THE INSURANCE LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938, the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation)
Act, 1972 and the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXII of 2008.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938
2.  In the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Insurance
Act), throughout the Act, for the words and figures “the Indian Companies Act, 1913”,
wherever they occur, the words and figures “the Companies Act, 1956” shall be
substituted.
3. In section 2 of the Insurance Act,—
(i) for clauses (1) and (1A), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(1) “actuary” means actuary as defined in clause ( a) of sub-section (1)
of section 2 of  the Actuaries Act, 2006;
(1A) ‘‘Authority’’ means the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority of India established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999;’;
(ii)  clause (5A) shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause (6B), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(6C) “health insurance business” means the effecting of contracts which
provide for sickness benefits or medical, surgical or hospital expense benefits,
whether in-patient or out-patient on an indemnity, reimbursement, service,
prepaid, hospital or other plans basis including assured benefits, long term
care, overseas travel cover and personal accident cover ;’;
(iv) for clause (7A), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(7A) “Indian insurance company” means any insurer, being a company
which is limited by shares, and,—
(a) which is formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956
as a public company or is converted into such a company within one year
of the commencement of Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008;
(b) in which the aggregate holdings of equity shares by a foreign
company, either by itself or through its subsidiary companies or its
nominees, do not exceed forty-nine per cent. paid-up equity capital of
such Indian insurance company;
(c) whose sole purpose is to carry on life insurance business or
general insurance business or re-insurance business or health insurance
business.
  Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the expression “foreign
company” shall mean a company or body established or incorporated under a
law of any country outside India and includes Lloyd’s established under the
Lloyd’s Act, 1871 (United Kingdom);’;
(v) in clause (8A),—
(I) for sub-clause ( b), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(b) having a minimum paid-up capital of rupees one hundred crores
in case of life insurance or general insurance business and rupees fifty
crores in case of health insurance business;”;
(II)  in sub-clause (d), after the words ‘‘general insurance business’’, the
words ‘‘or health insurance business’’ shall be inserted;
35 of 2006.
7 of 1913.
1 of 1956.
Amendment of
section 2.
1 of 1956.
41 of 1999.
4  of 1938.Substitution of
references to
certain
expressions by
certain other
expressions

3
(vi)  for clause (9), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(9)  “insurer” means —
(a) an Indian Insurance Company, or
(b) a statutory body established by an Act of Parliament to carry on
insurance business, or
(c) an insurance co-operative society, or
(d) a foreign company engaged in re-insurance business through a
branch established in India;’;
(vii) in clause (10), the words and figures “licensed under section 42” shall be
omitted;
(viii) in clause (11), in sub-clause (c), for the words “annuities payable out of
any fund”, the words “benefit payable out of any fund’’  shall be substituted;
(ix)  clauses (12), (13) and (15)  shall be omitted;
(x) in clause (16), for the words, brackets, figures and letter  “clauses (13) and
(13A) of section 2 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913”, the words, brackets and
figures “sub-clauses ( iii) and ( iv) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Companies
Act, 1956” shall be substituted;
(xi) after clause (16), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(16A) “regulations” means the regulations framed by the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority of India established under the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999;
 (16B) “re-insurance” means the insurance of all or part of one insurer’s
risk by another insurer who accepts the risk for a mutually acceptable premium;
(16C) ‘‘Securities Appellate Tribunal’’ means the Securities Appellate
Tribunal established under section 15K of the Securities and Exchange Board
of India Act, 1992;’;
 (xii) clause (17) shall be omitted.
4.  For section 2C of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“2C. Save as otherwise provided under this Act, no insurer shall begin to carry
on any class of insurance business in India  unless it is registered under this Act:
Provided that an insurer, being an Indian insurance company, insurance co-
operative society or a body corporate incorporated under the law of any country
outside India not being of the nature of a private company carrying on the business of
insurance, may carry on any business of insurance in any special economic zone as
defined in clause (za) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005:
Provided further that a foreign insurer registered under law of any country may
be notified by the Authority to carry on the business of re-insurance in India through
its branch office as per the terms and conditions specified by the regulation.”.
5. In section 2CA of the Insurance Act,—
(i) in clause (a), for the words, brackets, letters and figures “a body corporate
referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 2C”, the words “a body corporate
incorporated under the law of any country outside India not being a private company”
shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words, brackets, letters and figures “a body corporate
referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 2C”, the words “a body corporate
1 of 1956.
15 of 1992.
Substitution of
new section for
section 2C.
Prohibition of
transaction of
insurance
business by
certain
persons.
28 of 2005.
Amendment of
section 2CA.
7 of 1913.
41 of 1999.

4
incorporated under the law of any country outside India not being of the nature of a
private company” shall be substituted.
6.  After section 2CA of the Insurance Act, the  following section shall be inserted,
namely :—
“2CB. (1) No person shall take out or renew any policy of insurance in respect
of any property in India, except a property situated in any Special Economic Zone as
defined in clause (za) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, or any
ship or other vessel or aircraft registered in India with an insurer whose principal
place of business is outside India save with the prior permission of the Authority.
 (2) If any person contravenes the provision of sub-section ( 1), he shall be
punishable with penalty which may extend to five crore rupees.”.
7. Section 2E of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
8. In section 3 of the Insurance Act,—
(i)  for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
 “(2)  Every application for registration shall be made in such  manner
and shall be accompanied by such documents as may be specified by
regulations.”;
(ii) in sub-section (2A), in clause (d), the figures “32” shall be omitted;
 (iii) for sub-section (2C), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2C) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority refusing
registration may, within thirty days from the date on which a copy of the decision
is received by him, appeal to the Securities Appellate Tribunal.”;
(iv) sub-section (2D)  shall be omitted;
(v) for sub-sections (3), (4), (5) and (5A), the following sub-sections  shall be
substituted, namely:—
 “(3)  In the case of any insurer having joint venture with a person  having
its principal place of business domiciled outside India, the Authority shall
withhold registration or cancel registration already made if it is satisfied that in
the country in which such person  has been debarred by law or practice of that
country to carry on insurance business.
(4)  The Authority may suspend or cancel the registration of an insurer
either wholly or in so far as it relates  to a particular class of insurance business,
as the case may be,—
(a)   if the insurer fails, at any time, to comply with the provisions
of section 64V A as to the excess of the value of his assets over the amount
of his liabilities, or
(b) if the insurer is in liquidation or is adjudged as an insolvent, or
(c) if the business or a class of the business of the insurer has been
transferred to any person or has been transferred to or amalgamated with
the business of any other insurer, or
(d) if the insurer makes default in complying with, or acts in
contravention of, any requirement of  this Act or  of any rule or any
regulation or order made or, any direction issued thereunder, or
(e) if the  Authority has reason to believe that any claim upon the
Insertion of
new section
2CB.
Properties in
India not to be
insured with
foreign
insurers except
with the
permission of
Authority.
28  of 2005.
Omission of
section 2E.
Amendment of
section 3.

5
insurer arising in India under any policy of insurance remains unpaid for
three months after final judgment in regular court of law, or
(f) if the insurer carries on any business other than insurance business
or any prescribed business, or
(g) if the insurer makes a default in complying with any direction
issued or order made, as the case may be, by the Authority under the
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, or
 (h) if the insurer makes a default in complying with, or acts in
contravention of, any requirement of the Companies Act, 1956  or the
General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 or the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999 or the Prevention of Money Laundering
Act, 2002, or
(i) if the insurer fails to pay the annual fee required under section
3A, or
(j) if the insurer is convicted for an offence under any law for the
time being in force, or
(k) if the insurer being a co-operative society set up under the
relevant State laws or, as the case may be, the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002, contravenes the provisions of law as may be
applicable to the insurer.
(5) When the Authority suspends or cancels any registration under clause
(a), clause (d), clause (e) or clause (f) of sub-section (4), it shall give notice in
writing to the insurer of its decision, and the decision shall take effect on such
date as it may specify in that behalf in the notice, such date not being less than
one month nor more than two months from the date of the receipt of the notice
in the ordinary course of transmission.
(5A)  When the Authority suspends or cancels any registration under
clauses ( b), ( c), (i), clause  (j) or ( k) of sub-section ( 4), the suspension or
cancellation, as the case may be, shall take effect on the date on which notice of
the order of suspension or cancellation is served on the insurer.”.
(vi) for sub-section (5C), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5C)  Where a registration is suspended or cancelled under clause ( a),
clause (d), clause (e), clause (f) or clause (g)  of sub-section (4), the Authority
may at its discretion revive the registration, if the insurer within six months
from the date on which the suspension or cancellation took effect complies
with the provisions of section 64V A as to the excess of the value of his assets
over the amount of his liabilities or has had an application under sub-section
(4) of section 3A accepted, or satisfies the Authority that no claim upon him
such as is referred to in clause ( e) of sub-section ( 4) remains unpaid or that
he has complied with any requirement of this Act or the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority Act, 1999, or of any rule or any regulation, or
any order made thereunder or any direction issued under those Acts, or that
he has ceased to carry on any business other than insurance business or any
prescribed business, as the case may be, and complies with any directions
which may be given to him by the Authority.”.
9.  For section 3A of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“3A. (1) An insurer who has been granted a certificate of registration under
section 3 shall pay such annual fee to the Authority in such manner as may be specified
by the regulations.
41 of 1999.
1 of 1956.
57 of 1972.
15 of 2002.
39 of 2002.
41 of 1999.
Substitution of
new section  for
section 3A.
Payment of
annual fee by
insurer.
42 of 1999.

6
(2) Any failure to deposit the annual fee shall render the certificate of registration
liable to be cancelled.”.
10.  For section 4  of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“4.  The insurer shall pay or undertake to pay on any policy of life insurance  or
a group policy issued, a minimum annuity and other benefits as may be determined
by regulations excluding any profit or bonus provided that this shall not prevent an
insurer from converting any policy into a paid-up policy of any value or payment of
surrender value of any amount.”.
11.  In section 5 of the Insurance Act,—
(i) in sub-section (2), both the provisos shall be omitted;
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
12.  For section 6 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely :—
“6. (1) No insurer not being an insurer as defined in sub-clause (d) of clause (9)
of section 2, carrying on the business of life insurance, general insurance, health
insurance or re-insurance in India or after the commencement of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, shall be registered unless he has,—
(i) a paid-up equity capital of rupees one hundred crore, in case of a
person carrying on the business of life insurance or general insurance; or
(ii) a paid-up equity capital of rupees fifty crore, in case of a person
carrying on exclusively the business of health insurance; or
(iii) a  paid-up equity capital of rupees two hundred crore, in case of a
person carrying on exclusively the business as a re-insurer.
(2) No insurer, as defined in sub-clause (d) of clause (9) of section 2, shall be
registered unless he has net owned funds of not less than rupees  five thousand crore.”.
13. In section 6A of the Insurance Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) No public company limited by shares having its registered office in
India, shall carry on life insurance business or general insurance business or
health insurance business or re-insurance business, unless it satisfies the
following conditions, namely:—
(i) that the capital of the company shall consist of equity shares
each having a single face value and such other form of capital, as may be
specified by regulations;
(ii) that the voting rights of shareholders are restricted to equity
shares;
(iii) that, except during any period not exceeding one year allowed
by the company for payment of calls on shares, the paid-up amount is the
same for all shares, whether existing or new:
Provided that the conditions specified in this sub-section shall not apply
to a public company which has, before the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1950, issued any shares other than ordinary shares each of
which has a single face value or any shares the paid-up amount whereof is not
the same for all of the them for a period of three years from such
commencement.”;
Substitution of
new section for
section 4.
Minimum limits
for annuities
and other
benefits secured
by policies of
life insurance.
Amendment of
section 5.
Substitution of
new section for
section 6.
Requirement as
to capital.
41 of 1999.
Amendment of
section 6A.
47 of 1950.

7
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words "paid-up amount of the", the word "equity"
shall be inserted;
(iii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(4) A public company as aforesaid which carries on life insurance
business, general and health insurance business and re-insurance business—
(a) shall, in addition to the register of members maintained under
the Companies Act, 1956, maintain a register of shares in which the name,
occupation and address of the beneficial owner of each share shall be
entered including any change of beneficial owner declared to it within
fourteen days from the receipt of such declaration;
(b) shall not register any transfer of its shares—
(i) unless, in addition to compliance being made with the
provisions of section 108 of the Companies Act, 1956, the transferee
furnishes a declaration in the prescribed form as to whether he
proposes to hold the shares for his own benefit or as a nominee,
whether jointly or severally, on behalf of others and in the latter
case giving the name, occupation and address of the beneficial
owner or owners, and the extent of the beneficial interest of each;
(ii) where, after the transfer, the total paid-up holding of the
transferee in the shares of the company is likely to exceed five per
cent. of its paid-up capital unles the previous approval of the
Authority has been obtained to the transfer;
(iii) where, the nominal value of the shares intended to be
transferred by any individual, firm, group, constituents of a group,
or body corporate under the same management, jointly or severally
exceeds one per cent. of the paid-up equity capital of the insurer,
unless the previous approval of the Authority has been obtained
for the transfer.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause, the expressions
"group" and "same management" shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the Competition Act, 2002.".
(iv) sub-sections (6), (7), (8), (9) and (10) shall be omitted;
(v) in sub-section ( 11), the words, brackets and figures "except those of sub-
sections (7), (8) and (9)" shall be omitted;
(vi) in sub-section (11), clause (ii) shall be omitted; and
(vii) in the Explanation, in sub-clause (c) of clause (ii), the words "managing
agent" shall be omitted.
14.  Section 6AA of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
15.  In section 6B of the Insurance Act,—
(i)   in sub-section (1),—
(a) for the words “life insurance business”, the words “life or general or
health insurance or  re-insurance business” shall be substituted; and
(b)  for the words “Central Government”, the word “Authority” shall be
substituted;
(
ii)  sub-section (4) shall be omitted.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
12 of 2003.
Omission of
section 6AA.
Amendment of
section 6B.

8
16. Sections 6C, 7, 8 and 9 of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
17.  In section 10 of the Insurance Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “prescribed in this behalf”, the words
“specified by the regulations” shall be substituted;
(ii)  after sub-section (2A), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2AA) Where the insurer carries on the business of general insurance,
all receipts due in respect of each sub-clause of such insurance business shall
be carried to and shall form a separate fund, the assets of which shall be kept
separate and distinct from other assets of the insurer and every insurer shall
submit to the Authority the necessary details of such funds as may be required
by the Authority from time to time and such funds shall not be applied directly
or indirectly save as expressly permitted under this Act or regulations made
thereunder.”.
18. For section 11 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“11. (1) Every insurer, on or after the commencement of the Insurance Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2008,  in respect of insurance business transacted by him and in
respect of his shareholders’ funds, shall, at the expiration of each financial year, prepare
with reference to that year, balance-sheet, a profit and loss account, a separate account
of receipts and payments, a revenue account in accordance with the regulations as
may be specified.
(2) Every insurer shall keep separate accounts relating to funds of shareholders
and policy-holders.
(3) Unless the insurer is a company as defined in clause (10) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 1956, the accounts and statements referred to in sub-section (1) shall
be signed by the insurer, or in the case of a company by the chairman, if any, and two
directors and the principal officer of the company, or in case of an insurance co-
operative society by the person in-charge of the society and shall be accompanied by
a statement containing the names, descriptions and occupations of, and the
directorships held by, the persons in charge of the management of the business during
the period to which such accounts and statements refer and by a report on the affairs
of the business during that period.”.
19. For section 12 of the Insurance Act, the following section  shall be substituted,
namely:—
“12. The balance-sheet, profit and loss account, revenue account and profit
and loss appropriation account of every insurer, in respect of all insurance business
transacted by him, shall, unless they are subject to audit under the Companies Act,
1956,  be audited annually by an auditor, and the auditor shall in the audit of all such
accounts have the powers of, exercise the functions vested in, and discharge the duties
and be subject to the liabilities and penalties imposed on, auditors of companies by
section 233 of the Companies Act, 1956.”.
20. In section 13 of the Insurance Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Every insurer carrying on life insurance business shall, once at least
every year cause an investigation to be made by an actuary into the financial
condition of the life insurance business carried on by him, including a valuation
Omission of
sections 6C, 7,
8 and 9.
Amendment of
section 10.
Accounts and
balance-sheet.
1 of 1956.
Substitution of
new section for
section 12.
Substitution of
new section for
section 11.
Amendment of
section 13.
1 of 1956.
Audit.

9
of his liabilities in respect thereto and shall cause an abstract of the report of
such actuary to be made in accordance with the regulations:
 Provided that the Authority may, having regard to the circumstances of
any particular insurer, allow him to have the investigation made as at a date not
later than two years from the date as at which the previous investigation was
made: 
 Provided further that every insurer, on or after the commencement of the
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, shall cause an
abstract of the report of the actuary to be made in the manner specified by the
regulations.”;
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;
(iii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4)  There shall be appended to every such abstract a statement prepared
in such form and in such manner as many be specified by the regulations:
Provided that, if the investigation referred to in sub-sections ( 1) and (2)
is made annually by any insurer, the statement need not be appended every
year but shall be appended at least once in every three years.”;
(iv) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(6) The provisions of this section relating to the life insurance business
shall apply also to any such sub-class of insurance business included in the
class “Miscellaneous Insurance” and the Authority may authorise such
modifications and variations of regulations as may be necessary to facilitate
their application to any such sub-class of insurance business:
 Provided that, if the Authority is satisfied that the number and amount of
the transactions carried out by an insurer in any such sub-class of insurance
business is so small as to render periodic investigation and valuation unnecessary,
it may exempt that insurer from the operation of this sub-section in respect of
that sub-class of insurance business.”.
21. For section 14 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“14.  Every insurer, in respect of all business transacted by him, shall maintain—
(a) a record of policies, in which shall be entered, in respect of every
policy issued by the insurer, the name and address of the policy-holder, the
date when the policy was effected and a record of any transfer, assignment or
nomination of which the insurer has notice, and
(b) a record of claims, every claim made together with the date of the
claim, the name and address of the claimant and the date on which the claim
was discharged, or, in the case of a claim which is rejected, the date of rejection
and the grounds thereof.”.
22. For section 15 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“15. (1) The audited accounts and statements referred to in section 11 or sub-
section (5) of section 13 and the abstract and statement referred to in section 13 shall
be printed, and four copies thereof shall be furnished as returns to the Authority
within six months from the end of the period to which they refer.
41 of 1999.
Substitution of
new section for
section 14.
Record of
policies and
claims.
Substitution of
new section for
section 15.
Submission of
returns.

10
(2) Of the four copies so furnished one shall be signed in the case of a company
by the chairman and two directors and by the principal officer of the company and, if
the company has a managing director by that managing director and one shall be
signed by the auditor who made the audit or the actuary who made the valuation, as
the case may be.”.
23. Section 16 of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
24. Sections 17 and 17A of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
25. In section 20 of the Insurance Act,—
(i)  for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Every return furnished to the Authority or certified copy thereof
shall be kept by the Authority and shall be open to inspection; and any person
may procure a copy of any such return, or of any part thereof, on payment of
such fee as may be specified by regulations.”;
(ii) in sub-section (2), the words “or section 16” shall be omitted;
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words “one rupee”, the words “such fee as may
be specified by regulations” shall be substituted.
26. In section 21 of the Insurance Act,—
(i) in clause (d) of sub-section (1), the words and figures ‘‘or section 16’’ shall
be omitted;
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
 “( 2) The Securities Appellate Tribunal may, on the application of an
insurer and after hearing the Authority, cancel any order made by the Authority
under clause (d) of sub-section (1) or may direct the acceptance of such a  return
which the Authority has declined to accept, if the insurer satisfies the Tribunal
that the action of the Authority was in the circumstances unreasonable:
Provided that no application under this sub-section shall be entertained
unless it is made before the expiration of four months from the date when the
Authority made the order or declined to accept the return.”.
27. In section 22 of the Insurance Act,—
(i)  in sub-section (1), the words “or an abstract of a valuation report furnished
under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 16” shall be omitted;
(ii)  in sub-section (2), the words “or, as the case may be, of sub-section (2) of
section 16” shall be omitted.
28. For sections 27, 27A, 27B, 27C and 27D of the Insurance Act, the following
sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“27. (1) Every insurer shall invest and at all times keep invested assets equivalent
to not less than the sum of —
(a)  the amount of his liabilities to holders of life insurance policies in
India on account of matured claims, and 
Omission of
section 16.
Omission of
sections 17 and
17A.
Amendment of
section 20.
Amendment of
section 21.
Amendment of
section 22.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections 27,
27A, 27B, 27C
and 27D.
Investment of
assets.

11
(b) the amount required to meet the liability on policies of life insurance
maturing for payment in India,
less—
(i)  the amount of premiums which have fallen due to the insurer on such
policies but have not been paid and the days of grace for payment of which have
not expired, and
 (ii) any amount due to the insurer for loans granted on and within the
surrender values of policies of life insurance maturing for payment in India
issued by him or by an insurer whose business he has acquired and in respect of
which he has assumed liability in the manner following, namely, twenty-five per
cent. of the said sum in Government securities, a further sum equal to not less
than twenty-five per cent. of the said sum in Government securities or other
approved securities and the balance in any of the approved investments as may
be specified in the  regulations subject to the limitations, conditions and
restrictions specified therein.
(2) In the case of an insurer carrying on general insurance business, twenty per
cent. of the assets in Government Securities, a further sum equal to not less than ten
per cent. of the assets in Government Securities or other approved securities and the
balance in any other investment in accordance with the regulations of the Authority
and subject to such limitations, conditions and restrictions as may be specified by the
Authority in this regard.
Explanation— In this section, the term “assets”  means all the assets of insurer
at their carrying value  but does not include any assets specifically held against any
fund or portion thereof in respect of which the Authority is satisfied that such fund or
portion thereof, as the case may be, is regulated by the law of any country outside
India or miscellaneous expenditure or  in respect of which the Authority is satisfied
that it would not be in the interest of the insurer to apply the provisions of this section.
 (3) For the purposes of sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), any specified assets shall,
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified, be deemed  to be assets invested
or kept invested in approved investments specified by regulations.
(4) In computing the assets referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) —
(a) any investment made with reference to any currency other than the
Indian rupee which is in excess of the amount required to meet the liabilities of
the insurer in India with reference to that currency, to the extent of such excess;
and
(b) any investment made in the purchase of any immovable property outside
India or on the security of any such property, shall not be taken into account:
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect the
operation of sub-section (2):
Provided further that the Authority may, either generally or in any particular
case, direct that any investment, whether made before or after the commencement
of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, and whether made in or outside India,
shall, subject to such conditions as may be imposed, be taken into account, in
such manner as may be specified in computing the assets referred to in sub-
sections (1) and (2) and where any direction has been issued under this proviso
copies thereof shall be laid before each house of  Parliament as soon as may be
after it is issued. 
(5) Where an insurer has accepted re-insurance in respect of any policies of life
insurance issued by another insurer and maturing for payment in India or has ceded re-
insurance to another insurer in respect of any such policies issued by himself, the sum
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be increased by the amount of the liability involved
47 of 1950.

12
in such acceptance and decreased by the amount of the liability involved in such
cession.
(6) The Government securities and other approved securities in which assets
are under sub-section (1) or (2) to be invested and kept invested shall be held by the
insurer free of any encumbrance, charge, hypothecation or lien.
 (7) The assets required by this section to be held invested by an insurer
incorporated or domiciled outside India shall, except to the extent of any part thereof
which consists of foreign assets held outside India, be held in India and all such
assets shall be held in trust for the discharge of the liabilities of the nature referred to
in sub-section (1) and shall be vested in trustees resident in India and approved by
the Authority, and the instrument of trust under this sub-section shall be executed by
the insurer with the approval of the Authority and shall define the manner in which
alone the subject-matter of the trust shall be dealt with.
Explanation. —This sub-section shall apply to an insurer incorporated in India
whose share capital to the extent of one-third is owned by, or the members of whose
governing body to the extent of one-third consists of members domiciled elsewhere
than in India.
27A.  (1) No insurer carrying on life insurance business shall invest or keep
invested any part of his controlled fund and no insurer carrying on general business
shall invest or keep invested any part of his assets otherwise than in any of the approved
investments as may be specified by the regulations subject to such limitations,
conditions and restrictions therein. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or (2) of section 27,
an insurer  may, subject to the provisions contained in the next succeeding sub-sections,
invest or keep invested any part of his controlled fund or assets otherwise than in an
approved investment, if—
(i) after such investment, the total amounts of all such investments of the
insurer do not exceed  fifteen per cent. of the sum referred to in sub-section (1)
of section 27 or fifteen per cent. of the assets referred to in sub-section ( 2) as
the case may be;
(ii) the investment is made, or, in the case of any investment already
made, the continuance of such investment is with the consent of all the directors
present at a meeting and eligible to vote,  special notice of which has been
given to all the directors then in lndia, and all such investments, including
investments in which any director is interested, are reported without delay to
the Authority with full details of the investments and the extent of the director’s
interest in any such investment. 
(3) An insurer shall not out of his controlled fund or assets as referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 27,—
(a)  invest in the shares of any one banking company, or
(b) invest in the shares or debentures of any one company,
 more than the percentage specified by the regulations.
(4) An insurer shall not out of his controlled fund or assets as referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 27 invest or keep invested in the shares or debentures of any
private limited company. 
(5) All assets forming the controlled fund or assets as referred to in sub-section
(2) , of section 27, not being Government securities or other approved securities in
which assets are to be invested or held invested in accordance with  this section, shall
(except for a part thereof not exceeding one-tenth of the controlled fund or assets as
Further
provisions
regarding
investments.

13
referred to in sub-section (2) thereof in value which may, subject to such conditions
and restrictions as may be prescribed, be offered as security for any loan taken for
purposes of any investment), be held free of any encumbrance, charge, hypothecation
or lien.
(6) If at any time the Authority considers any one or more of the investments of
an insurer to be unsuitable or undesirable, the Authority may, after giving the insurer
an opportunity of being heard, direct him to realise the investment or investments,
and the insurer shall comply with the direction within such time as may be specified
in this behalf by the Authority.
(7) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect in any way the
manner in which any moneys relating to the provident fund of any employee or to any
security taken from any employee or other moneys of a like nature are required to be
held by or under any Central Act, or Act of a State legislature.
Explanation.—In this section “controlled fund” means—
(a)   in the case of any insurer carrying on life insurance business—
(i)   all his funds, if he carries on no other class of insurance business;
 (ii) all the funds appertaining to his life insurance business if he
carries on some other class of insurance business also; and
(b)  in the case of any other insurer carrying on life insurance business—
(i)   all his funds in India, if he carries on no other class of insurance
business;
 (ii) all the funds in India appertaining to his life insurance business
if he carries on some other class of insurance business also; but does not
include any fund or portion thereof in respect of which the Authority is
satisfied that such fund or portion thereof, as the case may be, is regulated
by the law of any country outside India or in respect of which the Authority
is satisfied that it would not be in the interest of the insurer to apply the
provisions of this section.
27B. (1) All assets of an insurer carrying on general insurance business shall,
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be prescribed, be deemed to be assets
invested or kept invested in approved investments specified in section 27.
(2) All assets shall (except for a part thereof not exceeding one-tenth of the
total assets in value which may subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be
prescribed, be offered as security for any loan taken for purposes of any investment
or for payment of claims, or which may be kept as security deposit with the banks for
acceptance of policies) be held free of any encumbrance, charge, hypothecation or
lien.
(3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Authority by sub-section
(5) of section 27A nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require any
insurer to realise any investment made in conformity with the previsions of sub-
section (1) of section 27 after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1968, which, after the making thereof, has ceased to be an approved investment
within the meaning of this section.
27C. An insurer may invest not more than five per cent. in aggregate of his
controlled fund or assets as referred to in sub-section (2) of section 27 in the companies
Provisions
regarding
investments of
assets of insurer
carrying general
insurance
business.
62 of 1968.
Investment
by insurer in
certain cases.

14
belonging to the promoters, subject to such coditions as may be specified by
regulations.
27D. (1) Without prejudice to anything contained in this section, the Authority
may, in the interests of the policy-holders, specify by the regulations, the time, manner
and other conditions of investment of assets to be held by an insurer for the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The Authority may give specific directions for the time, manner and other
conditions subject to  which the funds of policy-holders shall be invested in the
infrastructure and social sector as may be specified by regulations and such regulations
shall apply uniformly to all the insurers carrying on the business of life insurance,
general insurance, or health insurance or re-insurance in India on or after the
commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999.
(3) The Authority may, after taking into account the nature of business and to
protect the interests of the policy-holders, issue to an insurer the directions relating
to the time, manner and other conditions of investment of assets to be held by him:
Provided that no direction under this sub-section shall be issued unless the
insurer concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
27E. No insurer shall directly or indirectly invest outside India the funds of the
policy-holders.".
29. For section 28, section 28A and section 28B of the Insurance Act, the following
section shall be substituted, namely:—
"28. Every insurer shall submit to the Authority returns giving details of
investments made, in such form, time and manner including its authentication as may
be specified by the regulations.".
30. For section 29 of the Insurance Act,  the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“29. ( 1) No insurer shall grant loans or temporary advances either on
hypothecation of property or on personal security or otherwise, except loans on life
policies issued by him within their surrender value, to any director, manager, actuary,
auditor or officer of the insurer, if a company or to any other company or firm in
which any such director, manager, actuary or officer holds the position of a director,
manager, actuary, officer or partner:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to loans made
by an insurer to a banking company, if the previous approval of the Authority is
obtained for such loans:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall prohibit a company from
granting such loans or advances to a subsidiary company or to any other company of
which the company granting the loan or advance is a subsidiary company if the previous
approval of the Authority is obtained for such loan or advance.
(2) The provisions of section 220 of the Companies Act, 1956 shall not apply
to a loan granted to a director of an insurer being a company, if the loan is one
granted on the security of a policy on which the insurer bears the risk and the policy
was issued to the director on his own life, and the loan is within the surrender value of
the policy.
Manner and
condition of
investment.
41 of 1999.
Prohibition for
investment of
funds outside
india.
Substitution of
new section for
section 28,
section 28A and
section 28B.
Statement and
return of
investment of
assets.
Substitution of
new section for
section 29.
Prohibition of
loans.
1 of 1956.

15
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), no insurer  shall grant —
 (a)  any loans or temporary advances either on hypothecation of property
or on personal security or otherwise, except such loans as may be specified by
regulations including the loans sanctioned to the fulltime employees of the
insurer as per the scheme duly approved by its Board of Directors;
 (b) temporary advances to any insurance agent to facilitate the carrying
out of his functions as such except in cases where such advances do not exceed
in the aggregate the renewal commission earned by him during the year
immediately preceding.
(4)  Where any event occurs given rise to circumstances, the existence of which
at the time of grant of any subsisting loan or advance would have made such grant a
contravention of this section, such loan or advance shall, notwithstanding anything in
any contract to the contrary, be repaid within three months from the occurrence of
such event.
(5)   In case of default in complying with the provisions of sub-section (4), the
director, manager, auditor, actuary, officer or insurance agent concerned shall, without
prejudice to any other penalty which he may incur, cease to hold office under, or to
act for, the insurer granting the loan on the expiry of three months.”.
31. For section 30 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“30. If by reason of a contravention of any of the provisions of section 27, 27A,
27B, 27C, 27D or section 29, any loss is sustained by the insurer or by the policy-
holders, every director, manager or officer who is knowingly a party to such
contravention shall, without prejudice to any other penalty to which he may be liable
under this Act, be jointly and severally liable to make good the amount of such loss.”.
32. In section 31 of the Insurance Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) None of the assets in India of any insurer shall, except in so far as assets
are required to be vested in trustees under sub-section ( 7) of  section 27, be kept
otherwise than in the name of a public officer approved by the Authority, or in the
corporate name of the undertaking, if a company or as the case may be an insurance
co-operative society.”.
 33. In section 31A of the Insurance Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), in clause (c) —
(I) in sub-clauses ( i) and ( ii) to the proviso, the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(i) the payment of commission to an insurance agent, in respect of
insurance business procured by or through him;”;
(II) clause (iii) to the proviso shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words, letter and figure ‘‘or in section 86B of the
Indian Companies Act, 1913’’, the words ‘‘or in the provision relating to assignment
of office under the Companies Act, 1956’’ shall be substituted.
Substitution of
section 30.
Liability of
directors, etc.,
for loss due to
contravention
of section 27,
27A, 27B, 27C,
27D or 29.
Amendment of
section 31.
Amendment of
section 31A.
1 of 1956.
7 of 1913.

16
34. For section 31B of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“31B.  No insurer shall in respect of insurance business transacted by him,
shall pay to any person by way of remuneration, whether by way of commission or
otherwise in excess of such sum as may be specified by the regulations.” .
35. Section 32 of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
36. In section 32A of the Insurance Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), the words, figures and letter, ‘‘specified in sub-clause (b)
of clause (9) of section 2 and,’’ shall be omitted.
(ii) sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be omitted.
37. In section 32B of the Insurance Act, for the words “rural or social sector, as may
be specified in the Official Gazette by the Authority”, the words “rural and social sectors,
as may be specified by regulations” shall be substituted.
38. After section 32C of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“32D. Every insurer carrying on general insurance business shall, after the
commencement of the Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008, underwrite such
minimum percentage of insurance business in third party risks of motor vehicles as
may be specified by regulations:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to an insurer carrying on the
health insurance or re-insurance business only.’’.
39. For section 33 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“33. (1) The Authority may, at any time, if it considers expedient to do so by
order in writing, direct any person (hereafter in this section referred to as “Investigating
Officer”) specified in the order to investigate the affairs of any insurer or intermediary
or insurance intermediary, as the case may be, and to report to the Authority on any
investigation made by such Investigating Officer:
Provided that the Investigating Officer may, wherever necessary, employ any
auditor or actuary or both for the purpose of assisting him in any investigation under
this section.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 235 of the
Companies Act, 1956, the Investigating Officer may, at any time, and shall, on being
directed so to do by the Authority, cause an inspection to be made by one or more of
his officers of  the books of account of any insurer or intermediary or insurance
intermediary, as the case may be, and the Investigating Officer shall supply to the
insurer or intermediary or insurance intermediary, as the case may be, a copy of the
report on such inspection.
(3) It shall be the duty of every manager, managing director or other officer of
the insurer including a service provider, contractor of an insurer where services are
outsourced by the insurer, or intermediary or insurance intermediary, as the case may
1 of 1956.
Substitution of
new section for
section 31B.
Power to
restrict
payment  of
excessive
remuneration.
Omission of
section 32.
Amendment of
section 32A.
Amendment of
section 32B.
Insertion of new
section 32D.
Substitution of
new section for
section 33.
Power of
investigation
and inspection
by Authority.
Obligation of
insurer in
respect of
insurance
business in
third party
risks of motor
vehicles.

17
be, to produce before the Investigating Officer directed to make the investigation
under sub-section (1), or inspection under sub-section (2), all such books of account,
registers, other documents and the database in his custody or power and to furnish
him with any statement and information relating to the affairs of the insurer or
intermediary or insurance intermediary, as the case may be, as the Investigating Officer
may require of him within such time as the said Investigating Officer may specify.
(4) Any Investigating Officer, directed to make an investigation under sub-
section (1), or inspection under sub-section (2), may examine on oath, any manager,
managing director or other officer of the insurer including a service provider or
contractor where the services are outsourced by the insurer or intermediary or insurance
intermediary, as the case may be, in relation to his business.
(5) The Investigating Officer shall, if he has been directed by the Authority to
cause an inspection to be made, make a report to the Authority on such inspection.
(6) On receipt of any report under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 5), the
Authority may, after giving such opportunity to the insurer or  intermediary or insurance
intermediary, as the case may be, to make a representation in connection with the
report as, in the opinion of the Authority, seems reasonable, by order in writing, —
(a)  require the insurer, to take such action in respect of any matter arising
out of the report as the Authority may think fit; or
(b) cancel the registration of the insurer or intermediary or insurance
intermediary, as the case may be; or
(c)  direct any person to apply to the court for the winding up of the
insurer or intermediary or insurance intermediary, as the case may be, if it is
a company, whether  the registration of the insurer or intermediary or insurance
intermediary, as the case may be, has been cancelled under clause ( b) or not.
(7) The Authority may by the regulations made by it specify the minimum
information to be maintained by insurers or intermediary or insurance intermediary,
as the case may be, in their books, the manner in which such information shall be
maintained, the checks and other verifications to be adopted by insurers or intermediary
or insurance intermediary, as the case may be, in that connection and all other matters
incidental thereto as are, in its opinion, necessary to enable the Investigating Officer
to discharge satisfactorily his functions under this section.
 Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, expression “insurer” shall
include in the case of an insurer incorporated in India—
 (a) all its subsidiaries formed for the purpose of carrying on the business
of insurance exclusively outside India; and
 (b) all its branches whether situated in India or outside India.
(8) No order made under this section other than an order made under clause (b)
of sub-section (6) shall be capable of being called in question in any court.
 (9) All expenses of, and incidental to, any investigation made under this section
shall be defrayed by the insurer or intermediary or insurance intermediary, as the
case may be, shall have priority over the debts due from the insurer and shall be
recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.”.
40. In section 34B of the Insurance Act, for sub-section (4), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) If any person in respect of whom an order is made by the Authority
under sub-section ( 1) or under the proviso to sub-section ( 2), contravenes the
provisions of this section, he shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees for each
Amendment of
section 34B.

18
day during which such contravention continues or one crore rupees, whichever is
less.”.
41. In section 34C of the Insurance Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) If the Authority is of opinion that in the public interest or in the interest of
an insurer or his policy-holders it is necessary so to do, it may, from time to time, by
order in writing, appoint, in consultation with the Central Government with effect
from such date as may be specified in the order, one or more persons to hold office as
additional directors of the insurer:
 Provided that the number of additional directors so appointed shall not, at any
time, exceed five or one-third of the maximum strength fixed for the Board by the
articles of association of the insurer, whichever is less.”.
42. In section 34E of the Insurance Act, for the word ‘‘Controller’’, the word
‘‘Authority’’ shall be substituted.
43. Section 34G of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
44. In section 34H of the Insurance Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “an officer authorised by the Authority”,
the words “a Deputy Director” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-sections ( 7) and (8), for the words “Central Government”, the words
“Securities Appellate Tribunal” shall be substituted.
45. In section 35 of the Insurance Act,—
(i)  for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, no insurance business of an insurer shall be transferred to or
amalgamated with the insurance business of any other insurer except in
accordance with a scheme prepared under this section and approved by the
Authority.”;
(ii) in sub-section ( 3), for clauses ( b) and ( c), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely :—
“(b) balance-sheets in respect of the insurance business of each of the
insurers concerned in such amalgamation or transfer, prepared in such forms
may be specified by regulation;
(c)  actuarial reports and abstracts in respect of the life insurance business
of each of the insurers so concerned, prepared in conformity with the regulations
specified in this regard.”.
46. For section 36 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“36.  When any application under sub-section (3) of section 35 is made to the
Authority, the Authority shall cause, a notice of the application to be given to the
holders of any kind of policy of insurer concerned alongwith statement of the nature
and terms of the amalgamation or transfer, as the case may be, to be published in such
manner and for such period as it may direct, and, after hearing the directors and
considering the objections of the policy-holders and any other persons whom it
considers entitled to be heard, may approve the arrangement, and shall make such
consequential orders as are necessary to give effect to the arrangement.”.
Amendment of
section 34C.
Amendment of
section 34E.
Amendment of
section 34H.
Amendment of
section 35.
Substitution of
new section for
section 36.
Sanction of
amalgamation
and transfer by
Authority.
Omission of
section 34G .

19
47. In section 37A of the Insurance Act, for sub-section (4), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) The scheme shall thereafter be placed before the Central Government for
its sanction and the Central Government may sanction the scheme without any
modification or with such modifications as it may consider necessary, and the scheme
as sanctioned by the Central Government shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may notify in this behalf in the Official Gazette:
Provided that different dates may be specified for different provisions of the
scheme.
(4A) Every policy-holder or shareholder or member of each of the insurers,
before amalgamation, shall have the same interest in, or rights against the insurer
resulting from amalgamation as he had in the company of which he was originally a
policy-holder or shareholder or member:
Provided that where the interests or rights of any shareholder or member are
less than his interest in, or rights against, the original insurer, he shall be entitled to
compensation, which shall be assessed by the Authority  in such manner as may be
specified by regulations.
(4B) The compensation so assessed shall be paid to the shareholder or member
by the insurance company resulting from such amalgamation.
(4C) Any member or shareholder aggrieved by the assessment of compensation
made by the Authority under sub-section ( 4A) may within thirty days from the
publication of such assessment prefer an appeal to the Securities Appellate Tribunal.”.
48.  For sections 38, 39 and 40 of the Insurance Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“38. (1) A transfer or assignment of a policy of insurance, wholly or in part,
whether with or without consideration, may be made only by an endorsement upon
the policy itself or by a separate instrument, signed in either case by the transferor or
by the assignor or his duly authorised agent and attested by at least one witness,
specifically setting forth the fact of transfer or assignment and the reasons thereof,
the antecedents of the assignee and the terms on which the assignment is made.
(2) An insurer may, accept the transfer or assignment, or decline to act upon
any endorsement made under sub-section (1), where it has sufficient reason to believe
that such transfer or assignment is not bona fide or is not in the interest of the
policy-holder or in public interest.
(3) The insurer shall, before refusing to act upon the endorsement, record in
writing the reasons for such refusal and communicate the same to the policy-holder
not later than thirty  days from the date of the policy-holder giving notice of such
transfer or assignment.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the decision of an insurer to decline to act upon
such transfer or assignment may within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt
of the communication from the insurer containing reasons for such refusal, prefer a
claim to the Authority.
(5) Subject to the provisions in sub-section (2), the transfer or assignment shall
be complete and effectual upon the execution of such endorsement or instrument
duly attested but except, where the transfer or assignment is in favour of the insurer,
shall not be operative as against an insurer, and shall not confer upon the transferee
or assignee, or his legal representative, any right to sue for the amount of such policy
Amendment of
section 37A.
Substitution of
new sections
for  sections 38,
39 and 40.
Assignment
and transfer of
insurance
policies.

20
or the moneys secured thereby until a notice in writing of the transfer or assignment
and either the said endorsement or instrument itself or a copy thereof certified to be
correct by both transferor and transferee or their duly authorised agents have been
delivered to the insurer:
Provided that where the insurer maintains one or more places of business in
India, such notice shall be delivered only at the place where the policy is being serviced
or attached.
(6) The date on which the notice referred to in sub-section ( 5) is delivered to
the insurer shall regulate the priority of all claims under a transfer or assignment as
between persons interested in the policy; and where there is more than one instrument
of transfer or assignment the priority of the claims under such instruments shall be
governed by the order in which the notices referred to in sub-section (5) are delivered:
Provided that if any dispute as to priority of payment arises as between assignees,
the dispute shall be referred to the Authority.
(7) Upon the receipt of the notice referred to in sub-section ( 5), the insurer
shall record the fact of such transfer or assignment together with the date thereof and
the name of the transferee or the assignee and shall, on the request of the person by
whom the notice was given, or of the transferee or assignee, on payment of such fee
as may be specified by regulations, grant a written acknowledgement of the receipt of
such notice; and any such acknowledgement shall be conclusive evidence against the
insurer that he has duly received the notice to which such acknowledgment relates.
(8) Subject to the terms and conditions of the transfer or assignment, the insurer
shall, from the date of the receipt of the notice referred to in sub-section (5), recognise
the transferee or assignee named in the notice as the absolute transferee or assignee
entitled to benefit under the policy, and such person shall be subject to all liabilities
and equities to which the transferor or assignor was subject at the date of the transfer
or assignment and may institute any proceedings in relation to the policy, obtain a
loan under the policy or surrender the policy without obtaining the consent of the
transferor or assignor or making him a party to such proceedings.
Explanation.— Except where the endorsement referred to in sub-section ( 1)
expressly indicates that the assignment or transfer is conditional in terms of sub-
section (10) hereunder, every assignment or transfer will be deemed to be an absolute
assignment or transfer and the assignee or transferee, as the case may be, will be
deemed to be the absolute assignee or transferee respectively.
(9) Any rights and remedies of an assignee or transferee of a policy of life
insurance under an assignment or transfer effected prior to the commencement of the
Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008 shall not be affected by the provisions of
this section.
(10) Notwithstanding any law or custom having the force of law to the contrary,
an assignment in favour of a person made upon the condition that —
(a) the proceeds under the policy will become payable to the policy-
holder or the nominee or nominees in the event of either the assignee/or
transferee predeceasing the insured; or
(b) the insured surviving the term of the policy,
shall be valid:
Provided that a conditional assignee shall not be entitled to obtain a loan on the
policy or surrender a policy.
(11) In the case of the partial assignment or transfer of a policy of insurance
under sub-section (1), the liability of the insurer shall be limited to the amount secured

21
by partial assignment or transfer and such policy-holder shall not be entitled to further
assign or transfer the residual amount payable under the same policy.
39. ( 1) The holder of a policy of life insurance on his own life may, when
effecting the policy or at any time before the policy matures for payment, nominate
the person or persons to whom the money secured by the policy shall be paid in the
event of his death:
Provided that, where any nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the policy-
holder to appoint any person in the manner laid down by the insurer, to receive the
money secured by the policy in the event of his death during the minority of the
nominee.
(2) Any such nomination in order to be effectual shall, unless it is incorporated
in the text of the policy itself, be made by an endorsement on the policy communicated
to the insurer and registered by him in the records relating to the policy and any such
nomination may at any time before the policy matures for payment be cancelled or
changed by an endorsement or a further endorsement or a will, as the case may be,
but unless notice in writing of any such cancellation or change has been delivered to
the insurer, the insurer shall not be liable for any payment under the policy made
bona fide by him to a nominee mentioned in the text of the policy or registered in
records of the insurer.
(3) The insurer shall furnish to the policyholder a written acknowledgment of
having registered a nomination or a cancellation or change thereof, and may charge
such fee as may be specified by regulations for registering such cancellation or change.
(4) A transfer or assignment of a policy made in accordance with section 38
shall automatically cancel a nomination:
Provided that the assignment of a policy to the insurer who bears the risk on the
policy at the time of the assignment, in consideration of a loan granted by that insurer
on the security of the policy within its surrender value, or its re-assignment on
repayment of the loan shall not cancel a nomination, but shall affect the rights of the
nominee only to the extent of the insurer’s interest in the policy:
Provided further that the transfer or assignment of a policy, whether wholly or
in part, in consideration of a loan advanced by the transferee or assignee to the policy-
holder, will not cancel the nomination but shall affect the rights of the nominee only
to the extent of the interest of the transferee or assignee, as the case may be, in the
policy:
Provided also that the nomination, which has been automatically cancelled
consequent upon the transfer or assignment, the same nomination shall stand
automatically revived when the policy is reassigned by the assignee or retransferred
by the transferee in favour of the policy-holder on repayment of loan other than on a
security of policy to the insurer.
(5) Where the policy matures for payment during the lifetime of the person
whose life is insured or where the nominee or, if there are more nominees than one,
all the nominees die before the policy matures for payment, the amount secured by
the policy shall be payable to the policy-holder or his heirs or legal representatives or
the holder of a succession certificate, as the case may be.
(6) Where the nominee or if there are more nominees than one, a nominee or
nominees survive the person whose life is insured, the amount secured by the policy
shall be payable to such survivor or survivors.
(7) Subject to the other provisions of this section, where the holder of a policy
of insurance on his own life nominates his parents, or his spouse, or his children, or
his spouse and children, or any of them, the nominee or nominees shall be beneficially
Nomination by
policy-holder.

22
entitled to the amount payable by the insurer to him or them under sub-section ( 6)
unless it is proved that the holder of the policy, having regard to the nature of his title
to the policy, could not have conferred any such beneficial title on the nominee.
(8) Subject as aforesaid, where the nominee, or if there are more nominees than
one, a nominee or nominees, to whom sub-section ( 7) applies, die after the person
whose life is insured but before the amount secured by the policy is paid, the amount
secured by the policy, or so much of the amount secured by the policy as represents
the share of the nominee or nominees so dying (as the case may be), shall be payable
to the heirs or legal representatives of the nominee or nominees or the holder of a
succession certificate, as the case may be, and they shall be beneficially entitled to
such amount.
(9) Nothing in sub-sections ( 7) and ( 8) shall operate to destroy or impede
the right of any creditor to be paid out of the proceeds of any policy of life
insurance.
(10) The provisions of sub-sections (7), (8) and (9) shall apply to all policies of
life insurance maturing for payment after the commencement of the Insurance Laws
(Amendment ) Act, 2008.
(11) Every policy-holder shall have an option to indicate in clear terms whether
the person or persons being nominated by the policy-holder is/are a beneficiary
nominee(s) or a collector nominee(s):
Provided where the policy-holder fails to indicate whether the person being
nominated is a beneficiary nominee or a collector nominee it will be deemed that the
person nominated is a beneficiary nominee.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a)  the expression ‘beneficiary nominee’ means a nominee who is entitled
to receive the entire proceeds payable under a policy of insurance subject to
other provisions of this Act; and
(b)  the expression ‘collector nominee’ means a nominee other than a
beneficiary nominee who is liable to make payment of the benefits arising out
of policy to the beneficiary nominee or legal heirs of policy-holders or
representative.
(12) The collector nominee shall make payment of the benefits arising out of
policy to the beneficiary nominee or legal heirs or representative of the policy-holder
in accordance with the regulations made by the Authority.
(13) Where a policy-holder dies after the maturity of the policy but the proceeds
and benefit of his policy has not been made to him because of his death, in such a
case, his nominee shall be entitled to the proceeds and benefit of his policy.
(14) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any policy of life insurance
to which section 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874, applies or has at any
time applied:
Provided that where a nomination made whether before or after the
commencement of the Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008, in favour of the
wife of the person who has insured his life or of his wife and children or any of
them is expressed, whether or not on the face of the policy, as being made under
this section, the said section 6 shall be deemed not to apply or not to have applied
to the policy.
40. (1) No person shall, pay or contract to pay any remuneration or reward,
whether by way of commission or otherwise for soliciting or procuring insurance
business in India to any person except an insurance agent or an intermediary or
insurance intermediary in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
Prohibition of
payment by way
of commission
or otherwise
for procuring
business.
3 of 1874.

23
(2) No insurance agent or intermediary or insurance intermediary shall receive
or contract to receive commission or remuneration in any form in respect of policies
issued in India, by an insurer except in accordance with the regulations specified in
this regard.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 102 in respect of a
contravention of any of the provisions of the preceding sub-sections or the regulations
framed in this regard, by an insurer, any insurance agent or intermediary or insurance
intermediary who contravenes the said provisions shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to rupees one lakh.’’.
49. Section 40A of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
50. For section 40B and section 40C of the Insurance Act, the following sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
"40B. Every insurer transacting life insurance business in India shall furnish to
the Authority, the details of expenses of management in such manner and form as
may be specified by regulations.
40C. Every insurer transacting general insurance, health insurance or re-
insurance business shall submit to the Authority, the details of expenses of management
in such manner and form as may be specified by regulations.".
51. In section 41 of the Insurance Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) Any person making default in complying with the provisions of this section
shall be liable for a penalty which may extend to five lakh rupees.”.
52. For section 42 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(1) An insurer may appoint any person to act as insurance agent for the purpose
of soliciting and procuring insurance business:
Provided that such person does not suffer from any of the disqualifications
mentioned in sub-section (3).
(2) No person shall act as an insurance agent for more than one life insurer and
one general insurer.
(3) The disqualifications above referred to shall be the following:—
(a) that the person is a minor;
(b) that he is found to be of unsound mind by a court of competent
jurisdiction;
(c) that he has been found guilty of criminal misappropriation or criminal
breach of trust or cheating or forgery or an abetment of or attempt to commit
any such offence by a court of competent jurisidiction:
Provided that where at least five years have elapsed since the completion
of the sentence imposed on any person in respect of any such offence, the
Authority shall ordinaily declare in respect of such person that his conviction
shall cease to operate as a disqualification under this clause;
Omission of
section 40A.
Substitution of
new sections
for  sections
40B and 40C.
Limitation of
expenses of
management in
life insurance
business.
Limitation of
expenses of
management in
general, health
insurance and
re-insurance
business.
Amendment of
section 41.
Substitution of
new section for
section 42.
Appointment
of insurance
agents.

24
(d) that in the course of any judicial proceeding relating to any policy of
insurance or the winding up of an insurer or in the course of an investigation of
the affairs of an insurer it has been found that he has been guilty of or has
knowingly participated in or connived at any fraud, dishonesty or
misrepresentation against an insuer or insured;
(e) that in the case of an individual, who does not possess the requisite
qualifications or practical training or passed the examination, as may be specified
by the regulations;
(f) that in the case of a company or firm making, a director or a partner or
one or more of its officers or other employees so designated by it and in the
case of any other person the chief executive, by whatever name called, or one
or more of his employees designated by him, do not possess the requisite
qualifications or practical training and have not passed such an examination as
required under clauses (e) and (g);
(g) that he has not passed such examination as may be specified by the
regulations;
(h) that he has violated the code of conduct specified by the regulations.
(4) Any person who acts as an insurance agent in contravention of the provision
of this Act, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees and
any insurer or any person acting on behalf of an insurer, who appoints any person as
an insurance agent not permitted to act as such or transacts any insurance business in
India through any such person shall be liable to penalty which may extend to one
crore rupees.".
53. Sections 42A, 42B and 42C of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
54. In section 42D of the Insurance Act,—
(i) For the words "licence" and "licence issued", wherever they occur, the words
"registration" and "registration made", shall respectively be substituted.
(ii) in sub-section (1), in clause (a) of the proviso, for the word, brackets and
figure “sub-section ( 4)”, the word, brackets and figure “sub-section ( 3)” shall be
substituted;
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words, letters, brackets and figures "in clauses
(b), ( c), ( d), ( e) and ( f) of sub-section (4) of section 42", the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
"in clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (g) of sub-section (3) of section 42.".
55. For section 42E of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"42E. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act, the Authority
may, by regulations made in this behalf, specify the requirements of capital, form of
business and other conditions, to act as an intermediary or an insurance intermediary.".
56. For section 43 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"43. (I) Every insurer and every person who acting on behalf of an insurer
employs insurance agents shall maintain a record showing the name and address of
every insurance agent appointed by him and the date on which his appointment began
and the date, if any, on which his appointment ceased.
Ommission of
sections 42A,
42B and 42C.
Amendment of
section 42D.
Substitution of
new section for
section 42E.
Condition for
intermediary or
insurance
intermediary.
Substitution of
new section for
section 43.
Record of
insurance
agents.

25
(2) The record prepared by the insurer under sub-section (1), shall be maintained
for a period of five years.".
57. Section 44 of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
58. For sections 44A and 45 of the Insurance Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
"44A. For the purposes of ensuring compliance with the provisions of sections
40, 40B, 40C the Authority may, by notice—
(a) require from an insurer such information, certified if so required by
an auditor or actuary, as he may consider necessary;
(b) require an insurer to submit for his examination at the principal place
of business of  the insurer in India, any book of account, register or other
document, or to supply any statement which may be specified in the notice;
(c) examine any officer of an insurer on oath, in relation to any such
information, book, register, document or statement and the insurer, shall comply
with any such requirement within such time as may be specified in the notice.
45. (1) No policy of life insurance shall be called in question on any ground
whatsoever after the expiry of five years from the date of the policy, i.e., from the
date of issuance of the policy or the date of commencement of risk or the date of
revival of the policy or the date of the rider to the policy, whichever is later.
(2) A policy of life insurance may be called in question at any time within five
years from the date of issuance of the policy or the date of commencement of risk or
the date of revival of the policy or the date of the rider to the policy, whichever is
later, on the ground of fraud:
Provided that the insurer will have to communicate in writing to the insured or
the legal representatives or nominees or assignees of the insured the grounds and
materials on which such decision in based.
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression ‘fraud’
means any of the following acts committed by the insured or by his agent, with the
intent to deceive the insurer or to induce the insurer to issue a life insurance policy:
(a) the suggestion, as a fact of that which is not true and which the insured
does not believe to be true;
(b) the active concealment of a fact by the insured having knowledge or
belief of the fact;
(c) any other act fitted to deceive; and
(d) any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be fraudulent.
Explanation II.—Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the assessment of the
risk by the insurer is not fraud, unless the circumstances of the case are such that
regard being had to them, it is the duty of the insured or his agent, keeping silence to
speak, or unless his silence is, in itself, equivalent to speak.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), no insurer shall
repudiate a life insurance policy on the ground of fraud if the insured can prove that
the mis-statement of or suppression of a material fact was true to the best of his
knowledge and belief or that there was no deliberate intention to suppress the fact or
that such mis-statement of or suppression of a material fact are within the knowledge
of the insurer.
Omission of
section 44.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections
44A and 45.
Power  to call
for information.
Policy not be
called in
question on
ground of mis-
statement after
five years.

26
Explanation.—A person who solicits and negotiates a contract of insurance
shall be deemed for the purpose of the formation of the contract, to be the agent of
the insurer.
(4) A policy of life insurance may be called in question at any time within five
years from the date of issuance of the policy or the date of commencement of risk or
the date of revival of the policy or the date of the rider to the policy, whichever is
later, on the ground that any statement of or suppression of a fact material to the
expectancy of the life of the insured was incorrectly made in the proposal or other
document on the basis of which the policy was issued or revived or rider issued:
Provided that the insurer will have to communicate in writing to the insured or
the legal representatives or nominees or assignees of the insured the grounds and
materials on which such decision to repudiate the policy of life insurance is based:
Provided further that in case of repudiation of the policy on the ground of mis-
statement or suppression of a material fact, and not on the ground of fraud, the
premiums collected on the policy till the date of repudiation shall be paid to the
insured or the legal representatives or nominees or assignees of the insured within a
period of ninety days from the date of such repudiation.
Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section, the mis-statement of or
suppression of fact will not be considered material unless it has a direct bearing on
the risk undertaken by the insurer, the onus is on the insurer to show that had the
insurer been aware of the said fact no life insurance policy would have been issued to
the insured.
(5) Nothing in this section shall prevent the insurer from calling for proof of
age at any time if he is entitled to do so, and no policy shall be deemed to be called in
question merely because the terms of the policy are adjusted on subsequent proof
that the age of the life insured was incorrectly stated in the proposal.".
59. Sections 47A and 48 of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
60. For section 48A of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"48A. No insurance agent or intermediary or insurance intermediary shall be
eligible to be or remain a director in insurance company:
Provided that any director holding office at the commencement of the Insurance
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008 shall not become ineligible to remain a director by
reason of this section until the expiry of six months from the date of commencement
of the said Act:
Provided further that the Authority may permit an agent or intermediary or
insurance intermediary to be on the Board of an insurance company subject to such
conditions or restrictions as it may impose to protect the interest of policy-holders or
to avoid conflict of interest.".
61. In section 49 of the Insurance Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words "being an insurer specified in sub-clause (a) (ii) or sub-clause
(b) of clause (9) of section 2" shall  be omitted;
(ii) for the words "or to the Central Government under section 11 of the Indian
Life Insurance Companies Act, 1912" shall be omitted.
62. For sections 52 and 52A of the Insurance Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
Omission of
sections 47A
and 48.
Substitution of
new section for
section 48A.
Insurance agent
or intermediary
or insurance
intermediary
not to be
directors in
insurance
company.
Amendment of
section 49.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections 52
and 52A.
7 of 1912.

27
"52. No insurer shall commence any business upon the dividing principle, that
is to say, on the principle that the benefit secured by a policy is not fixed but depends
either wholly or partly on the result of a distribution of certain sums amongst policies
becoming claims within certain time-limits, or on the principle that the premiums
payable by a policy-holder depend wholly or partly on the number of policies becoming
claims within certain time-limits:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent an insurer
from allocating bonuses to holders of policies of life insurance as a result of a periodical
actuarial valuation either as reversionary additions to the sums insured or as immediate
cash bonuses or otherwise.
52A. (1) If at any time the Authority has reason to believe that an insurer carrying
on life insurance business is acting in a manner likely to be prejudicial to the interests
of holders of life insurance policies, it may, after giving such opportunity to the insurer
to be heard appoint an Administrator to manage the affairs of the insurer under the
direction and control of the Authority.
(2) The Administrator shall receive such remuneration as the Authority may
direct and the Authority may at any time cancel the appointment and apoint some
other person as Administrator.".
63. In section 52BB of the Insurance Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "the Central Government and the Central
Government", the words "Securities Appellate Tribunal and the Securities Appellate
Tribunal" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "Central Government", the words "Securities
Appellate Tribunal", shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (10), in clause ( a), the words "or the Central Government"
shall be omitted.
64. For section 52D of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"52D. If at any time, it appears to the Authority that the purpose of the order
appointing the Administrator has been fulfilled or that, for any reason, it is undesirable
that the order of appointment should remain in force, the Authority may cancel the
order and thereupon the Administrator shall be divested of the management of the
insurance business which shall, unless otherwise directed by the Authroity, again vest
in the person in whom it was vested immediately prior to the apointment of
Administrator or any other person appointed by the insurer in this behalf.".
65. In Section 52E the words "Central Government" are to be replaced by the word
"Authority".
66. In section 52F of the Insurance Act, for the words "punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both", the words "liable to penalty of rupees ten thousand each day during which such
failure continues or rupess ten lakh, whichever is less" shall be substituted.
67. In section 52G of the Insurance Act, in sub-section ( 2), the words "Central
Government or" shall be omitted.
68. Sections 52H to 52N (both inclusive) of the Insuracne Act, shall be omitted.
69. In section 53 of the Insurance Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
When
Administrator
for
management
of insurance
business may
be appointed.
Amendment of
section 52BB.
Substitution of
section 52D.
Termination of
appointment of
Administrator.
Amendment of
section 52E.
Amendment of
section 52F.
Amendment of
section 52G .
Omission of
sections 52H to
52N.
Amendment of
section 53.
Prohibition of
business on
dividing
principle.

28
“Explanation.—For the purpose of sections 53 to 61A, "Tribunal" means
National Company Law Tribunal constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section
10FB of the Companies Act, 1956.";
(b) In sub-section (2), in clause (b), sub-clause (i) shall be omitted.
70. In section 58 of the Insurance Act, for sub-section (4), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(4) An order of the Tribunal confirming a scheme under this section whereby
the memorandum of a company is altered with respect to its objects shall as respects
the alteration have effect as if it were an order confirmed under section 15 of the
Companies Act, 1956, and the provisions of section 17 of that Act shall apply
accordingly.".
71. Section 59 of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
72. Sections 62 to 64 (both inclusive) of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
73. In Part II A of the Insurance Act, for the heading "I
NSURANCE ASSOCIATION OF
INDIA, COUNCILS OF THE ASSOCIATION AND COMMITTEES THEREOF" the following heading shall
be substituted, namely:—
"LIFE I NSURANCE C OUNCIL AND G ENERAL INSURANCE COUNCIL AND COMMITTEES
THEREOF.".
74.     Sections 64A and 64B of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
75.  For sections 64C and 64D of the Insurance Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely :—
“64C.  On and from the date of commencement of the Insurance Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2008,—
(a) the existing Life Insurance Council, a representative body of the
insurers, who carry on the life insurance business in India; and
(b) the existing General Insurance Council, a representative body of
insurers, who carry on general, health insurance business and re-insurance in
India,
shall be deemed to have been constituted as the respective Councils under this Act.
64D. It shall be lawful for any member of the Life Insurance Council or the
General Insurance Council to authorise any of its officer to act as the representative
of such member at any meeting of the Council concerned.”.
76.    For section 64F of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“64F. (1) The Executive Committee of the Life Insurance Council shall consist
of the following persons, namely:—
(a) four representatives of members of the Life Insurance Council elected
in their individual capacity by the members in such manner as may be laid
down in the bye-laws of the Council;
Amendment of
section 58.
Omission of
section 59.
Omission of
sections 62, 63
and 64.
Amendment of
heading.
Omission of
sections 64A
and 64B.
Substitution of
new sections for
sections 64C
and 64D.
Councils of
Life Insurance
and General
Insurance.
Authorisation
to represent in
Councils.
Substitution of
new section for
section 64F.
Executive
Committees of
the Life
Insurance
Council and
the General
Insurance
Council.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.

29
(b) an eminent person not connected with insurance business, nominated
by the Authority; and
(c) three persons to represent insurance agents, intermediaries and policy-
holders respectively as may be nominated by the Authority:
Provided that one of the representatives as mentioned in clause ( a) shall be
elected as the Chairperson of the Executive Committee of the Life Insurance Council.
(2) The Executive Committee of the General Insurance Council shall consist of
the following persons, namely:—
(a) four representatives of members of the General Insurance Council
elected in their individual capacity by the members in such manner as may be
laid down in the bye-laws of the Council;
(b) an eminent  person not connected with insurance business, nominated
by the Authority; and
(c) four persons to represent insurance agents, third party administrators,
surveyors and loss assessors and policy-holders respectively as may be
nominated by the Authority:
Provided that one of the representatives as mentioned in clause ( a) shall be
elected as the Chairperson of the Executive Committee of the General Insurance
Council.
(3) If any body of persons specified in sub-sections (1) and (2) fails to elect any
of the members of the Executive Committees of the Life Insurance Council or the
General Insurance Council, the Authority may nominate any person to fill the vacancy,
and any person so nominated shall be deemed to be a member of the Executive
Committee of the Life Insurance Council or the General Insurance Council, as the
case may be, as if he had been duly elected thereto.
(4) Each of the said Executive Committees may make bye-laws for the
transaction of any business at any meeting of the said Committee.
(5) The Life Insurance Council or the General Insurance Council may form
such other committees consisting of such persons as it may think fit to discharge such
functions as may be delegated thereto.
(6) The Secretary of the Executive Committee of the Life Insurance Council
and of the Executive Committee of the General Insurance Council shall in each case
be appointed by the Executive Committee concerned:
Provided that each Secretary appointed by the Executive Committee concerned
shall exercise all such powers and do all such acts as may be authorised in this behalf
by the Executive Committee concerned.”.
77. In section 64G of the Insurance Act, in sub-section ( 2), for the words “by
nomination by the Authority”, the words “in such manner as may be laid down in the bye-
laws of the Council concerned” shall be substituted.
78.  Section 64-I of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
79.  In section 64J of the Insurance Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) For the purpose of enabling it to effectively discharge its functions, the
Executive Committee of the Life Insurance Council may collect such fees as may be
laid down in the bye-laws made by the Council from the  insurers carrying on life
insurance business.”.
Amendment of
section 64G.
Omission of
section 64-I.
Amendment of
section 64J.

30
80. In section 64L of the Insurance Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(2) For the purpose of enabling it to effectively  discharge its functions, the
Executive Committee of the General Insurance Council may collect such fees as may
be laid down in the bye-laws made by the Council from the insurers carrying on
general insurance business.’’.
81. In section 64N of the Insurance Act,  for the words “the Central Government may
prescribe”, the words “the Authority may specify” shall be substituted.
82. In section 64R of the Insurance Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(a)  for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(c) keep and maintain up to date a copy of list of all insurers who are
members of the either Council.”.
(b)  in clause (d), for the words “with the previous approval of the Authority
make regulations for”, the words “make bye laws for” shall be substituted.
83. Sections 64S and 64T of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
84.  Sections 64U to 64UL (both inclusive) of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
85.  After section 64UL of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“64ULA.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, until the rates,
advantage and terms and conditions laid-down by the Advisory Committee under
section 64UC are de-notified by the Authority with effect from such date as the
Authority may by notification in the Official Gazette determine, and the rates,
advantages and terms and conditions are decided by the insurer concerned, the rates,
advantages and terms and conditions notified by the Advisory Committee shall
continue to be in force and shall always be deemed to have been in force and any
such rates, advantages and terms and conditions shall be binding on all the insurers.
(2) The Authority shall, in consultation with the Central Government, prepare a
scheme for  the existing employees of the Tariff Advisory Committee on its dissolution,
keeping in view the interests of such employees on such terms and conditions as it
may, by order, determine.
86.  For section 64UM of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“64UM. Save as otherwise provided in this section and the regulations made
thereunder, no person shall act as a surveyor or loss assessor in respect of general
Insurance business.’’.
87.  For sections 64V and 64VA of the Insurance Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“64V. (1) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of
section 64V A, assets shall be valued at value not exceeding their market or realisable
value and certain assets may be excluded by the Authority in the manner as may be
specified by the  regulations made in this behalf.
(2) A proper value shall be placed on every item of liability of the insurer in the
manner as may be specified by the regulations made in this behalf.
Amendment of
section 64L.
Amendment of
section 64N.
Amendment of
section 64R.
Omission of
section 64S and
64T.
Omission of
sections 64U to
64UL.
Insertion of new
section 64ULA.
Transitional
provisions.
Substitution of
new section for
section 64UM.
Surveyors or
loss assessors.
Substitution of
new sections for
sections 64V
and 64V A.
Assets and
laibilities how
to be valued.

31
(3) Every insurer shall furnish to the Authority along with the returns required
to be filed under this Act, a statement, certified by an Auditor, approved by the
Authority, in respect of general insurance business or an actuary approved by the
Authority in respect of life insurance business, as the case may be, of his assets and
liabilities assessed in the manner required by this section as on the 31
st day of March
of each year within such time as may be specified by regulations.
64VA. (1) Every insurer and re-insurer shall at all times maintain an excess of
value of assets over the amount of liabilities of, not less than fifty per cent. of the
amount of minimum capital as stated under section 6 and arrived at in the manner
specified by the regulations.
(2) An insurer or re-insurer, as the case may be, who does not comply with sub-
section (1), shall be deemed to be insolvent and may be wound-up by the court on an
application made by the Authority.
(3) The Authority shall by way of regulation made for the purpose, specify a
level of solvency margin known as control level of solvency on the breach of which
the Authority shall act in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 4) without
prejudice to taking of any other remedial measures as deemed fit:
Provided that if in respect of any insurer the Authority is satisfied that either by
reason of an unfavourable claim experience or because of a sharp increase in the
volume of new business, or for any other reason, compliance with the provisions of
this sub-section will cause undue hardship to the insurer, it may direct that for such
period and subject to such conditions as it may specify, the provisions of this sub-
section shall apply to that insurer with such modifications provided that such
modifications shall not result in the control level of solvency being less than what is
stipulated under sub-section (1).
(4) If, at any time, an insurer or re-insurer does not maintain the required control
level of solvency margin, he shall, in accordance with the directions issued by the
Authority, submit a financial plan to the Authority, indicating a plan of action to
correct the deficiency within a specified period not exceeding six months.
(5) An insurer who has submitted a plan, as required under sub-section ( 4),
the Authority shall propose modifications to the plan, if the Authority considers the
same inadequate, and in such an eventuality, the Authority shall give directions, as
may be deemed necessary, including direction in regard to transacting any new
business, or, appointment of an administrator or both.
(6) An insurer or re-insurer, as the case may be, who does not comply with the
provisions of sub-section ( 4) shall be deemed to have made default in complying
with the requirements of this section.
(7) The Authority shall be entitled at any time to take such steps as it may
consider necessary for the inspection or verification of the assets and liabilities of
any insurer or re-insurer, or for securing the particulars necessary to establish that the
requirements of this section have been complied with as on any date, and the insurer
or re-insurer, as the  case may be, shall comply with any requisition made in this
behalf by the Authority, and in the event of any failure to do so within two months
from the receipt of the requisition, the insurer or re-insurer, as the case may be, shall
be deemed to have made default in complying with the requirements of this section.
(8) In applying the provisions of sub-section (1) to any insurer or re-insurer, as
the case may be, who is a member of a group, the relevant amount for that insurer
shall be an amount equal to that proportion of the relevant amount which that group,
if considered as a single insurer, would have been required to maintain as the proportion
of his share of the risk on each policy issued by the group bears to the total risk on
that policy:
Sufficiency of
assets.

32
Provided that when a group of insurers ceases to be a group, every insurer in
that group who continues to carry on any class of insurance business in India shall
comply with  the requirements of sub-section (1) as if he had not been an insurer in a
group at any time:
Provided further that it shall be sufficient compliance of the provisions of the
foregoing proviso if the insurer brings up the excess of the value of his assets over the
amount of his liabilities to the required amount within a period of six months from
the date of cessation of the group:
Provided also that the Authority may, on sufficient cause being shown, extend
the said period of six months by such further periods as it may think fit, so, however
that the total period may not in any case exceed one year.
(9) Every insurer shall furnish to the Authority  return giving details of solvency
margin in such form, time, manner including its authentication as may be specified
by the regulations.".
88. For section 64VC of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘‘64VC. No insurer shall, after the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1968, open a new place of business or close a place in India or
outside India or change otherwise than within the same city, town or village, the
location of an existing place of business situated in India or outside India, except in
the manner as may be specified by regulations.’’.
89.  PART III and IIIA of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
90.  PART IV  of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
91. For section 102 of the Insurance Act, for the words “not exceeding five lakh
rupees for each such failure and punishable with fine”, the words “ of one lakh rupees for
each day during which such failure continues or one crore rupees, whichever is less” shall
be substituted.
92.  For sections 103 and  104  of the Insurance Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“103.  If a person carries on the business of insurance without obtaining a
certificate of registration under section 3, he shall be liable to a fine not exceeding
rupees twenty-five crores and with imprisonment which may extend to ten years.
104.  If a person fails to comply with the provisions of section 27, section 27A,
section 27B, section 27D and section 27E, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
twenty-five crore rupees.”.
93. In section 105 of the Insurance Act, for the words “not exceeding two lakh rupees
for each such failure”, the words “not exceeding one crore rupees ” shall be substituted.
94. For sections 105B and 105C of the Insurance Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely :—
“105B. If an insurer fails to comply with the provisions of section 32B, section
32C and section 32D, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty-five crore
rupees.
Substitution of
new section for
section 64VC.
Restrictions on
the opening of a
new place of
bunsiness.
Amendment of
section 102.
Substitution
of new
sections for
sections 103
and 104.
Amendment of
section 105.
Omission of
Part III and IIIA.
Omission of
Part IV .
Substitution of
new sections for
sections 105B
and 105C.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
sections 32B,
32C and 32D.
Penalty for
carrying on
insurance
business in
contravention
of section 3.
Penalty for
contravention
of sections 27,
27A, 27B, 27D
and 27E.

33
105C. (1) For the purpose of adjudication under sub-section  ( 2) of section
2CB, sub-section (4) of section 34B, sub-section (2) of section 40A, sub-section (2)
of section 41, sub-section ( 4)  of section 42, section 102, section 104, section 105
and section 105B, the Authority, shall appoint any officer not below the rank of a
Joint Director to be an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry in the prescribed
manner after giving any person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) Upon receipt of the inquiry report from the officer so appointed, the Authority
after giving an opportunity of being heard to the person concerned may impose any
penalty provided in sections aforesaid.
(3) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have power to summon
and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances
of the case to give evidence or to produce any document which in the opinion of the
adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry
and if on such inquiry, is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the provisions
of any of the sections specified in sub-section (1), he may recommend such penalty as
he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of any of those sections.
105D. While recommending the quantum of penalty under section 105C, the
adjudicating officer and while imposing such penalty, the Authority shall have due
regard to the following factors, namely:—
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever
quantifiable, made as a result of the default;
(b) the amount of loss caused to the policy-holders as a result of the default; and
(c) the repetitive nature of default."
95.  In section 106A  of the Insurance Act, in sub-section (2), clauses (a), (b) and (f)
shall be omitted and in clause (d), the words ‘or a provident society’ shall be omitted.
96.  Sections 107 and 107A of the Insurance Act shall be omitted.
97. For section 109 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“109. No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act
or any rules or any regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint made by an
officer of the Authority or by any person authorised by it. ".
98.  For section 110 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"110. (1) Any person aggrieved—
(a) by an order of the Authority made on and after the commencement of
the Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008, or under this Act, the rules or
regulations made thereunder, or
(b) by an order made by the Authority by way of adjudication under this
Act, may prefer an appeal to the Securities Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction
in the matter.
Power to
adjudicate.
Factors to be
taken into
account by the
adjudicating
officer.
Amendment of
section 106A.
Omission of
section 107 and
107A.
Substitution of
new section for
section 109.
Cognizance of
Offence.
Substitution of
new section for
section 110.
Appeal to
Securities
Appellate
Tribunal.

34
(2) Every Appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty-
five days from the date on which a copy of the order made by the Authority is received
by him and it shall be in such a form and be accompanied by such fees as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Securities Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after
the expiry of the said period of forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient
cause for not filing it within that period.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the Securities Appellate
Tribunal may after giving parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass
such orders thereon as it thinks fit, conforming, modifying or setting aside the order
appealed against.
(4) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall make available copy of order made
by it to the Authority and parties.
(5) The appeal filed before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under sub-section
(1) shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made
by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six months from the date of receipt of
appeal.
(6) The procedure for filing and disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(7) The provision contained in section 15U, section 15V , section 15W, section
15Y and section 15Z of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 shall
apply to the appeals arising out of the provisions of this Act, as they apply to the
appeals under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.
99. Section 110E of the Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
100. Sections 110G and 110H of the  Insurance Act, shall be omitted.
101. After section 110H of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘110AA.  Any penalty imposed by the Authority under this Act shall be
recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.".
102. In section 111 of the Insurance Act, the words "provident societies", wherever
they occur, shall be omitted.
103. For section 113 of the Insurance Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“113. (1)  A policy of life insurance shall acquire surrender value as per the
norms specified by the regulations.
(2) Every policy of life insurance shall contain the formula as approved by the
Authority for calculation of guaranteed surrender value of the policy.
(3) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, a policy of life insurance
under a non-linked plan which has acquired a surrender value shall not lapse by
reason of non-payment of further premiums but shall be kept in force to the extent of
paid-up sum insured, calculated by means of a formula as approved by the Authority,
and contained in the policy, and the reversionary bonuses that have already been
attached to the policy:
15 of 1992.
Omission of
section 110E.
Omission of
sections 110G
and 110H.
Insertion of new
section 110AA.
Penalty to be
recoverable as
arrear of land
revenue.
Amendment of
section 111.
Substitution of
new section for
section 113.
Acquisition of
surrender value
by policy.

35
Provided that a policy of life insurance under a linked plan shall be kept in
force in the manner as may be specified by the regulations.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall not apply—
(i) where the paid-up sum insured by a policy, inclusive of attached
bonuses, is less than the amount specified by the Authority or takes the form of
annuity of amount less than the amount specified by the Authority; or
(ii) when the parties after the default has occurred in payment of the
premium agree in writing to other arrangement.”.
104. In section 114 of the Insurance Act, in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) clauses (c) and (f) shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (l), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“ (la) the manner of inquiry under sub-section (1) of section 105C;
(lb) the form in which an appeal may be preferred under sub-section (2)
and the fee payable in respect of such appeal and the procedure for filing and
disposing of an appeal under sub-section ( 6)  of section 110.”.
105. In section 114A of the Insurance Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clauses (a) and (aa), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) manner of making application for registration and documents to be
accompanied under sub-section (2) of section 3;";
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(d) such annual fee to the Authority and manner of payment under sub-
section (1) of section 3A;";
(iii) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(da) such minimum annuity and other benefits to be secured by the insurer
under section 4;
(db) such equity capital and such forms of capital including hybrid capital
required under sub-section (I) of section 6A;";
(iv) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ea) separation of account of all receipts and payments in respect of
each classes and sub-classes of insurance business as required under sub-section
(1) and sub-section (2A) of section 10; and its waiver under the said section;";
(v) in clause (f), for the words "under sub-section (1A) of section 11", the words
"under sub-section (1) of section 11" shall be substituted;
(vi) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(g) the manner in which an abstract of the report of the actuary to be
specified and the form and manner in which the statement referred to in section
13 shall be appended;";
(vii) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(h) the fee for procuring a copy of return or any part thereof under sub-
section (I) of section 20;";
(viii) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(i) investment of assets and further provisions regarding investments by
an insurer and investment by insurers in certain cases under sections 27, 27A,
Amendment of
section 114.
Amendment of
section 114A.

36
27B, 27C and time, manner and other conditions of investment of assets under
section 27D;";
(ix) for clauses ( ia), ( ib), ( ic), ( id) and ( ie), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(ia) the form in which a return giving details of investments made, time
and manner including its authentication under section 28;
(ib) the loans including the loans sanctioned to the full-time employees
of the insurer under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 29;
(ic) the sum to be paid by the insurer to any person under section 31B;
(id) the obligation of insurer in respect of rural or social or unorganised
sector and backward classes under section 32B and 32C;
(ie) the minimum percentage of insurance business in third party risks of
motor vehicles under section 32D;";
(x) for clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(j) the minimum information to be maintained by insurers or intermediary
or insurance intermediary, as the case may be, in their books, the manner in
which such information shall be maintained, the checks and other verifications
in that connection and all other matters incidental thereto under sub-section (7)
of section 33;";
(xi) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ja) the form in which balance-sheets in respect of the insurance business
of each of the insurers concerned and the manner in which actuarial reports and
abstracts in respect of the life insurance business are to be prepared under
clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (3) of section 35;
(jb) the manner of assessment of compensation under the proviso to sub-
section  (4A) of section 37A;
(jc) the fee to be charged by the insurer under sub-section (3) of section 39;
(jd) the manner of payment of benefits under sub-section (12) of section
39;
(je) the manner and amount of remuneration or reward to be paid or
received by way of commission or otherwise to an insurance agent or an
intermediary or insurance intermediary under section 40;
(jf) the manner and form of expenses of management under section 40B
and 40C.";
(xii) clauses (k) and (l), shall be omitted;
(xiii) for clause (m), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(m) the requisite qualifications or practical training or examination to
be passed for appointment as an insurance agent under clause (e) of sub-section
(3) of section 42;";
(xiv) clause (n), shall be omitted;
(xv) for clause (o), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(o) the code of conduct under clause (h) of sub-section (3) of section 42;";
(xvi) clause (p), shall be omitted;
(xvii) clause (va), shall be omitted;

37
Omission of the
Fifth, the Sixth
and the Eighth
Schedule.
(xviii) in clause (vb), the words, brackets and figure "sub-section (2) of" shall
be omitted;
(xix) clause (w), shall be omitted;
(xx) for clause (y), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(y) the manner of exclusion of certain assets under sub-section (1), the
manner of valution of liabilities under sub-section  (2) and time for furnishing
statement under sub-section (3) of section 64V;";
(xxi) for clause (za), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(za) the matters specified under sub-section (1) of section 64V A relating
to sufficiency of assets;";
(xxii) after clause (zaa), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(zab) the form, time, manner including autherntication of the return giving
details of solvency margin under sub-section (9) of section 64VA;
(zac) the manner of opening and closing places of business under section
64VC;":
(xxiii) after clause (zb), the  following clause shall be added, namely:—
"(zba) the norms for surender value of life insurance policy under sub-
section (1) of section 113;";
 106. In the Insurance Act, the Fifth Schedule, the Sixth Schedule and the Eighth
Schedule shall be omitted.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENT TO THE  GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS (NATIONALISATON)
ACT, 1972
107. In the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972, after section
10A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"10B. The General Insurance Corporation and the insurance companies specified
in section 10A may, raise their capital for increasing their business in rural and social
sectors, to meet solvency margin and such other purposes, as the Central Government
may empower in this behalf.".
108. Section 25 of the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 shall be omitted.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENT TO INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
ACT, 1999
109. In section 2 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999,
in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (b), after the words "Development Authority", the  words" of India",
shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause (f), after the words "insurance consultants", the words "Insurance
agents, third party administrator" shall be inserted.
110. In section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, in
sub-section (1), after the words ‘‘Development Authority’’ the words ‘‘of India’’ shall be inserted.
111. In section 16 of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, in
sub-section (1) clause (c) shall be omitted.
Insertion of a
new section
after section
10A.
Enchancement
of equity capital
of General Insu-
rance comapnies.
Omission of
section 25.
Amendment of
section 2.
57 of 1972.
Amendment of
section 16.41 of 1999.
41 of 1999.
41 of 1999.
57 of 1972.
Amendment of
section 3.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Insurance Act, 1938 (Insurance Act) provides for and regulates the insurance
business in the country. However, with the enactment of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999 (the IRDA Act), the insurance business was opened up
to the private sector. As a result of opening up of the insurance business, the number of
insurance companies has increased from six nationalised companies in 1999 to forty-two
insurance companies as on today. The IRDA Act paved the way for establishment of the
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) to protect the interest of holders
of insurance policies and to regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of the insurance
industry and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The General Insurance
Business (Nationalisation) Act  (GIBNA), 1972 nationalised the general insurance business
in India and provided for the acquisition and transfer of shares of Indian general insurance
companies, in order to serve better the need of the economy, by securing the development
of general insurance business in the best interest of the public.
2. The Law Commission of India, at the request of IRDA, had reviewed these Acts
and submitted its 190th report relating to the revision of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 to Government on 1st June,
2004. The report covered legal issues concerning repudiation of the life insurance policies;
nominations; assignment and transfer of policies; merger of IRDA  Act with the Insurance
Act, 1938; setting up of the Grievance Redressal Authorities, Insurance Appellate Authority,
amendment to definitions and deletion of redundant provisions. An expert committee under
Shri K.P. Narsimhan (Ex-Chairman of the LIC) was set-up by the IRDA on the
recommendation of the Law Commission. The KPN Committee examined various issues
relating to Surveyors and Loss Assessors, Investments, Tariff, Shareholders and
Policyholders Funds and extent of Foreign Shareholdings in the Indian insurance companies
and co-operative societies. It submitted its report to IRDA on 26th July, 2005. The reports
submitted by the Law Commission and the KPN Committee were examined by IRDA and
the IRDA forwarded its recommendations on amendment of insurance laws to the
Government on 16th March, 2006. The recommendations have been considered and finalised
by the Government in consultation with General Insurers Public Sector’s Association
(GIPSA) and General Insurance Corporation of India (GIC) to amend the Insurance Act,
1938, General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 and Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority Act, 1999.
3. The Insurance Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2008 proposes to amend the Insurance
Act, 1938, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 and the General
Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972. The said Bill, inter alia, seeks to:—
(i) define "health insurance business" and provides for a minimum paid-up
equity capital of Rs. 50 crore in case of insurers carrying on exclusively the business
of health insurance;
(ii) raise the foreign equity in Indian insurance company from 26% to 49% and
maintain foreign direct investment cap at 26% for the Insurance Co-operative Societies;
(iii) permit foreign re-insurers to open branches only for re-insurance business
in India;
(iv) facilitate entry of Lloyd's of London in insurance business in India as a
foreign company in joint venture with Indian partners and also as branch of foreign
re-insurer;
(v) provide for permanent registration of the insrurers with annual renewal fee
and right to cancel the registration on breach of conditions specified by the IRDA;
38

39
(vi) remove restriction on divestment by Indian promoters of insurance
companies, which were required earlier to divest to 26% or such other, prescribed
percentage in the manner and period prescribed by the Central Government;
(vii) remove requirements of deposits by insurers for registration in view of
these being regulated by the IRDA on the basis of solvency margin;
(viii) provide obligatory underwritting of third party risks of motor vehicles on
the pattern of insurance in rural areas and social sectors;
(ix) make provision for absolute and conditional assignments of life insurance
policies;
(x) make provision for distinction between a beneficiary nominee and a collector
nominee in life insurance policies;
(xi) entrust responsibility of appointing insurance agents to insurers and IRDA
to regulate their eligibility, qualifications and other aspects;
(xii) make life insurance policy unchallengeable on whatsoever ground after
five years of issue of the policy and limiting the grounds for challenge during the
period within five years;
(xiii) delete provisions relating to Tariff Advisory Committee (TAC) in view of
the detariffing of rates and premiums w.e.f. 1st January, 2007;
(xiv) provide for making Life Insurance Council and General Insurance Council
as self-regulating bodies by empowering them to frame bye-laws for elections,
meetings, levy and collection of fees from its members;
(xv) provide for fine up to Rs. 25 crore and imprisonment up to 10 years for
carrying on insurance business without registration;
(xvi) provide for penalty of "not exceeding twenty-five crore rupees" in case an
insurer fails to comply with the obligations for rural or social sector or third party
insurance of motor vehicles;
(xvii) provide for powers of adjudication to the Authority and appeal to Securities
Appellate Tribunal against the decisions of the Authority;
(xviii) provide for crediting sums realised by way of penalty to the Consolidated
Fund of India;
(xix) bar courts from taking cognizance of any offence punishable under the
Insurance Act, save on a complaint made by an officer of the IRDA;
(xx) delete redundant provisions and make consequential amendments to various
provisions in the Insurance Act;
(xxi) allow insurance companies to raise newer capital through newer instruments
on the pattern of banks;
(xxii) formulate regulations for payment of commission and control of
management expenses;
(xxiii) formulate regulations for opening and closing of foreign branches and
the closing of domestic branches of Indian insurers and norms for opening domestic
branches;
(xxiv) address matters relating to the functions, code of conduct, etc., of surveyors
and loss assessors in the existing regulations;
(xxv) allow nationalised general insurance companies to raise money from the
market with the permission of the Central Government for increasing their business
in rural and social sector, to meet solvency margin and such other purposes, as the

40
Central Government may empower in this behalf; and
(xxvi) include "insurance agent" in the definition of  "insurance intermediaries"
in the IRDA Act.
4. The proposed amendments are aimed at bringing improvement and revision of the
laws relating to insurance business in the changed scenario of private participation. It also
incorporates certain provisions to provide IRDA with flexibility to discharge its functions
effectively and efficiently.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; PAW AN KUMAR BANSAL.
The 4th December, 2008.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to substitute the words “Indian Companies Act, 1913”
throughout the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) with the words “the
Companies Act, 1956”.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Act to substitute, amend,
insert the definitions of actuary, health insurance business, Indian insurance company,
insurance co-operative society, insurer , regulation, re-insurance, Securities Appellate
Tribunal and omit certain redundant clauses from definitions.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to substitute section 2C of the Act so as to prohibit
insurance business without registration but provide relaxation to special economic zone
and regulate re-insurance through its branch office by a foreign insurer.
Clause 5.— This clause seeks to amend section 2CA of the Act to exempt from
application of the provisions of the Act to the foreign insurers also in special economic
zone.
Clause 6.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 2CB in the Act to prohibit
insurance of the properties in India, ship, vessel, aircraft registered in India from foreign
insurer except the properties situated in special economic zones.  It also proposed a penalty
of five crore of rupees for contravention of this provision.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to omit section 2E of the Act relating to insurers, who
enter into new contracts before commencement of the Act, as it has become redundant.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Act to regulate the manner of
making application for registration of insurers by regulation and provide for appeal to
Securities Appellate T ribunal against the refusal of registration by the Authority and
suspension or cancellation of registration in certain cases.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to substitute section 3A of the Act to provide for annual
fee in place of annual renewal of registration of insurers by regulation.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to substitute section 4 of the Act to provide for minimum
limit for annuities and other benefits secured by policy of life insurance by regulations.
Clause 11.— This clause seeks to amend section 5 of the Act to omit redundant
provisions.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to substitute section 6 of the Act to provide for capital
of rupees fifty crore for exclusive health insurance business and minimum net owned funds
of rupees five thousand crore for a foreign re-insurer opening branch in India.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to amend section 6A of the Act to regulate the capital
structure, voting rights, maintenance of records of the shareholders, etc., of life, general,
health insurance and re-insurance companies and to omit certain redundant provisions.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to omit section 6AA of the Act relating to manner of
divesting of the excess shareholding by promoters in certain cases.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 6B of the Act to include general,
health insurance business and re-insurance for compliance of capital structure and empower
the Authority to regulate the same  in place of the Central Government.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to omit sections 6C, 7, 8 and 9 of the Act relating to
capital structure, company limited by guarantee and deposits by the insurers before
registration.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to amend section 10 of the Act to empower the Authority
to regulate the separation of accounts and funds of insurers.
41

42
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to substitute section 11 of the Act to empower the
Authority to regulate preparation of annual accounts and balance-sheet by insurers.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to substitute section 12 of the Act to provide audit of
insurance business.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend section 13 of the Act to omit the redundant
provisions relating to actuarial investigation and empower the Authority to regulate the
insurance business through actuaries.
Clause 21.— This clause seeks to substitute section 14 of the Act to provide for
maintenance of records of policies and claims electronically also.
Clause 22 .—This clause seeks to substitute section 15 of the Act to omit certain
redundant provisions relating to submission of returns by insurers.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to omit section 16 of the Act relating to returns by
insurers established outside India.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to omit sections 17 and 17A of the Act relating to
exemption from certain provisions of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 and furnishing of
balance sheet and accounts to Registrar of Companies and non-application of the Act to the
preparation of accounts for the period prior to 1968.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to amend section 20 of the Act to empower the Authority
to regulate inspection and filing of copy of the returns of the insurers and fee.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to amend section 21 of the Act to provide for appeal to
the  Security Appellate Tribunal by insurers against the final order of the Authority not
accepting a return or other statement submitted to it.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to amend section 22 of the Act to make consequential
amendments relating to powers of the Authority.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 27, 27A, 27B, 27C and 27D of
the Act to provide for broad guidelines for investment by insurers and prohibit investment
of funds outside India.  The objective is to make the investment provisions more effective.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 28, 28A and 28B to empower
the Authority to regulate statements, returns of investment of assets.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to substitute section 29 of the Act to provide for granting
of loans or advances to subsidiaries of insurance companies with the prior approval of the
Authority.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to substitute section 30 of the Act to provide for liability
of directors, managers or officers for loss sustained by insurer or policy-holders due to
contravention of the provisions relating to investments.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to amend section 31 of the Act to provide that none of
the assets in India of any insurer shall be kept otherwise than in the name of a public officer
approved by the Authority.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to amend section 31A of the Act to omit redundant
provisions relating to management of the insurance companies.
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to substitute section 31B of the Act to empower the
Authority to regulate the payment of excessive remuneration.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to omit section 32 of the Act relating to employment
of managing agents.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to amend section 32A of the Act to prohibit the common
officer  for insurers  and prescribe a full-time officer.

43
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to amend section 32B of the Act to provide for insurance
business in rural and social sector in place of rural or social sector.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to insert section 32D in the Act for obligation on all
insurers in respect of third party risks of motor vehicles.
Clause 39.— This clause seeks to substitute section 33 of the Act to provide for
coverage of intermediary or insurance intermediary  for investigation and inspection by the
Authority.
Clause 40.—This clause seeks to amend section 34B to enhance the penalty of one
lakh rupees for each day during which such  contravention continues or one crore rupees,
whichever is less, for contravention of the orders of the Authority for removal of managerial
person from office.
Clause 41.— This clause seeks to amend section 34C of the Act to provide for
consultation with the Central Government for appointment of Additional Directors of the
insurers by the Authority in public interest.
Clause 42.—This clause seeks to amend section 34E of the Act to substitute the word
“Controller” with  the word “Authority”.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to omit section 34G of the Act relating to the power of
the Authority to order closure of foreign branches of   Indian insurance companies.
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to amend section 34H of the Act to designate Deputy
Director of the Authority as authority for search and seizure ordered by the Authority and
substitute  the  Securities Appellate Tribunal in place of  the Central Government.
Clause 45.—This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the Act to empower the Authority
to regulate amalgamation and transfer of insurance business.
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to substitute section 36 of the Act relating to  the
sanction of amalgamation and transfer of insurance business by the Authority by omitting
redundant provisions.
Clause 47.—This clause seeks to amend section 37A of the Act to provide for the
scheme for amalgamation to be notified in the Official Gazette after approval of the Central
Government.  It also gives rights to policy-holder or shareholder or member of each of the
insurers to file an appeal in the Securities Appellate Tribunal against the recommendation
of the Authority for amalgamation.
Clause 48.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 38, 39 and 40 of the Act dealing
with assignment and transfer of insurance policies to make a clear distinction between
absolute and conditional assignments of life policies.  It also provides for a clear distinction
between a beneficial nominee and a collector nominee by order to provide timely and
adequate benefits to the policy-holders. It also empowers the Authority to regulate payment
of commission for procuring business.
Clause 49.—This clause seeks to omit section 40A of the Act to omit the redundant
provisions relating to limitation of expenditure on commission.
Clause 50.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 40B and 40C of the Act to regulate
management expenses of life, general and health insurers and re-insurers.
Clause 51.—This clause seeks to amend section 41 of the Act by enhancing the penalty
from five hundred rupees up to five lakh rupees in case an insurer contravenes the provision
relating to prohibition of rebates.
Clause 52.— This clause seeks to substitute section 42 of the Act to regulate the
appointment of insurance agents by insurers in respect of eligibility, disqualification and
other aspects.
Clause 53.—This clause seeks to omit sections 42A, 42B and 42C of the Act relating
to registration and regulation of principal agents, chief agents and special agents.

44
Clause 54.— This clause seeks to amend section 42D of the Act to provide for
registration in place of licensing of intermediary or insurance intermediary by the Authority.
Clause 55.— This clause seeks to substitute section 42E of the Act to regulate
requirement of capital, form of business and other conditions for intermediary or insurance
intermediary.
Clause 56.—This clause seeks to substitute section 43 of the Act to enable the insurers
to keep the records electronically.
Clause 57.—This clause seeks to omit section 44 of the Act relating to shifting of
agents from one insurer to another insurer.
Clause 58.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 44A and 45 of the Act to provide
that no policy of life insurance shall be called in question on any ground  after the period of
five years. It  also provides that the policy can be called in question by the insurer within
the period of five years only in case of fraud.
Clause 59.—This clause seeks to omit sections 47A and 48 of the Act relating to
claims on small life insurance policies and directors of insurers being  companies.
Clause 60.—This clause seeks to substitute section 48A of the Act to prohibit insurance
agents or insurance intermediaries from becoming director  in  any insurance company.
Clause 61.—This clause seeks to amend section 49 of the Act relating to restriction
of dividends and bonuses  in order to omit  certain  redundant provisions.
Clause 62.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 52 and 52A of the Act  in order
to omit redundant provisions in the section relating to prohibition of the business on dividing
principle.  It further provides for appointment of an Administrator by the Authority to
manage the affairs of the insurer.
Clause 63.—This clause seeks to amend section 52BB of the Act to provide for appeal
to the Securities Appellate Tribunal in place of the Central Government against the order of
attachment of property by the Authority.
Clause 64.—This clause seeks to substitute section 52D of the Act to provide for
termination of appointment of an Administrator by the Authority in place of  the Central
Government.
Clause 65.—This clause seeks to amend section 52E of the Act to provide for final
decision on appointment of an Administrator  in place of the Central Government by  the
Authority.
Clause 66.—This clause seeks to amend section 52F of the Act to provide  the penalty
of ten thousand rupees for each day of withholding the documents of property from the
Administrator appointed by the Authority during which such failure continues or ten lakh
rupees, whichever is less.
Clause 67.—This clause seeks to amend section 52G of the Act to omit the words
“Central Government” as a consequential change.
Clause 68.—This clause seeks to omit sections 52H to 52N (both inclusive) of the
Act relating to acquisition of the undertakings of the insurers in certain cases by the Central
Government, being redundant.
Clause 69.—This clause seeks to amend section 53 of the Act to provide for insertion
of explanation defining Tribunal under the Companies Act, 1956.
Clause 70.—This clause seeks to make consequential amendments in section 58 of
the Act to substitute relevant sections of the Companies Act, 1956 in place of Indian
Companies Act, 1913.
Clause 71.—This clause seeks to omit section 59 of the Act relating to return of
deposits as such deposits by insurers before registration are proposed to be discontinued.

45
Clause 72.—This clause seeks to omit sections 62 to 64 (both inclusive) of the Act
relating to special provisions for external insurance companies.
Clause 73.—This clause seeks to amend the heading in Part II of the Act.
Clause 74.—This clause seeks to omit sections 64A and 64B of the Act relating to
incorporation of the Insurance Association of India  and entry of  names of the  members in
the register.
Clause 75.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 64C and 64D of the Act to provide
for consequential amendment to the section dealing with the Life Insurance Council and
General Insurance Council.
Clause 76.— This clause seeks to substitute section 64F of the Act relating to
composition, function and operational issues of the Life Insurance Council and the General
Insurance Council to make  them the self-regulatory organisations.
Clause 77.— This clause seeks to amend section 64G of the Act to empower the
Executive Committees of Life Insurance Council and General Insurance Council to nominate
members on casual vacancies by bye-laws.
Clause 78.—This clause seeks to omit section 64-I of the Act relating to holding of
examination for insurance agents by the Life Insurance Council.
Clause 79.- This clause seeks to amend section 64J of the Act to enable the Life
Insurance Council to collect fee by bye-laws from council members.
Clause 80.—This clause seeks to amend section 64L of the Act to enable the General
Insurance Council to collect fee by bye-laws from council members.
Clause 81.— This clause seeks to amend section 64N of the Act to empower the
Authority to specify the manner for holding of joint meeting of the Executive Committees
of the Life and General Insurance Councils.
Clause 82.—This clause seeks to amend section 64R of the Act to empower the Life
Insurance Council and the General Insurance Council to make bye-laws for elections,
meetings, levy and collection of fees, etc.
Clause 83.—This clause seeks to omit sections 64S and 64T of the Act relating to
transitory provisions.
Clause 84.—This clause seeks to omit sections 64U to 64UL (both inclusive) of the
Act relating to Tariff Advisory Committee and control of rates in view of the de-tariffing
with effect from 01-01-2007.
Clause 85.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 64ULA in the Act to provide
transitory provisions for continuation of rates, terms and conditions fixed by the Tariff
Advisory Committee.
Clause 86.- This clause seeks to substitute section 64UM of the Act to empower the
Authority to regulate the functions, code of conduct, etc., of surveyors and loss assessors.
Clause 87.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 64V and 64V A of the Act to
empower the Authority to regulate valuation of the assets and procedure for calculation of
solvency margin of insurers.
Clause 88.—This clause seeks to substitute section 64VC of the Act to empower the
Authority to regulate opening and closing of places of business of insurers.
Clause 89.—This clause seeks to omit Part III and Part IIIA of the Act relating to
provident societies, which are no longer permitted to underwrite the insurance business.   It
also omits the provisions relating to insurance co-operative societies.

46
Clause 90.—This clause seeks to omit Part IV of the Act relating to mutual insurance
companies and life insurance societies, as they are not allowed to underwrite insurance
business in India.
Clause 91.—This clause seeks to amend section 102 of the Act to enhance the penalty
for default in complying with, or act in contravention of, the Act to one lakh rupees for each
day during which such failure continues or one crore rupees, whichever is less.
Clause 92.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 103 and 104 of the Act to enhance
the fine not exceeding twenty-five crore rupees and  with imprisonment which may extend
to ten years in case a person carries on business of insurance without obtaining a certificate
of registration.  It also enhances the penalty for contravention of provisions relating to
investment of controlled fund or assets.
Clause 93.—This clause seeks to amend section 105 of the Act to enhance the penalty
not exceeding one crore rupees in case any executive of the insurer wrongfully obtains or
withholds the property under the Act.
Clause 94.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 105B and 105C of the Act to
enhance penalty in case an insurer fails to comply with the obligations for rural or social
sector or third party insurance for motor vehicles to not exceeding twenty-five crore rupees.
It further provides for powers of adjudication to the Authority and provides penalty for
contravention where there is no separate penalty provided in the Act.
Clause 95.— This clause seeks to amend section 106A of the Act to provide for
consequential amendments.
Clause 96.— This clause seeks to omit sections 107 and 107A of the Act being
redundant.
Clause 97.—This clause seeks to substitute section 109 of the Act to provide that no
court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under the Act  save on a complaint
made by an officer of the Authority.
Clause 98.—This clause seeks to substitute section 110 of the Act to provide for
appeal to the Securities and Appellate Tribunal against the decision of the Authority and
omit certain  redundant  provisions.
Clause 99.—This clause seeks to omit section 110E of the Act being redundant.
Clause 100.—This clause seeks to omit sections 110G and 110H of the Act  relating
to appeals in view of the provision for appeal to Securities Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 101.—This clause seeks to insert a new section  110A in the Act to provide for
recovery of penalties imposed by the Authority as arrears of land revenue.
Clause 102.—This clause seeks to amend section 111 of the Act to omit the words
“provident society”.
Clause 103.—This clause seeks to substitute section 113 of the Act to omit redundant
provisions relating to acquisition of surrender value of life insurance policies.
Clause 104.—This clause seeks to amend section 114 of the Act to omit and insert
the provisions relating to rule making powers in respect of which substantive provisions
have been made in the Act.
Clause 105.—This clause seeks to amend section 114A of the Act to omit and insert
the provisions relating to regulation making powers in respect of which substantive provisions
have been made in the Act.
Clause 106.—This clause seeks to omit the Fifth Schedule, Sixth Schedule and Eighth
Schedule from the Act  being redundant.

47
Clause 107.— This clause seeks to  amend the General Insurance Business
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972 to  insert section 10A to empower the Central Government to
allow public sector General Insurance companies to raise money from the market to meet
their capital requirements.
Clause 108.—This clause seeks to omit section 25 from the General Insurance Business
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972  relating to  properties  in India  not to be insured with foreign
insurers except  with  permission of  Central Government  as the said provision has been
kept in  the Insurance Act, 1938.
Clause 109.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999 in order to substitute “Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority” to “Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India”.
Clause 110.—This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999 consequent upon the change of the name to Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority of India.
Clause 111.—This clause seeks to omit clause (c) of  sub-section  (1) of section 16 of
the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999  relating to imposition of
levy by the Authority as a percentage of premium income of the insurers for Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Fund.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 104 of the Bill seeks to amend section 114 of the Insurance Act, 1938 which
empowers the Central Government to make rules.  The matters on which rules may be
made, inter alia, relate to the manner of inquiry under sub-section (1) of section 105C and
the form in which an appeal may be preferred under sub-section (2) and the fee    payable
in respect of such appeal and the procedure for filing and disposing of an  appeal under
sub-section (6)   of section 110.
Clause 105 of the Bill seeks to amend section 114A of the Insurance Act, 1938 which
empowers the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority to make regulations
consistent with the Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of the Act.
The matters on which regulations may be made, inter alia, relate to (i)  manner of making
application for registration and documents  under sub-section (2) of section 3; (ii)  annual
fee to the Authority and manner of payment under sub-section (1) of section 3A; (iii)
minimum annuity and other benefits to be secured by the insurer under section 4 and equity
capital and such forms of capital including hybrid capital required under sub-section (1) of
section 6A; (iv) separation of account of all receipts and payments in respect of each classes
and sub-classes of insurance business under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2A) of section
10; and its waiver under the said section; (v) the manner in which an abstract of the report
of the actuary to be specified; (vi)  the fee for procuring a copy of return under sub-section
(1) of section 20; (vii) investment of assets and further provisions regarding investments by
an insurer under sections 27, 27A, 27B, 27C; and time, manner and other conditions of
investment of assets under section 27D; (viii) the form in which a return giving details of
investments made under section 28; (ix) the loans including the loans sanctioned to the full
time employees of the insurer under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 29; (x) the sum
to be paid by the insurer to any person under section 31B; (xi) the obligation of insurer in
respect of rural or social or unorganised sector and backward classes under sections 32B
and 32C; (xii)  the minimum percentage of insurance business in third party risks of motor
vehicles under section 32D; (xiii)  the minimum information to be maintained by insurers
or intermediary or insurance intermediary in their books and all other matters incidental
thereto under sub-section (7) of section 33; (xiv)  the form in which balance-sheets in
respect of the insurance business of each of the insurers concerned and the manner in which
actuarial  reports and abstracts in respect of the life insurance business are to be prepared
under clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (3) of section 35; (xv) the manner of assessment of
compensation under the proviso to sub-section (4A)  of section 37A; (xvi) the fee to be
charged by the insurer under sub-section (3) of section 39; (xvii) the manner of payment of
benefits under sub-section (12) of section 39; (xviii) the manner and amount of remuneration
or reward to be paid or received by way of commission or otherwise to an insurance agent
or an intermediary or insurance intermediary under section 40; (xix) the manner and form
of expenses of management under section 40B; (xx) the manner and form of expenses of
management under section 40C; (xxi)  the requisite qualifications or practical training or
examination to be passed for appointment as an insurance agent under clause (e) of sub-
section (3) of section 42; (xxii)  the code of conduct under clause (h) of sub-section (3) of
section 42; (xxiii)  the manner of exclusion of certain assets, the manner of valuation of
liabilities and time for furnishing statement under section 64V; (xxiv)  the matters specified
under sub-section (1) of section 64V A relating to sufficiency of assets;  (xxv)  the form,
time, manner including authentication of the return giving details of solvency margin under
sub-section (9) of section 64VA; (xxvi) the manner of opening and closing places of business
under section 64VC; (xxvii)  the norms for surrender value of life insurance policy under
sub-section (1) of section 113.
2. The rules made under section 114 and the regulations made under section 114A of
the Insurance Act, 1938, shall have to be laid, as soon as they are made, before both Houses
of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matters of
procedure or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
48

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938
(4 OF 1938)
*****
2. In this Act, unless there is anything, repugnant in the subject or context,—
(1) "actuary" means an actuary possessing such qualifications as may be
specified by the regulations made by the Authority;
*****
(IA) “Authority” means the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
established under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999;
*****
(5A) "chief agent" means a person who, not being a salaried employees of an
insurer, in consideration of any commission—
(i) performs any administrative and organising functions for the insurer,
and
(ii) procures life insurance business for the insurer by employing or causing
to be employed insurance agents on behalf of the insurer;
*****
(7A) "Indian insurance company" means any insurer being a company—
(a) which is formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956;
(b) in which the aggregate holdings of equity shares by a foreign company,
either by itself or through its subsidiary companies or its nominees, do not
exceed twenty-six per cent. paid-up equity capital of such Indian insurance
company;
(c) whose sole purpose is to carry on life insurance business or general
insurance business or re-insurance business.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression "foreign
company" shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause (23A) of section 2
of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
*****
(8A) "insurance co-operative society" means any insurer being a co-operative
society,—
(a) * * * * *
(b) having a minimum paid-up capital, (excluding the deposits required
to be made under section 7) of rupees one hundred crores;
*****
(d) whose sole purpose is to carry on life insurance business or general
insurance business in India;
(9) "insurer" means—
Definitions.
1 of 1956.
43 of 1961.
49
41 of 1999.

50
(a) any individual or unincorporated body of individuals or body corporate
incorporated under the law of any country other than India, carrying on insurance
business not being a person specified in sub-clause ( c) of this clause which—
(i) carries on that business in India, or
(ii) has his or its principal place of business or is domiciled in India,
or
(iii) with the object of obtaining insurance business, employs a
representative, or maintains a place of business, in India;
(b) any body corporate (not being a person specified in sub-clause (c) of
this clause) carrying on the business of insurance, which is body corporate
incorporated under any law for the time being in force in India, or stands to any
such  body corporate in the relation of a subsidiary company within the meaning
of the Indian companies Act, 1913, as defined by sub-section (2) of section 2 of
that Act, and
(c) any person who in India as a standing contract with underwriters who
are members of the Society of Lloyd's whereby such person is authorised within
the terms of such contract to issue protection notes, cover notes, or other
documents granting insurance cover to others on behalf of the underwriters,
but does not include a principal agent, chief agent, special agent, or an insurance
agent or a provident society  as defined in Part III;
(10) "insurance agent" means an insurance agent licensed under section 42
who receives or agrees to receive payment by way of commission or other remuneration
in consideration of his soliciting or procuring insurance business including business
relating to the continuance, renewal or revival of policies of insurance;
* * * * *
(11) "life insurance business" means the business of effecting contracts of
insurance upon human life, including any contract where by the payment of money is
assured on death (expect death by accident only) or the happening of any contingency
dependent on human life, and any contract which is subject to payment of premiums
for a term dependent on human life and shall be deemed to include—
* * * * *
(c) the granting of superannuation allowances and annuities payable out
of any fund applicable solely to the relief and maintenance of persons engaged
or who have been engaged in any particular profession, trade or employment
or of the dependents of such persons;
(12) "manager" and "officer" have the meanings assigned to those expressions
in clauses (9) and (11) respectively of section 2 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913;
(13) "managing agent" means a person, firm or company entitled to the
management of the whole affairs of a company by virtue of an agreement with the
company, and under the control and direction of the directors except to the extent, if
any, otherwise provided for in the agreement, and includes any person, firm or company
occupying such position by whatever name called.
Explanation.—If a person occupying the position of managing agent calls
himself manager or managing director, he shall nevertheless be regarded as managing
agent for the purposes of section 32 of this Act;
* * * * *
7 of 1913.
7 of 1913.

51
(15) "principal agent" means a person who, not being a salaried employee of
an insurer, in consideration of any commission,—
(i) performs any administrative and organising functions for the insurer,
and
(ii) procures general insurance business whether wholly or in part by
employing or causing to be employed insurance agents on behalf of the insurer;
(16) " private company" and "public company" have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in clauses (13) and (13A) of section 2 of the Indian Companies Act,
1913;
(17) "special agent" means a person who, not being a salaried employee of an
insurer, in consideration of any commission, procures life insurance business for the
insurer whether wholly or in part by employing or causing to be employed insurance
agents on behalf of the insurer, but does not include a chief agent.
* * * * *
PART II
P
ROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO INSURERS
 2C. (1) Save as hereinafter provided, no person shall, after the commencement of
the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, being to carry on any class of insurance business in
India and no insurer carrying of any class of insurance business in India shall after the
expiry of one year from such commencement, continue to carry on any such business unless
he is—
(a) a public company, or
(b) a society registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or under
any other law for the time being in force in any State relating to co-operative societies,
or
(c) a body corporate incorporated under the law of any country outside India
not being of nature of a private company:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
exempt from the operation of this section to such extent for such period and subject to such
conditions as it may specify, any person or insurer for the purpose of carrying on the business
of granting superannuation allowances and annuities of the nature specified in sub-clause
(c) of clause ( 11) of section 2 or for the purpose of carrying on any general insurance
business:
Provided further that in the case of an insurer carrying of any general insurance
business no such notification shall be issued having effect for more than three years at
any one time:
Provided also that no insurer other than an Indian insurance company shall being to
carry on any class of insurance business in India under this Act on or after the commencement
of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999:
Provided also an insurer, being an Indian Insurance Company, insurance co-operative
society or a body corporate referred to in clause ( c) of this sub-section carrying on the
business of insurance, may carrying on any business of insurance in any Special Economic
Zone as defined in clause (za) of section 2 of the Special  Economic Zones Act, 2005.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid before Parliament as
soon as may be after it is issued.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an  insurance co-operative
society may carry on any class of insurance business in India under this Act on or after the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2002.
7 of 1913.
2 of 1912.
Prohibition of
transaction of
insurance
business by
certain
persons.
47 of 1950.
41 of 1999.
28 of 2005.
42 of 2002.

52
2CA.  The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of the provisions
of this Act,—
(a) shall not apply to insurer, being an Indian Insurance Company, insurance
co-operative society or a body corporate referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 2C, carrying on the business of insurance, in any Special Economic Zones  as
defined in clause (za) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005; or
(b) shall apply to any insurer being an Indian Insurance Company, insurance
co-operative society or a body corporate referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 2C, carrying on the business of insurance, in any Special Economic Zone as
defined in clause (za) of section of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 only with
such  exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification.
* * * * *
2E.  The provisions of this Act shall not apply to an insurer as defined in paragraph
(i) or (iii) of sub-clause (a) of Clause (9) of section 2 in relation to any class of his insurance
business where such insurer has ceased, before the commencement of this Act, to enter into
any new contracts of that class of business.
3. (1) * * * * *
(2) Every application for registration shall be made in such manner as may be
determined by the regulations made be  the Authority and shall be accompanied by—
(a) a certified copy of the memorandum and articles of association, where the
applicant is a company and incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 , for
under the Indian Companies Act, 1882 , or under the Indian Companies Act, 1866, or
under any Act repealed thereby, or, in the case of any other insurer specified in sub-
clause (a), (ii) or sub-clause ( b), of clause ( 9) of section 2, a certified copy of the
deed of partnership or of the deed of constitution of the company, as the case may be,
or in the case of an insurer having his principal place of business or domicile outside
India, the document specified in clause (a) of section 63 ;
(b) the name, address and the occupation, if any, of the directors where the
insurer is a company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 or under
the Indian Companies Act, 1882 or under the Indian Companies Act,1886 or under
any Act repealed thereby, and in the case of an insurer specified in sub-clause (a) (ii)
of clause ( 9) of section 2 of the names and addresses of the proprietors and of the
manager in India, and in any other case the full address of the principal office of the
insurer in India, and the names of the directors and the manager at such office and the
name and address of some one or more persons resident in India authorised to accept
any notice required to be served on the insurer;
(c) a statement of the class or classes of insurance business done or to be done,
and a statement that the amount required to be deposited by section 7 or section 98
before application for registration is made has been deposited together with a certificate
from the Reserve Bank of India showing the amount deposited;
(d) where the provision of section 6 or section 97 apply, a declaration verified
by an affidavit made by the principal officer of the insurer authorised in that behalf
that the provisions of those sections as to paid-up equity capital or working capital
have been complied with;
(e) in the case of an insurer having his principal place of business or domicile
outside India, a statement verified by an affidavit made by the principal officer of the
insurer setting forth the requirements (if any) not applicable to nationals of the country
in which such insurer is constituted, incorporated or domiciled which are imposed by
the laws or practice of that country upon Indian nationals as a condition of carrying
on insurance business in that country;
6  of 1882.
10 of 1866.
7 of 1913.
Power of
Central
Government to
apply
provisions of
this Act to
special
Economic
Zones.
44 of 2005.
44 of 2005.
This Act not to
apply to certain
insurers,
ceasing to enter
into new
contracts before
commencement
of Act.
Registration.
7 of 1913.
6 of 1882.
10 of 1886

53
(f) a certified copy of the published prospectus, if any, and of the standard
policy forms of the insurer and statements of the assured rates, advantages, terms and
conditions to be offered in connection with insurance policies together with a certificate
in connection with life insurance business by an actuary that such rates, advantages,
terms and conditions are workable and sound:
Provided that in the case of marine accident and miscellaneous insurance
business other than workmen's compensation and motor car insurance the above
requirements regarding prospectus, forms and statements shall be complied with only
in so far as the prospectus, forms and statements may be available;
(g) the receipt showing payment of fee as may be determined by the regulations
which shall not exceed fifty thousands rupees for each class of business as may be
specified by the regulations made by the Authority;
(h) such other documents as may be specified by the regulations made by the
Authority.
* * * * *
2A. If, on receipt of an application for registration and after making such inquiry as
he deems fit, the Authority is satisfied that —
(a) the financial condition and the general character of management of the
applicant are sound;
(b) the volume of business likely to be available to, and the capital structure
and earning prospects of, the applicant will be adequate;
(c) the interests of the general public will be served if the certificate of
registration is granted to the applicant in respect of the class or classes of insurance
business specified in the application; and
(d) the applicant has complied with the provisions of sections 2C, 5, 31A and
32 and has fulfilled all the requirements of this section applicable to him,
 the Authority may register the applicant as an insurer and grant him a certificate of
registration.
(2C) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority refusing registration
may, within thirty days from the date on which a copy of the decision is received by him,
appeal to the Central Government.
(2D) The decision of the Central Government on such appeal shall be final and shall
not be questioned before any court.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2A), in the case of any insurer
having his principal place of business or domicile outside India the Authority shall withhold
registration or shall cancel a reistration already made, if it is satisfied that in the country in
which such insurer has his principal place of business or domicile Indian nationals are
debarred by the law or practice of the country relating to, or applied to insurance from
carrying on the business of insurance, or that any requirement imposed on such insurer
under the provisions of section 62 is not satisfied.
(4) The Authority shall cancel the registration of an insurer either wholly or in so far
as it relates to a particular class of insurance business, as the case may be,—
(a) if the insurer fails to comply with the provisions of section 7 or section 98
as to deposits, or
(aa) if the insurer fails, at any time, to comply with the provisions of section
65V A as to the excess of the value of his assets over the amount of his liabilities, or
(b) if the insurer is in liquidation or is adjudged an insolvent, or
(c) if the business or a class of the business of the insurer has been transferred
to any person or has been transferred to or amalgamated with the business of any
other insurer, or
(d) if the whole of the deposit made in respect of insurance business has been
returned to the insurer under section 9, or
(e) if, in the case of an insurer specified in sub-clause (c) of clause (9) of section
2, the standing contract referred to in that sub-clause is cancelled or is suspended and
continues to be suspended for a period of six months, or
(ee) if the Central Government so directs under sub-section (4) of section 33, and the
Authority may cancel the registration of an insurer—
(f) if the insurer makes default in complying with, or acts in contravention of,
any requirement of this Act or of any rule or any regulation or order made or, any
direction issued thereunder, or

54
(g) if the Authority has reason to believe that any claim upon the insurer arising
in India under any policy of insurance remains unpaid for three months after final
judgment in regular course of law, or
(h) if the insurer carries on any business other than insurance business or any
prescribed business, or
(i) if the insurer makes a default in complying with any direction issued or
order made, as the case may be, by the Authority under the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999, or
(j) if the insurer makes a default in complying with or acts in contravention of,
any requirement of the Companies Act, 1956 or the Life Insurance Corporation Act,
1956 or the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 or the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973.
(5) When the Authority withholds or cancels any registration under sub-section ( 3)
clause (a), clause (aa) or clause (e), clause (ee), clause (f), clause (g), or clause (h) of sub-
section (4), he shall give notice in writing to the insurer of its decision, and the decision
shall take effect on such date as may specify in that behalf in the notice, such date not being
less than one month nor more than two months from the date of the receipt of the notice in
the ordinary course of transmission.
(5A) When the Authority cancels any registration under clause ( b), clause ( c), or
clause (d), of sub-section (4) the cancellation shall take effect on the date on which notice
of the order of cancellation is served on the insurer.
* * * * *
(5C) Where a registration is cancelled under clause (a), clause (aa), clause (e), clause
(f), clause (g), or clause (h), or clause (i), or clause (j) of sub-section (4), the Authority may
at discretion revive the registration, if the insurer within six months from the date on which
the cancellation took effect makes the deposits required by section 7 or section 98, or
complies with the provisions of section 64V A as to the excess of the value of his assets over
the amount of his liabilities or has his standing contract restored or has had an application
under sub-section (4) of section 3A accepted, or satisfies the Authority that no claim upon
him such as is referred to in clause ( g) of sub-section ( 4) remains unpaid or that he has
complied with any requirement of this Act or the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority Act, 1999, or of any rule or any regulation, or any order made thereunder or any
direction issued under those Acts, or that he has ceased to carry on any business other than
insurance business or any prescribed business, as the case may be, and complies with any
directions which may be given to him by the Authority.
* * * * *
3A. (1) An insurer who has been granted a certificate of registration under section 3
shall have the registration renewed annually for each year after that ending on the 31st day
of March, after the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
Act, 1999.
(2) An applicaiton for the renewal of a registration for any year shall be made by the
insurer to the Authority before the 31st day of December of the preceding year, and shall be
accompanied as provided in sub-section (3) by evidence of payment of the fee as determined
by the regulations made by the Authority which may vary according to the total gross
preminum written direct in India, during the year preceding the year in which the application
is required to be made under this section, by the insurer in the class of insurance business to
which the registration relates but shall not—
(i) exceed one-fourth of one per cent. of such premium income or rupees five
crores, whichever is less;
(ii) be less, in any case, than fifty thousand rupees for each class of insurance
business:
1 of 1956.
31 of 1956.
57 of 1972.
46  of 1973.
Renewal of
registration.
41 of 1999.
41 of 1999.
41 of 1999.

55
Provided that in the case of an insurer carrying on solely re-insurance business, the
provisions of this sub-section shall apply with the modification that instead of the total
gross premium written direct in India, the total premiums in respect of facultative
re-insurances accepted by him in India shall be taken into account.
(3) The fee as determined by the regulations made by the Authority for the renewal of
a registration for any year shall be paid into the Reserve Bank of India or where there is no
office of that Bank, into the Imperial Bank of India acting as the agent of that Bank, or into
any Government treasury, and the receipt shall be sent along with the application for renewal
of the registration.
(4) If an insurer fails to apply for renewal of registration before the date specified in
sub-section (2) the Authority may, so long as an application to the court under sub-section
(5D) of section 3 has not been made, accept an application for renewal of the registration
on receipt from the insurer of the fee payable with the application and such penalty, not
exceeding the fee as determined by the regulations made by the Authority, and payable by
him, as the Authority may require:
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Central Government from an order passed by
the Authority imposing a penalty on the insurer.
(5) The Authority shall, on fulfilment by the insurer of the requirements of this section,
renew the registration and grant him a certificate of renewal of registration.
* * * * *
4.  (1) No insurer, not being a Co-opeative Life Insurance Society to which Part IV of
this Act applies, shall pay or undertake to pay on any policy of life insurance issued after
the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1946, an annuity of less than one
hundred rupees of a gross sum of less than one thousand rupees exclusive of any profit or
bonus provided that this shall not prevent an insurer from converting any policy into a
paid-up policy of any value or payment of surrender value of any amount.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any policy of the description
known as a group policy, where the number of persons covered by the policy is not less
than fifty or such smaller number as may be approved by the Authority and a standard form
of the policy has been certified in writing by the authority to be a policy of such description
or to any policy undertaking to pay a gross sum of more than five hundred rupees or an
annuity of more than fifty rupees, issued—
(a) by an insurer to any person in his permanent employ in respect of the life of
that person, or
(b) under any scheme, approved by the authority and complying with such
conditions, if any, as he may think fit to impose, whereby premiums due from persons
employed under any employer are collected by or under the supervision of the employer,
or to any policy issued by a Mutual Insurance Company to which Part IV applies and which
the Authority may by order in writing exempt from the provisions of this section, for so
long as the company complies with such conditions, if any, as may be prescribed.
5. (1) * * * * *
(2) If an insurer, through inadvertence or otherwise, is without such consent as aforesaid
registered by a name identical with that by which an insurer already in existence whether
previously registered or not is carrying on business or so nearly resembling it as to be
calculated to deceive, the first-mentioned insurer shall, if called upon to do so by the
Authority on the application of the second-mentioned insurer, change his name within a
time to be fixed by the Authority:
Minimum
limits for
annuities and
other benefits
secured by
policies of life
insurance.
Restriction on
name of insurer.
6 of 1946.

56
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any insurer carrying on business
before the 27th day of January, 1937, under the Indian Life Assurance Companies
Act, 1912:
Provided further that in the application of this section to any insurer who begins to
carry on insurance business after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act,
1946, the references to an insurer in existence in sub-section (1) and this sub-section shall
be construed as including references to a provident society (as defined in Part III) in existence,
whether or not the society is in the course of being dissolved.
(3) No insurer other than a provident society as defined in Part III, who begins to
carry on insurance business after the commencement of this Act, shall adopt as its name
and no such insurer carrying on business before the commencement of this Act shall continue
after the expiry of six months from the commencement thereof to use as its name any
combination of words which includes the word "provident".
6. No insurer carrying on the business of life insurance, general insurance or re-
insurance in India on or after the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999, shall be registered unless he has,—
(i) a paid-up equity capital of rupees one hundred crore in case of a person
carrying on the business of life insurance or general insurance; or
(ii) a paid-up equity capital of rupees two hundred crores in case of a person
carrying on exclusively the business as a re-insurer:
Provided that in determining the paid-up equity capital specified under clause ( i) or
clause (ii), the deposit to be made under section 7 and any preliminary expenses incurred in
the formation and registration of the company shall be excluded:
Provided further that an insurer carrying on business of life insurance, general
insurance or re-insurance in India before the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority Act, 1999 and who is required to be registered under this Act,
shall have a paid-up equity capital in accordance with clause (i) and clause (ii), as the case
may be, within six months of the commencement of that Act.
6A. (1) No Public company limited by shares having its registered office in India,
shall carry on life insurance business, unless it satisfies all the following conditions,
namely:—
(i) that the capital of the company consists only of ordinary shares each of
which has a single face value;
(ii) that, except during any period nat exceeding one year allowed by the
company for payment of calls on shares, the paid-up amount is the same for all shares,
whether existing or new:
Provided that the conditions specified in this sub-section shall not apply to a public
company which has, before the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950,
issued any shares other than ordinary shares each of which has a single face value or any
shares the paid-up amount whereof is not the same for all of them for a period of three years
from such commencement.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the countrary contained in any law for the time being
inforce or in the memorandum or articles of association but subject to the other provisions
contained in this section the voting right of every shareholder of any public company as a
foresaid shall in all cases be strictly proportionate to the paid-up amount of the shares held
by him.
** ** ** **
(4) A public company as aforesaid which carries on life insurance business—
(a) * * * * *
(b) shall not register any transfer of its shares—
(i) unless, in addition to compliance being made with the provisions of
section 34 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 the transferee furnishes a
6 of 1912.
Requirement as to
capital.
Requirements
as to capital
structure and
voting rights
and
maintenance of
registers of
beneficial
owners of
shares.
6 of 1946
41 of 1999.
41 of 1999.
7 of 1913.
47 of 1950.

57
declaration in the prescribed form as to whether he proposes to hold the shares
for his own benefit or as a nominee, whether jointly or severally, on behalf of
others, and in the latter case giving the name, occupation and address of the
beneficial owner or owners, and the extent of the beneficial interest of each;
(ii) where, after the transfer, the total paid-up holding of the transferee in
the shares of the company is likely to exceed five per cent., of its paid-up
capital or where the transferee is a banking or an investment company, is likely
to exceed two and a half per cent. of such paid-up capital, unless the previous
approval of the Authority has been obtained to the transfer;
(iii) where, the nominal value of the shares intended to be transferred by
any individual, firm, group, constituents of a group, or body corporate under
the same management, jointly or severally exceeds one per cent. of the paid-up
equity capital of the insurer, unless the previous approval of the Authority has
been obtained for the transfer.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause, the expressions "group"
and "same management" shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them
in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969.
* * * * *
(6) If the total paid-up holding of any person in the shares of a company referred to in
sub-section (1) on the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, exceed
two and a half per cent. of its paid-up capital where that person is a banking company or an
investment company, or five per cent. of its paid-up capital in any other case, he shall not
be entitled to any vote as a shareholder of the company in respect of such excess holding of
shares.
(7) Where the total paid-up holding of any person in the shares of a company referred
to in sub-section  (1) on the date of the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act,
1950, exceeds five per cent. of its paid-up capital where that person is a banking company
or an investment company, or ten per cent. of its paid-up captial in any other case, he shall
dispose of the excess holding of shares within three years from such commencement or
such further period not exceeding two years as may be allowed to him by the Central
Government.
(8) If, after the expiry of three years or of such further period as may be allowed to
any person under sub-section (7), the total paid-up holding of any such person has not been
reduced to the limits specified in that sub-section, any shares in excess of the limits specified
in that sub-section shall vest in the Administrator-General of the State in which the registered
office of the company concerned is situate and the Administrator General shall take such
steps as may be necessary for taking charge of any property which has been so vested in
him and shall dispose of the said shares and the proceeds thereof in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(9) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, but notwithstanding
anything contained in the Indian Companies Act, 1913, or in the  memorandum or articles
of association of any such company as is referred to in sub-section ( 1), no such company
shall refuse to register the transfer of any shares where the transfer is for the purpose of
securing compliance with the provision of sub-sections ( 7) and (8).
(10) The Central Government may, subject to such restrictions  as it may think fit to
impose, exempt from the operation of sub-sections(6), (7) and (8) any insurance company,
in any case where the total paid-up holding of such insurance company in the shares of any
other insurance company exceeds the limits specified in the said sub-sections, if the other
insurance company is or is to be made a subsidary company of the insurance company.
(11) The provisions of this section, except those of sub-sections (7), (8) and (9) shall,
on and from the commencment of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, also apply to
54 of 1969.
7 of 1913.
62 of 1968.
47 of 1950.
47 of 1950.

58
insures carrying on general insurance business subject to the following modifications,
namely:—
(i) that references in sub-sections ( 1), ( 3), ( 5) and ( 6) to the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1950, shall be construed as references to the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1968; and
(ii) references in sub-section (10) to sub-section (7) and (8) shall be omitted.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the holding of a person in the shares
of a company shall be deemed to include—
(i) the total paid-up holding in such shares held by such person in the name of
others; and
(ii) if any shares of the company are held—
(a) by a public limited company, of which such person is a member holding
more than ten per cent. of the paid-up capital, or
(b) by a private limited company, of which such person is a member, or
(c) by a company, of which such person is a managing director, manager,
managing agent or in which he has a controlling interests, or
(d) by a firm in which such person is a partner, or
(e) by such person jointly with others,
such part of the total paid-up holding of the company or firm or of the total joint holding in
those shares, as is proportionate to the contribution made by such person to the paid-up
capital of the company, the paid-up capital of the firm or the joint holding, as the case may
be.
6AA.  (1) No promoter shall at any time hold more than  twenty-six per cent. or such
other percentage as may be prescribed, of the paid-up equity capital in an Indian insurance
company:
Provided that in a case where an Indian insurance company begins the business of
life insurance, general insurance or re-insurance in which the promoters hold more than
twenty-six per cent. of the paid-up equity capital or such other excess  percentage as may
be prescribed, the promoters shall divest in a phased manner the  share capital in excess of
the twenty-six per cent. of the paid-up equity capital or such excess paid-up equity capital
as may be prescribed, after a period of ten years from the date of the commencement of the
said  business by such Indian insurance company or within such period as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declare that nothing contained
in the proviso  shall apply to the promoters being foreign company, referred to in sub-
clause (b) of clause (7A) of section 2.
(2) The manner and procedure for divseting the excess  share capital under sub-
section (1) shall be specified by the regulations made by the Authority.
6B.  (1) For the purpose of enabling any public company carring on life insurance
business to bring its capital structure into conformity with the requirements of section 6A,
an officer  appointed on this behalf by the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything
contained in the Indian Companies Act, 1913,—
(a) examine any scheme proposed for the purpose aforesaid by the directors of
the company:
Provided that—
(i) the scheme has been placed before a meeting of the shareholders for
their opinion and has been forwarded to the officer together with the opinion of
the shareholders thereon, and
Manner of
divesting excess
shareholding by
promoter in
certain cases.
Provision for
securing
compliance
with
requirements
relating to
capital
structure.
7 of 1913.
47 of 1950.
62 of 1968.

59
(ii) the scheme does not involve any diminution of the liability of the
shareholders in respect of unpaid-up share capital;
(b) invite objections and suggestions in respect of the scheme so proposed; and
(c) after considering such objections and suggestions to the scheme so proposed,
sanction it with such modifications as he may consider necessary or desirable.
* * * * *
(4) The provisions of this section shall, on and from the commencement of the
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, also apply to insurers carrying on general insurance
business.
6C.  (1) Where a public company limited by shares carrying on insurance business
has passed a special resolution for converting itself into a public company limited by
guarantee, it may apply to the Central Government with a scheme for putting the special
resolution into effect, including any provision for the alteration of the memorandum or
articles of association insofar as it may be necessary for this purpose.
(2) If the Central Government, after giving such notice to any person concerned as it
thinks fit, is satisfied—
(a) that the scheme makes suitable provision with respect to the repayment,
conversion or liquidation of the paid-up capital of the company,
(b) that the consent of the creditors to the conversion of the company limited
by shares into a company limited by guarantee has been obtained, or that suitable
provisions have been made for discharging, determining or securing the debts or
claims of such creditors, and
(c) that the scheme is otherwise reasonable, it may sanction the scheme and
thereupon the scheme shall become binding on the company and on all the persons
concerned.
(3) Against the decision of the Central Government sanctioning a scheme under sub-
section (2), any person aggrieved thereby may, within ninety days of the date of the order
sanctioning the scheme, prefer an appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction the
registered office of the insurer is situate.
(4) The decision of the High Court where an appeal has been preferred to it under
sub-section (3) or of the Central Government where no such appeal has been preferred,
shall be final and binding on all the persons concerned.
(5) Where a scheme has been sanctioned under this section, the company shall file
with the Registrar of Companies a certified copy of the scheme as sanctioned, and thereupon
the provisions of the Indian Companies Act, 1913, relating to companies limited by guarantee
shall become applicable to the company.
7. (1) Every insurer shall, in respect of the insurance business carried on by him in
India, deposit and deep deposited with the Reserve Bank of India in one of the offices in
India of the Bank for and on behalf of the Central Government the amount hereafter specified,
either in cash or in approved securities estimated at the market value of the securities on the
day of deposit, or partly in cash and partly in approved securities so estimated,—
(a) in the case of life insurance business, a sum equivalent to one per cent. of
his total gross premium written in India in any financial year commencing after the
31st day of March, 2000, not exceeding rupees ten crores;
(b) in the case of general insurance business, a sum equivalent to three per cent.
of his total gross premium written in India, in any financial year commencing after
the 31st day of March, 2000, not exceeding rupees ten crores;
(c) in the case of re-insurance business, a sum of rupees twenty crores:
Provided that, where the business done or to be done in marine insurance only and
relates exclusively to country craft or its cargo or both, the amount to be desposited under
this sub-section shall be one hundred thousand rupees only:
Conversion of
company
limited by
shares into
company
limited by
guarantee.
Deposits.
7 of 1913.
62 of 1968.

60
Provided further that in respect of any insurer not having a share capital and carrying
on only such insurance business as in the opinion of the Central Government is not carried on
ordinarily by insurers under separate policies, the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, order that the provisions of this sub-section shall apply to such insurer
with the modification that instead of the sum of rupees twenty lakhs or rupees ten lakhs, as the
case may be, the deposit to be made by such insurer shall be such amount, being not less than
one hundred and fifty  thousand rupees, as may be specified in the said order.
(2) Where the insurer is an insurer specified in sub-clause (c) of clause (9) of section
2, he shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of this section as to deposits, if
in respect of insurance business carried on by him in India under a standing  contract of the
nature referred to in sub-clause ( c) of clause (9) of section 2 a deposit of an amount one-
and-a-half times that specified in sub-section ( 1) has been made in the Reserve Bank of
India in one of the offices in India of the Bank for and on behalf of the Central Government
in cash or approved securities estimated at the market value of securities on the day of
deposit by or on behalf of the underwriters who are members of the Society of Lloyd's with
whom he has his standing contract.
(3) Where the deposit is to be made by an insurer not carrying on insurance business
in India immediately before the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968,
a deposit of rupees ten lakhs  shall be made before the application for registration is made,
and the provisions of clause ( ii) of sub-section ( IA) shall apply to such insurer after his
registration as they apply to an insurer specified in clause ( a) of sub-section (1).
(4) An insurer shall not be registered for any class of insurance business in addition
to the class or classes for which is already registered until the full deposit required under
sub-section (1) has been made.
(5) Where an insurer who intends to become a member of a group, does not carry on
all the classes of insurance business carried on by the other insurers in such group, or,
where out of the severeal insurers who  desire to form themselves into a group, any insurer
does not carry on all the classes of insurance business carried on by the other insurers who
desire to form themselves into the group, such insurer may be registered for that class or
those classes of insurance business which is or are carried on by the other insurers of the
group or  the proposed group, as the case may be, and where any application for registration
is made by any such insurer, the Authority may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (2A) of section 3 or sub-section (4), register such insurer for one or more additional
classes of insurance, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
(a) the Authority is satisfied that registration for the proposed one or more
additional classes of insurance business would qualify the insurer to become a member
of a group;
(b) agreements have been executed by all the Insurers in the group or proposed
group, as the case may be, and such agreements, in the opinion of the Authority,
satisfy the requirements of the Explanation to sub-section (1B); and
(c) the insurer has, after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1968 made deposit of a sum not less than the total of all the instalments of
deposit which he would have been required to make after such commencement till
the date of his becoming a member of the group, had he been a member of the group
from such commencement.
(6) The Authority shall cancel the registration made in pursuance of the provisions of
sub-section (5), if the insurer referred to therein fails to become, within a period of three
months from the date of such registration, a member of the group or proposed group, as the
case may be, and, where such registration has been cancelled, the provisions of this Act
shall apply to the insurer as if he had not been registered for the class or classes of insurance
business in relation to which his registration has been cancelled.
(7) Securities already deposited with the Authority of Currency in compliance with
the Indian Life Assurance Companies Act, 1912 , shall be transferred  by him to the Reserve
6 of 1912.
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.

61
Bank of India and shall, to the extent of their market value as at the date of the commencement
of this Act, be deemed to be deposited under this Act, as the instalment or as part of the
instalment to be made under the foregoing provisions of this section before the application
for registration is made whether any such application is or is not in fact made.
(8) A deposit made in cash shall be held by the Reserve Bank of India to the credit of
the insurance  and shall except to the extent, if any, to which the cash has been invested in
securities under sub-section (9A), be returnable to the insurer in cash in any case in which
under the provisions of this Act a deposit is to be returned; and any interest accruing due
and collected  on securities deposited under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be paid
to the insurer, subject only to deduction of the normal commission chargeable for the
realisation of interest.
(9) The insurer may at any time replace any securities deposited by him under this
section with the Reserve Bank of India either by cash or by other approved securities or
partly by cash and partly by other approved securities, provided that such cash, or the value
of such other approved securities estimated at the market rates prevailing at the time of
replacement, or such cash together with such value, as the case may be, is not less than the
value of the securities replaced estimated at the market rates prevailing when they were
deposited.
(9A) The Reserve Bank of India shall, if so requested by the insurer,
(a) sell any securities deposited by him with the Bank under this section and
hold the cash realised by such sale as deposit , or
(b) invest in approved securities specified by the insurer the whole or any
part or a deposit held by it in cash or the whole or any part of cash received by it on
the sale of or on the maturing of securities deposited by the insurer, and hold the
securities in which investment is so made as deposit,
and may charge the normal commission on such sale or on such investment.
(9B) Where sub-section (9A) applies,—
(a) if the cash realised by the sale of or on the maturing of the securities
(excluding in the former case the interest accrued) falls short of the market value of
the securities at the date on which they were deposited with the bank, the insurer shall
make good the deficiency  by a further deposit  either in cash or in approved securities
estimated at the market value of the securities on the day on which they are depostied,
or partly in cash and partly in approved securities so estimated, within a period of
two month from the date on which the securities matured or were sold or where the
securities matured or were sold before the 21st day of March, 1940, within a period
of four months from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1940;
and unless he does so the insurer shall be deemed to have failed to comply with the
requirements of this section as to the deposits; and
(b) if  the cash realised by the sale of or on the maturing of the securites
(excluding in the former case the interest accrued) exceeds the market value of the
securities at the date on which they were deposited with the Bank, the Central
Government may, if satisfied that the full amount required to be deposited under sub-
section direct the required to be deposited under sub-section ( 1) is in deposit, direct
the Reserve Bank to return the excess.
(10) If any part of a deposit made under this section is used in the discharge of any
liability of the insurer, the insurer shall deposit such additional sum in cash or approved
securities estimated at the market value of the securities on the day of deposit, or partly in
cash and partly in such securities, as will make up the amount so used. The insurer shall be
deemed to have failed to comply with the requirements of sub-section ( 1), unless the
deficiency is supplied within a period of two months from the date when the deposit or any
part thereof is so used for discharge of liabilities.
20 of 1940.

62
8.  (1) Any deposit made under section 7 or section 98 shall be deemed to be part of
the assets of the insurer but shall not be susceptible of any assignment or charge; nor shall
it be available for the discharge of any liability of the insurer other than liabilities arising
out of policies of insurance issued by the insurer so long as any such liabilities remain
undischarged; nor shall it be liable to attachment in execution of any decree except a decree
obtained by a policy-holder of the insurer in respect of a debt due upon a policy which debt
the policy-holder has failed to realise in any other way.
(2) Where a deposit is made in respect of life insurance business the deposit made in
respect thereof shall not be available for the discharge of any liability of the insurer other
than liabilities arising out of policies of life  insurance issued by the insurer.
9.  Where an insurer has ceased to carry on in India all classes of insurance business
and his liabilities in India in respect of all classes of insurance business have been satisfied
or are otherwise provided, for the court may, on the application of the insurer, order the
return to the insurer of the deposit made by him under this Act.
10. (1) Where the insurer carries on business of more than one of the following classes,
namely, life insurance, fire insurance, marine insurance or miscellaneous insurance, he
shall keep a separate account of all receipts and payments in respect of each such class of
insurance business and where the insurer carries on business of miscellaneous insurance
whether alone or in conjunction with business of another class, he shall, unless the Authority
waives this requirement in writing, keep a separate account of all receipts and payments in
respect of each of such sub-classes of miscellaneous insurance business as may be prescribed
in this behalf:
Provided that no sub-class of miscellaneous insurance business shall be, prescribed
under this sub-section if the insurance business comprised in the sub-class consist of
insurance contracts which are terminable by the insurer at intervals not exceeding twelve
months and under which, if a claim arises, the insurer's liability to pay benefit ceases within
one year of the date on which the claim arose.
* * * * *
11. (1) Every insurer, in the case of an insurer specified in sub-clause (a) (ii) or sub-
clause (b) of clause (9) of section 2 in respect of all insurance business transacted by him,
and in the case of any other insurer in respect of the insurance business transacted by him in
India shall at the expiration of each financial year prepare with reference to that year—
(a) in accordance with the regulations contained in Part I of the First Schedule,
a balance-sheet in the form set forth in Part II of that Schedule;
(b) in accordance with the regulations contained in Part I of the Second Schedule,
a profit and loss account in the forms set forth in Part II of that Schedule, except
where the insurer carries on business of one class only of the following classes, namely,
life insurance, fire insurance or marine insurance and no other business;
(c) in respect of each class or sub-class of insurance business for which he is
required under sub-section ( 1) of section 10  to keep a separate account of receipts
and payments, a revenue account in accordance with the regulations, and in the form
or forms, set forth in the Third Schedule applicable to that class or sub-class of
insurance business.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), every insurer, on or after
the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, in
respect of insurance business transacted by him and in respect of his shareholders' funds,
shall, at the expiration of each financial year, prepare with reference to that year, a balance-
sheet, a profit and loss account, a separate account of receipts and payments, a revenue
account in accordance with the regulations made by the Authority.
(1B) Every insurer shall keep separate accounts relating to funds of shareholders and
policy-holders.
Refund of
deposit.
Separation of
accounts and
funds.
Accounts and
balance-sheet.
41 of 1999.
Reservation of
deposits.

63
(2) Unless the insurer is a company as defined in clause ( 2) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 2 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 accounts and statements referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be signed by the insurer, or in the case of a company by the chairman, if
any, and two directors and the principal officer of the company, or in the case of a firm by
two partners of the firm, and shall be accompanied by a statement containing the names,
descriptions and occupations of, and the directorships help by, the persons in charge of the
management of the business during the period to which such accounts and statements refer
and by a report on the affairs of the business during that period.
(3) Where an insurer carrying on the business of insurance at the commencement of
this Act has prepared the balance-sheet and accounts required by the Indian Life Assurance
Companies Act, 1912, or has based his accounts upon the financial and not the calendar
year, the provisions of this section shall, if the Central Government so directs in any case,
apply until the 31st day of December, 1939, as if sub-section (1) reference to the calendar
year were references to the financial year.
12. The balance-sheet, profit and loss account, revenue account and profit and loss
appropriation account  of every insurer, in the case of an insurer specified in sub-clause (a)
(ii) or sub-clause (b) of clause (9) of section 2 in respect of all insurance business transacted
by him, and in the case of any other insurer in respect of the insurance business transacted
by him in India, shall, unless they are subject to audit under the Indian Companies
Act, 1913 be audited annually by an auditor, and the auditor shall in the audit of all such
accounts have the powers of, exercise the functions vested in, and discharge the duties and
be subject to the liabilities and penalties imposed on, auditors of companies by section 145
of the Indian Companies Act, 1913.
13.  (1) Every insurer carrying on life insurance business shall, in respect of the life
insurance transacted by him in India, and also in the case of an insurer specified in sub-
clause (a)( ii) or sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 9) of section 2 in respect of all life insurance
business transacted by him, once at least every year course an investigation to be made by
an actuary into the financial condition of the life insurance business carried on by him,
including a valuation of his liability in respect thereto and shall cause an abstract of the
report of such actuary to be made in accordance with the regulations contained in Part I of
the Fourth Schedule and in conformity with the requirements of Part II of that Schedule:
Provided that the Authority may, having regard to the circumstances of any particular
insurer, allow him to have the investigation made as at a date not later than two years from
the date as at which the previous investigation was made:
Provided further that for an insurer carrying on life insurance business in India at the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, the last date as at which the first
investigation after such commencement should be caused to be made by an actuary shall be—
(a) the 31st day of December, 1950, or the date of expiration of five years from
the date at which the last investigation was made by an actuary before such
commencement, whichever is earlier, where the said last investigation was at a date—
(i) before the 31st day of December, 1946 but not more than five years
before such commencement, or
(ii) after the 30th day of December, 1946, but before the 31st day of
December, 1947,  and had disclosed a deficit in the life insurance fund; or
(b) the 31st day of December, 1951, where the last investigation by an actuary
before such commencement was at a date—
(i) after the 30th day of December, 1946, but before the 31st day of
December, 1947, and did not disclose a deficit in the life insurance fund; or
(ii) after the 31st day of December, 1947, but before the 31st day of
December, 1948;
Audit.
Actuarial report
and abstract.
7 of 1913.
7 of 1913.
6 of 1912.
47 of 1950.

64
(c) the 31st day of December, 1952, where the last investigation by an actuary
before such commencement was as at any date after 30th day of December, 1948, but
before the 1st day of January, 1950:
Provided also that for an insurer carrying on life insurance business in India
immediately before the Commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority Act, 1999, the last date as which the first investigation after such commencement
should be caused by an actuary, shall be the 31st day of March, 2001:
Provided also that, in the case of an insurer who has not caused an investigation to be
made by an actuary as at any date prior to such commencement, the date of commencement
of life insurance business in India shall, for the purpose of the preceding proviso, be deemed
to be the date as at which the last investigation was made by an actuary before such
commencement and such investigation shall be deemed to have disclosed no deficit in the
life insurance fund:
Provided also that every insurer, on or after the commencement of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, shall cause an abstract of the report of
the actuary to be made in the manner specified by the regulations made by the Authority.
* * * * *
(3) There shall be appended to every such abstract as is referred to in sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2) or a certificate signed by the principal officer of the insurer that full and
accurate particulars of every policy under which there is a liability either actual or contingent
have been furnished to the actuary for the purpose of the investigation.
(4) There shall be appended to every such abstract a statement, in conformity with
their requirement of a Part II of the Fifth Schedule and prepared in accordance with the
regulations contained in Part I of that Schedule of the life insurance business in force at the
date to which the account of the insurer are made up for the purposes of such abstract:
Provided that, if the investigation referred to in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) is made
annually by any insurer, the statement need not be appended every year but shall be appended
at least once in every three years:
Provided further that the statement referred to in sub-section (4) shall be appended in
the form and in the manner specified by the regulations made by the Authority.
* * * * *
(6) The provisions of this section relating to the life insurance business shall apply
also to any such sub-class of insurance business included in the class "Miscellaneous
Insurance" as may be prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 10; and the Authority may
authorise such modification and variation of regulations contained in Part I of the Forth
and Fifth Schedules and of the requirement of Part II of those Schedules as may be necessary
to facilitate their application to any such sub-class of insurance business:
Provided that, if the Authority is satisfied that the number and amount of transactions
carried out by an insurer in any such sub-class of insurance business is so small as to render
periodic investigation and valuation unnecessary, it may exempt that insurer from the
operation of this sub-section in respect of that sub-class of insurance business.
14.  Every insurer in the case of insurer specified in sub-clause (a) (ii) or sub-clause
(b) of clause (9) of section 2 in respect of all business transacted by him, and in the case of
any other insurer in respect of the insurance business transacted by him in India, shall
maintain—
(a) a register or record of policies in which shall be entered in respect of every
policy issued by the insurer, the name and address of the policy-holder, the date when
the policy was effected and a record of any transfer, assignment or nomination of
which the insurer has notice, and
Register of
policies and
register of
claims.
41 of 1999.
41 of 1999.

65
(b) a register of record of claims, in which shall be entered every claim made
together with the date of the claim, the name and address of the claimant and the date
on which the claim was discharged, or, in the case of a claim which is rejected, the
date of rejection and the ground therefor.
15.  (1) The audited accounts and statements referred to in section 11 or sub-section
(5) of section 13 and the abstract and statement referred to in section 13 shall be printed,
and four copies thereof shall be furnished as returns to the Authority within six months
from the end of the period to which they refer:
Provided that the said period of six months shall in the case of insurers having their
principal place of business or domicile outside India and in the case of insurers constituted,
incorporated or domiciled in India but also carrying on business outside India be extended
by three months, and provided further that the Central Government may in any case extend
the time allowed by this sub-section for the furnishing of such returns by a further period
not exceeding three months.
(2) Of the four copies so furnished one shall be signed in the case of a company by
the chairman and two directors and by the principal officer of the company and, if the
company has a managing director or managing agent, by that director or managing agent,
in the case of a firm, by two partners of the firm, and, in the case of an insurer being an
individual, by the insurer himself and one shall be singed by the auditor who made the audit
or the actuary who made the valuation, as the case may be.
(3) Where the insurer's principal place of business or domicile is outside India he
shall forward to the Authority along with the documents referred to in section 11, the balance-
sheet, profit and loss account and revenue account and the valuation reports and valuation
statements, if any, which the insurer is required to file with the public authority of the
country in which the insurer is constituted, incorporated or domiciled, or, where such
documents are not required to be filed, a certified statement showing the total assets and
liabilities of the insurer at the close of the period covered by the said documents and his
total income and expenditure during that period.
16. (1) Where, by the law of the country in which an insurer, not being an insurer
specified in sub-clause (a) (ii) or sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 9) of section 2, is constituted,
incorporated or domiciled, the insurer is required to prepare and to furnish to a public authority
of that country documents of substantially the same nature as the documents required to be
furnished as returns in accordance with the provisions of section 15, the provisions of sub-
section (2) of this section shall apply to such insurer in lieu of the provisions of sections 11,
12, 13, and 15.
(2) The insurer shall, within the time specified in sub-section (1) of section 15, furnish
to the Authority four certified copies in the English language of every balance-sheet, account,
abstract, report and statement supplied to the public authority referred in sub-section (1) of
this section, and in addition thereto, four certified copies in the English language of each of
the following statements, namely:—
(a) a statement audited by an auditor or by a person duly qualified under the
law of the insurer in India as at the date of any balance-sheet so furnished;
(b) for each class or sub-class of insurance business for which he is required
under sub-section (1) of section 10 to keep a separate account of receipts and payments,
a revenue account for the period covered by any account so furnished, prepared in
accordance with the regulations and in the form or forms, set forth in the Third Schedule
applicable to that class or sub-class of insurance business and similarly audited showing
separately with respect to business transacted by the insurer in India the details required
to be supplied in a revenue account furnished under this clause of this sub-section;
(c) a separate abstract of the valuation report in respect of all business transacted
in India in each class or sub-class or insurance business to which section 13 refers,
prepared in the manner required by that section; and
Submission of
returns.
Returns by
insurers
established
outside India.

66
(d) a declaration in the prescribed form stating that all amounts received by the
insured directly or indirectly whether from his head office or from any other source
outside India have been shown in the revenue account except such sums as properly
appertain to the capital account.
17. Where an insurer, being a company incorporated under the Indian Companies
Act, 1913 or under the Indian Companies Act, 1882 or under the Indian Companies Act,
1866 or under any Act repealed thereby, in any year furnishes his balance-sheet and accounts
in accordance with the provisions of section 15, he may at the same time send to the Registrar
of Companies, copies of such balance-sheet and accounts; and where such copies are so
sent, it shall not be necessary for the company to file copies of the balance-sheet and account
with the Registrar as required by sub-section ( 1) of section 134 of the first mentioned Act
and such copies so sent shall be chargeable with the same fees and shall be dealt with in all
respects as if they were filed in accordance with that section.
17A.   Nothing in this Act shall apply to the preparation of accounts by an insured and
the audit and submission thereof in respect of any accounting year which has expired prior
to the commencement of this Act, and notwithstanding the other provisions of this Act such
accounts shall be prepared, audited and submitted in accordance with the law in force
immediately before the commencement of this Act.
* * * * *
20.  (1) Every return furnished to the Authority or certified copy thereof shall be kept
by the Authority and shall be open to inspection; and any person may procure a copy of any
such return, or of any part thereof, on payment of a fee of six annas for every hundred
words or fractional part thereof required to be copied, any five figures being deemed
equivalent to one word.
(2) A printed or certified copy of the accounts, statements and abstract furnished in
accordance with the provisions of section 15 or section 16 shall, on the application of any
shareholder or policy-holder made at any time within two years from the date on which the
documents was so furnished, be supplied to him by the insurer within fourteen days when
the insurer is constituted, incorporated or domiciled in India and in any other case within
one month of such application.
(3) A copy of the memorandum and articles of association of the insurer, if a company
shall on the application of any policy-holder, be supplied to him by the insurer on payment
of one rupee.
21. (1) If it appears to the Authority that any return furnished to it under the provisions
of this Act is incorrect or defective in any respect it may—
* * * * *
(d) decline to accept any such return unless the inaccuracy has been corrected
or the deficiency has been supplied before the expiry of one month from the date on
which the requisition asking for correction of the inaccuracy or supply of the deficiency
was delivered to the insurer or of such further time as the Authority may specify in
the requisition and if it declines to accept any such return, the insurer shall be deemed
to have failed to comply with the provisions of section 15 or section 16 for section 28
or section 28A or section 28B or section 64V relating to the furnishing of returns.
(2) The Court may on the application of an insurer and after hearing the Authority
cancel any order made by Authority under clauses (a), (b) or (c) of sub-section (1) or may
direct the acceptance of any return which the Authority has declined to accept, if the insurer
satisfied the Court the action of the Authority was in the circumstances unreasonable:
Provided that no application under this sub-section shall be entertained unless it is
made before the expiration of four months from the time when the Authority made the
order or declined to accept the return.
Custody and
inspection of
documents and
supply of
copies.
Powers of
Authority
regarding
returns.
This Act not to
apply to
preparation of
accounts, etc.,
for periods prior
to this Act
coming into
force.
Exemption
from certain
provisions of
the Indian
Companies
Act, 1913.
7  of 1913.
6 of 1882.
10 of 1866.

67
22.  ( 1) If it appears to the Authority that an investigation or valuation to which
section 13 refers or an abstract of a valuation report furnished under clause ( c) of sub-
section (2) of section 16 does not properly indicate the condition of the affairs of the insurer
by reason of the faulty basis adopted in the valuation, it  may, after giving notice to the
insurer and giving him an opportunity to be heard, cause an investigation and valuation as
at such date as the Authority may specify to be made at the expense of the insurer by an
actuary appointed by the insurer for this purpose and approved by the Authority and the
insurer shall place at the disposal of the actuary so appointed and approved all the material
required by the actuary for the purposes of the investigation and valuation within such
period, not being less than three months, as the Authority may specify.
(2) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (4) of section 13, and of sub-sections ( 1)
and (2) of section15 or, as the case may be, of sub-section (2) of section 16, shall apply in
relation to an investigation and valuation under this section:
Provided that the abstract and statement prepared as the result of such investigation
and valuation shall be furnished by such date as the Authority may specify.
* * * * *
Investment, Loans and Management
27.  (1) Every insurer shall invest and at all times keep invested assets equivalent to
not less than the sum of—
(a) the amount of his liabilities to holders of life insurance policies in India on
account of matured claims, and
(b) the amount required to meet the liability on policies of life insurance maturing
for payment in India, less—
(i) the amount of premiums which have fallen due to the insurer on such
policies but have not been paid and the days of grace for payment of which
have not expired, and
(ii) any amount due to the insurer for loans granted on and within the
surrender values of policies of life insurance maturing for payment in India
issued by him or by an insurer whose business he has acquired and in respect of
which he has assumed liability, in the manner following, namely, twenty-five
per cent. of the said sum in Government securities, a further sum equal to not
less than twenty-five per cent. of the said sum in Government securities or
other approved securities and the balance in any of the approved investments
specified in sub-section ( 1) of section 27A or, subject to the limitations,
conditions and restrictions specified in sub-section ( 2) of that section, in any
other investment.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1),—
(a) the amount of any deposit made under section 7 or section 98 by the insurer
in respect of his life insurance business shall be deemed to be assets invested or kept
invested in Government securities;
(b) the securities of, or guaranteed as to principal and interest by, the Government
of the United Kingdom shall be regarded as approved securities other than Government
securities for a period of four years from the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1950, in the manner and to the extent hereinafter specified,
namely:—
(i) during the first year, to the extent of twenty-five per cent. in value of
the sum referred to in sub-section (1);
(ii) during the second year, to the extent of eighteen and three fourth per
cent. in value of the said sum;
(iii) during the third year, to the extent of twelve and a half per cent. in
value of the said sum; and
Investment of
assets.
Powers of
Authority to
order
revaluation.
47 of 1950.

68
(iv) during the fourth year, to the extent of six and a quarter per cent. in
value of the said sum:
Provided that, if the Authority so directs in any case, the securities specified in
clause (b) shall be regarded as approved securities other than Government securities
for a longer period than four years, but not exceeding six years in all, and the manner
in which and the extent to which the securities shall  be so regarded shall be as
specified in the direction;
(c) any prescribed assets shall, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be
prescribed, be deemed to be assets invested or kept invested in approved investments
specified in sub-section (1) of section 27A.
(3) In computing the assets referred to in sub-section ( 1),—
(a) any investment made with reference to any currency other than the Indian
rupee which is in excess of the amount required to meet the liabilities of the insurer in
India with reference to that currency, to the extent of such excess; and
(b) any investment made in the purchase of any immovable property outside
India or on the security of any such property,
shall not be taken into account:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect the operation of sub-
section (2):
Provided further that the Authority may, either generally or in any particular case,
direct that any investment, whether made before or after the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1950, and whether made in or outside India, shall, subject to such
conditions as may be imposed, be taken into account, in such manner as may be specified in
computing the assets referred to in sub-section (1) and where any direction has been issued
under this proviso copies thereof shall be laid before Parliament as soon as may be after it
is issued.
(4) Where an insurer has accepted reassurance in respect of any policies of life
insurance issued by another insurer and maturing for payment in India or has ceded
reassurance to another insurer in respect of any such policies issued by himself, the sum
referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be increased by the amount of the liability involved in
such acceptance and decreased by the amount of the liability involved in such cession.
(5) The Government securities and other approved securities in which assets are
under sub-section (1) to be invested and kept invested shall be held by the insurer free of
any encumbrance, charge, hypothecation or lien.
(6) The assets required by this section to be held invested by an insurer incorporated
or domiciled outside India shall, except to the extent of any part thereof which consists of
foreign assets held outside India, be held in India and all such assets shall be held in trust
for the discharge of the liabilities of the nature referred to in sub-section ( 1) and shall be
vested in trustees resident in India and approved by the Authority and the instrument of
trust under this sub-section shall be executed by the insurer with the approval of the Authority
and shall define the manner in which alone the subject-matter of the trust shall be dealt
with.
Explanation.—This sub-section shall apply to an insurer incorporated in India whose
share capital to the extent of one-third is owned by, or the members of whose governing
body to the extent of one-third consists of members domiciled elsewhere than in India.
27A.  (1) No insurer shall invest or keep invested any part of his controlled fund
otherwise than in any of the following approved investments, namely:—
(a) approved securities;
(b) securities of, or guaranteed as to principal and interest by the Government
of the United Kingdom;
(c) debentures or other securities for money issued with the permission of the
State Government by any municipality in a State;
47 of 1950.
Further
provisions
regarding
investments.

69
(d) debentures or other securities for money issued by any authority constituted
under any housing or building scheme approved by the Authority or a State Government
or by any authority or body constituted by any Central Act or Act of a State Legislature;
(e) first mortage on immovable property situated in India under any housing or
building scheme of the insurer approved by the Authority or a State Government;
(f) debentures secured by a first charge on any immovable property, plant or
equipment of any company which has paid interest in full for the five years immediately
preceding or for at least five out of the six or seven years immediately preceding on
such or similar debentures issued by it;
(g) debentures secured by a first charge on any immovable property, plant or
equipment of any company where either the book value or the market value, whichever
is less, of such property, plant or equipment is more than three times the value of such
debentures;
(h) first debenture secured by a floating charge on all in its assets of any company
which has paid dividends on its ordinary shares for the five years immediately
preceding or for at least five out of the six or seven years immediately preceding;
(i) preference shares of any company which has paid dividends on its ordinary
shares for the five years immediately preceding or for at least five out of the six or
seven years immediately preceding;
(j) preference shares of any company on which dividends have been paid for
the five years immediately preceding or for at least five out of the six or seven years
immediately preceding and which have priority in payment over all the ordinary shares
of the company in winding up;
(k) shares of any company which have been guaranteed by another company,
such other company having paid dividends on its ordinary shares for the five years
immediately preceding or for at least five out of the six or seven years immediately
preceding:
Provided that the total amount of shares of all the companies under guarantee
by the guaranteeing company is not in excess of fifty per cent. of the paid up amount
of preference and ordinary shares of the guaranteeing company;
(l) shares of any company on which dividends of not less than four per cent.
including bonus have been paid for the seven years immediately preceding or for at
least seven out of the eight or nine years immediately preceding;
(m) first mortgages on immovable property situated in India or in any other
country where the insurer is carrying on insurance business:
Provided that the property mortgaged is not leasehold property with an
outstanding term of less than thirty years and the value of the property exceeding by
one-third, or if it consists of buildings, exceeds by one-half, the mortgage money;
(n) immovable property situated in India or in any other country where the
insurer is carrying on insurance business:
Provided that the property is free of all encumbrances;
(o) loans on life interests, or on policies of life insurance within their surrender
values issued by him or by an insurer whose business he has acquired and in respect
of which business he has assumed liability;
(p) life interests;
(q) fixed deposits with banks included for the time being in the Second Schedule
to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 or with co-operative societies registered
under the Indian Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or under any other law for the
time being in force, the primary object of which is to finance other co-operative
societies similarly registered;
2 of 1934.
6 of 1912.

70
(r) debentures of, or shares in co-operative societies registered under the Indian
Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 , or under any other law for the time being in force;
(s) such other investments as the Authority may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, declare to be approved investments for the purposes of this section.
(2) Notwithstanding contained in sub-section ( 1), an insurer being a company or a
co-operative life insurance society as defined in clause (b) of sub section (1) of section 95,
may, subject to the provisions contained in the next succeeding sub-sections, invest or keep
invested any part of his controlled fund otherwise than in an approved investment, if—
(i) after such investment, the total amounts of all such investments of the
insurer do not exceed fifteen per cent. of the sum referred to in sub-section (1)
of section 27,
(ii) the investment is made, or, in the case of any investment already
made, the continuance of such investment is with the consent of all the directors
present at a meeting and eligible to vote, special notice of which has been
given to all the directors then in India, and all such investments, including
investments in which any director is interested, are reported without delay to
the Authority with full details of the investments and the extent of the director's
interest in any such investment.
(3) An insurer shall not out of his controlled fund invest or keep invested in the shares
of any one banking company or investment company more than—
(a) two and a quarter per cent. of the sum referred to in sub-section ( 1) of
section 27, or
(b) two per cent. of the subscribed share capital and debentures of the banking
company or investment company concerned,
whichever is less.
(4) An insurer shall not out of the controlled fund invest or keep invested in the
shares or debentures of any one company other than a banking company or investment
company more than—
(a) two and a quarter per cent. of the sum referred to in sub-section ( 1) of
section 27, or
(b) ten per cent. of the subscribed share capital and debentures of the company,
whichever is less:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any investment made with the
previous consent of the Authority by an insurer, being a company with a view to forming a
subsidiary company carrying on insurance business.
(5) An insurer shall not out of his controlled fund invest or keep invested any sum in
the shares or debentures of any private limited company.
(6) Where an investment is in partly paid-up shares, the uncalled liability on such
shares shall be added to the amount invested for the purpose of computing the percentages
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (3) and clause (a) of sub-section (4).
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3) and (4), where new shares
are issued to the existing shareholders by a company the existing shares of which are covered
by clause (i) or clause (k) or clause (l) of sub-section (1) and of which an insurer is already
a shareholder, the insurer may subscribe to such new shares:
Provided that the proportion of new shares subscribed by him does not exceed the
proportion which the paid-up amount on the shares held by him immediately before such
subscription bears to the total paid-up capital of the company at the time of such subscription.
2 of 1912.

71
(8) If,  on an application submitted through the Authority the Authority is satisfied
that special grounds exist warranting such exemption, the Authority may for such period, to
such extent and in relation to such particular investments and subject to such conditions as
may be specified by it in this behalf, exempt an insurer from all or any of the provisions of
sub-sections (3), (4) and (7).
(9) An insurer shall not keep more than three per cent. of the controlled fund in fixed
deposit or current deposit, or partly in fixed deposit and partly in current deposit, with any
one banking company or with any one co-operative society registered under the Indian Co-
operative Societies Act, 1912, or under any other law for the time being in force and doing
banking business:
Provided that in applying this sub-section to the amount in deposit with a banking
company on any day all the premiums collected by that company on behalf of the insurer
during the preceding thirty days shall be excluded:
Provided further that the Authority may permit a co-operative life insurance society
as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 95 to keep more than three per cent. of
its controlled fund in fixed deposit with any co-operative society referred to in this sub-
section, if the fixed deposit is secured by a first mortgage on any immovable property.
(10) All assets forming the controlled fund, not being Government securities or other
approved securities in which assets are to be invested or held invested in accordance with
section 27, shall (except for a part thereof not exceeding one-tenth of the controlled fund in
value which may, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be offered
as security for any loan taken for purposes of any investment), be held free of any
encumbrance, charge, hypothecation or lien.
(11) If at any time the Authority considers any one or more of the investments
constituting an insurer's controlled fund to be unsuitable or undesirable, the Authority may,
after giving the insurer an opportunity of being heard, direct him to realise the investment
or investments, and the insurer shall comply with the direction within such time as may be
specified in this behalf by the Authority.
(12) Every insurer in existence at the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1950, whose investments or any part thereof at such commencement contravene or
contravenes any of the provisions of this section, shall, within ninety days from such
commencement, submit to the Authority a report specifying all such investments, and if the
Authority is satisfied that it will not be in the interest of the insurer or any class of insurers
generally to any such investments, it may, by order, direct that the provisions of this section
other than the provisions contained in sub-section ( 11) shall not apply in relation to any
such investments or to any class of investments generally for such period or periods as may
be specified in the order.
(13) Without prejudice to the powers given to the Authority by sub-section ( 11),
nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require any insurer to realise any
investment made in conformity with the provisions of sub-section ( 1) after the
commencement of this Act which, after the making thereof, has ceased to be an approved
investment within the meaning of this section.
(14) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect in any way the manner
in which any moneys relating to the provident fund of any employee or to any security
taken from any employee or other moneys of a like nature are required to be held by or
under any Central Act, or Act of a State Legislature.
Explanation—In this section "controlled fund" means—
(a) in the case of any insurer specified in sub-clause (a) (ii) or sub-clause (b) of
clause (9) of section 2 carrying on life insurance business—
(i) all his funds, if he carries on no other class of insurance business;
(ii) all the funds appertaining to his life insurance business if he carries
on some other class of insurance business also; and
2 of 1912.
47 of 1950.

72
(b) in the case of any other insurer carrying on life insurance business—
(i) all his funds in India, if he carries on no other class of insurance busines;
(ii) all the funds in India appertaining to his life insurance business if he
carries on some other class of insurance business also;
but does not include any fund or portion thereof in respect of which the Authority is satisfied
that such fund or portion thereof, as the case may be, is regulated by the law of any country
outside India or in respect of which the Authority is satisfied that it would not be in the
interest of the insurer to apply the provisions of this section.
27B. (1) No insurer carrying on general insurance business shall, after the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, invest or keep invested any part
of  his assets otherwise than in any of the following approved investments, namely:—
(a) the investments specified in clauses (a) to (e), (n), (q) and (r) of sub-section
(1) of section 27A;
(b) debentures secured by a first charge on any immovable property, plant or
equipment of any company which has paid interest in full for the three years
immediately preceding or for at least three out of the four or five years immediately
preceding on such or similar debentures issued by it;
(c) debentures secured  by  a first charge on any immovable property, plant or
equipment of any company where either the book value or the market value, whichever
is less, of such property, plant or equipment is more than twice the value such
debentures;
(d) first debentures secured by a floating charge on all its assets or by a fixed
charge on fixed assets and floating charge on all other assets of any company which
has paid dividends on its equity shares for the three years immediately preceding  or
for at least three out of the four or five years immediately preceding the date of the
investment;
(e) preference shares of any company which has paid dividends on its equity
shares for the three years immediately preceding or for at least three out of the four or
five years immediately preceding;
(f) preference  shares of any company on which dividends have  been paid for
the three years immediately preceding or for at least three out of the four or five years
immediately preceding and which have priority in payment over all the equity areas
of the company in winding up;
(g) shares of any company  which have been guaranteed by another company,
such other company having  paid dividends on its equity shares for the three years
immediately  preceding or for atleast three out of the four or five years immediately
preceding:
Provided  that the total amount of shares of all the companies under guarantee
by the guaranteeing company is not in excess of fifty per cent. of the paid-up amount
of preference  and equity shares of the guaranteeing company;
(h) shares of any company on which dividends of not less than four per cent.
including  bonus   have been  paid for the three years immediately preceding or for at
least three out of the four or five years  immediately preceding;
(i) first mortgages on immovable property situated in India or  in any other
country where the insurer is carring on insurance business:
Providing that the property mortgaged  is not leasehold property with an
outstanding   term of less than fifteen years and the value of the property exceeds  by
one-third, or if it consists of buildings, exceeds, by one-half, the mortgage money;
Further
provisions
regarding
investments.

73
(j) such other investments as the Authority may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, declare to be approved investments for the purposes of this section.
(2) Any prescribed assets shall, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be prescribed,
be deemed   to be assets invested or kept invested in approved investment specified  in sub-
section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), an insurer may, subject
to the provisions  contained  in the next succeeding sub-sections, invest  or keep invested
any  part of his assets otherwise than in an approved investment specified in sub-
section ( 1), if—
(i) after such investment, the total amount of all such investments of the insurer
do to exceed  twenty-five per cent. of  his assets, and
(ii) the investment is made, or, in the case of any investment already made,  the
continunace  of such investment is with the consent  of all the directors, other than the
directors appointed under section 34C, present at a meeting and eligible to vote,
special notice  of which has been given to all the directors then in India, and all such
investments, including  investments in which any director is interested, are  reported
without delay to the Authority with full details of the investments and the extent of
the director's  interest in any such investment:
Provided that the making, or the continuance, of such investment is not objected to
by any director appointed  under section  34C.
(4) An insurer shall not invest or keep invested any part of his assets in the shares of
any one banking company or investment company more than—
(a) ten per cent. of his assets, or
(b)  two per cent. of the subscribed share capital and debentures of the banking
company  or investment company concerned,
whichever is less.
(5) An insurer shall not  invest or keep invested  any part of his assets in the shares or
debenturers of any one company  other than a banking company  or investment company
more than—
(a) ten per cent. of his assets, or
(b)  ten per cent. of the subscribed share capital and debentures of the company,
whichever  is less:
Provided  that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any investment  made  by an
insurer in the shares of any other insurer if  such other insurer is  a company within the
meaning of section  3 of the Companies  Act, 1956  and carries on insurance or re-insurance
business in India.
(6)  An insurer shall not  invest or keep invested any part of his assets in the shares  or
debentures  of any private  company.
(7) Where  an investment is in  partly paid-up shares, the uncalled  liability  on such
shares shall be added to the amount  invested  for the purpose  of computing  the percentages
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (4)  and clause (a) of sub-section (5).
(8) Notwithstanding  anything contained in sub-sections (4) and (5), where new shares
are issued to the existing sharedholders by a company, the existing shares of which are
covered by clause (e)  or clause (g) or clause (h) of sub-section  (1) and of which an insurer
is already a shareholder, the insurer may subscribe to such new shares:
1 of 1956.

74
Provided that the proportion of new shares subscribed by him does not exceed  the
proportion which the paid-up amount on the shares held  by him immediately before such
subscription bears to the total paid-up capital of the company at the time of such
subscription.
(9) If, on an application  submitted  to the Authority  is satisfied that special grounds
exist warranting such exemption, may, for such period, to such  extent and in relation to
such particular  investments and subject  to such conditions as may be specified by it in this
behalf, exempt an insurer from all or any of the provisions of sub-sections (4), (5) and (8).
(10) An insurer  shall not keep more than ten per cent. of his assets in fixed deposit  or
current deposit, or partly in fixed deposit and partly in current deposit, with any one banking
company or with any co-operative  society   registered  under the Co-operative Societies
Act, 1912, or under any other law for the time being in force and doing banking business:
Provided that in applying this sub-section to the amount in deposit with  a banking
company  on any day, all the premiums crediting during the preceding sixty days, to the
account of the insurer with such banking company and the amounts deposited, during the
preceding thirty days, by  such insurer  with that banking company for payment of claims or
out of re-insurance, recoveries, shall be excluded.
(11) All assets shall (except for a part thereof not exceeding one-tenth of the total
assets in value which may subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed,
be offered as security for any loan taken for purposes of any investment or for payment of
claims, or which may be kept as security deposit with the banks for acceptance of policies)
be held free  of any encumbrance, charge, hypothecation or lien.
(12)  If at any time the Authority considers any  one or more of the investments
constituting  an insurer's assets to be unsuitable or undesirable, it may, after giving the
insurer an opportunity of being heard, direct  the insurer to realise the investment or
investments, and the insurer shall comply with the direction within such time as may be
specified  in this behalf  by the Authority.
(13) Every insurer in existence at the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1968, whose investments or any part thereof at such commencement  do or does not
fulfil the requirements of this section, shall, within ninety days from such commencement,
submit to the Authority a report specifying all such investments, and, if the Authority is
satisfied  that it will not be in the interest of the insurer or any clas of insurers  generally to
realise any such investments it may, by order, direct that the provisions of this section,
other than the provisions contained  in sub-section ( 12), shall not apply in relation to any
such investments or to any class  of investments generally for such period or periods as may
be  specified  in the order.
(14) Without prejudice  to the powers conferred on the  Authority by sub-section (12),
nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require any insurer  to realise any
investment made in conformity  with the provisions of sub-section ( 1) after the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, which, after the making thereof,
has ceased to be an approved  investment within the meaning of this section.
(15) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed  to affect in any way the
manner in which any  moneys relating  to the provident fund of any employee or to any
security taken from any employee or other moneys of a like nature are required to be held
by or under any Central, Provincial or State Act.
(16) In this section, unless the context otherwise requires, "assets" means—
(a)  in the case of an insurer carrying on life insurance business  in India, all his
assets to be shown under the column "Other Classes of Business" in the balance-
sheet in Form   A, in Part  II of the First Schedule, but excluding any  times against
the head "Other Accounts (to be specified)".
2 of 1912.
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.

75
(b) In the case of an insurer specified in sub-clauses (a) (ii) or sub-clause (b) of
clause (9) of section 2, who is not carrying on life insurance business in India, all his
assets required to be shown in the balance-sheet in Form A, in Part II of the First
Schedule but excluding any items against the head "Other Accounts (to be spcified)";
and
(c) In the case of an other insurer, the assets  required to be shown in  the
statement in Form AA, in Part II of the First Schedule, but excluding office furniture,
but does  not include  any assets  specifically  held against any funds or portion  thereof in
respect  of which the Authority  is satisfied  that such fund or portion thereof, as the case
may be, is regulated by the law of any country outside India or in respect of which the
Authority is satisfied that it would not be in the interest of the insurer to apply the provisions
of this section.
27C.  No insurer shall directly or indirectly invest outside India the funds of the
policy-holders.
27D. (1) Without prejudice to anything  contained in sections 27, 27A and 27B, the
Authority may, in the interests of the policy-holders, specify by the regulations made by it,
the time, manner and other conditions of Investment of assets to be held by an insurer for
the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority may give specific directions for the time, manner and other
conditions subject to which the funds of policy-holders shall be invested in the infrastructure
and social sector as may be  specified by regulations made by the Authority and such
regulations shall apply  uniformly to all the insurers  carrying on the business of life insurance,
general insurance, or re-insurance in India on or after the commencement  of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act,  1999.
(3) The Authority may, afte  taking into account the nature of business  and to protect
the insterests  of the policy-holders, issue to an insurer to directions relating to the time,
manner  and other conditons of Investment of assets to be held by him:
Provided that no direction  under this sub-section shall be issued unless the insurer
concerned has been given a reasonable   opportunity of being heard.
28. (1) Every insurer carrying  on the business  of life insurance  shall every year,
within thirty-one days from the beginning of the year, submit to the Authority return showing
as at the 31st day of December of the preceding year the assets held invested in accordance
with section 27, and all other particulars necessary to establish that the requirements of that
section have been complied with, and such return shall be certified by a principal officer of
the insurer.
(2) Every such insurer shall also furnish, within fifteen days from the last day of
March, June and September, a return certified  as aforesaid showing as at the end of each of
each of said months the assets held invested accordance with section 27.
(2A) In respect of the Government securities  and other approved securities  invested
and kept invested in accordance with sub-section (1) of section 27 an insurer  shall  submit
along with the returns referred  to in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2)  a certificate, where such
assets are in the custody   of a banking company, from that company, and in any other case,
from the chairman, two directors and a principal officer, if the insurer is company, or
otherwise from a principal officer of the insurer, to the effect that  the securities are held
free of any encumbrance, charge, hypothecation, or lien, and every such certificate after the
first shall also state that since   the date of the certificate immediately prceding all the
securities have been  so held.
(2B) In respect  of  the assets forming the controlled fund within the meaning of
section 27A, and which do not from part of the Government securities and approved securities
Prohibition for
Investment of
funds outside
India.
Manner and
conditions of
Investment.
Statement of
investment of
assets.
41 of 1999.

76
invested  and kept invested  in accordance with section 27, an insurer shall submit, along
with the returns referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2), a statement, where such assets  are
in the custody of a banking company,  from that company, and, in any other case, from the
chairman, two directors  and a principal  officer if the insurer  is a company, or from a
principal officer of the insurer if the insurer is not a company, specifying  the assets, which
are subjected  to a charge and certifying  that the other assets are held free  of any
encumbrance, charge, hypothecation, or lien, and every such statement after the first shall
also specify  the charges created  in respect of any of those assets since the date of the
statement immediately preceding, and, if any such charges have been liquidated, the date
on which they were so liquidated.
(3) The Authority may at his discretion require any insurer to whom sub-section ( 1)
applies  to submit before the 1st day of August in each or any year a return of the nature
referred to in sub-section (1) , certified  as required  by that sub-section and prepared  as at
the 30th day of  June.
(4) In the case of an insurer  having  his principal place of business  or domicile
outside India the Authority may, on application made by  the insurer, extend the periods of
fifteen and thirty-one days mentioned in the foregoing sub-sections to thirty days and sixty
days, respectively.
(5) The Authority shall be entitled at any time to take such steps as it may consider
necessary  for the inspection or verification of the assets  invested in compliance  with
section  27 or for the purpose of securing the particulars necessary to establish that the
requirements of the section  have been complied with.  The insurer shall comply  with any
requisition made in this behalf by the Authority  and if he fails to do so within two months
from the receipt  of the  requisition he shall be deemed to have made default in complying
with the requirements of this section.
28A. (1) Every insurer carrying on life insurance business,  shall every year within
thirty-one days from the beginning of the year submit to the Authority a return  in the from
specified by the regulations made  by the Authority showing  as at the 31st day of March of
the preceding year, the investments  made out  of the controlled  fund referred to in section
27A, and every such return shall be certified  by a principal officer  of the insurer.
(2) Every insurer referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall also submit to the Authority a
return in the form specified by the regulations  made by the Authority showing all the
changes that occurred in the investments aforesaid  during each of the quarters ending on
the last day of March, June, September and December within thirty-one days from the close
of the quarter to which it relates, and every such return shall be certified by a principal
office of the insurer.
28B. (1) Every insurer carrying  on general insurance business, shall, every year,
within thirty-one days from the beginning of the year, submit to the Authority a return in the
form specified by the rgulations made by the Authority showing as at the 31st day of March
of the preceding year the investments made out of his assets referred to in section 27B, and
every such return shall be certified  by a principal officer of the insurer.
(2) Every insurer  referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall also submit to the Authority a
return  in the form specified by the regulations   made by the Authority  showing all the
changes that occurred in the Investments aforesaid during  each  of the quarters  ending on
the last day of March, June, September and December within thirty-one days from the close
of the quarter to which it relates, and every such return  shall be certified  by a principal
officer of the insurer.
(3) Every insurer  shall submit, along  with the returns referred  to in sub-sections (1)
and ( 2), a statement, where   any part of the assets are  in the custody  of a banking
company, from that company, and in any other case, from the chairman,  two directors  and
a principal officer, if the insurer  is a company, or from a principal officer of the insurer, if
Return of
investments
relating to
controlled fund
and changes
therein.
Return of
investments
relating to  the
assets and
changes
therein.

77
the insurer is not a company, specifying  the assets, which are subject to a charge and
certiyfing  that the other assets are held free of any encumbrance, charge, hypothecation or
lien, and every such statement   after the first shall also specify the charges created  in
respect of any of those assets  since the date of the statement immediately preceding, and,
if any such charges have been liquidated, the date on which they were so liquidated.
29. (1) No insurer shall grant loans or temporary advances either on hypothecation of
property or on personal security or otherwise, except loans on life policies issued by him
within their surrender value, to any director, manager, managing agent, actuary, aduitor or
officer of the insurer if a company, or where the insurer is a firm, to any partner therein, or
to any other company or firm in which any such director, manager, managing agent, actuary,
officer or partner holds the position of a director, manager, managing agent, actuary, officer
or partner:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to loans made by an
insurer to a banking company:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall prohibit a company from granting
such loans or advances to a subsidiary company or to any other company of which the
company granting the loan or advance is a subsidiary company and where any such loan or
advance is made out of any life insurance fund the matter shall be reported within thirty
days of the making of such loan or advance to the Authority.
(2) The provisions of section 96D of the Indian Companies act, 1913 shall not apply
to a loan granted to a director of an insurer being a company, if the loan is one granted on
the security of a policy on which the insurer bears the risk and the policy was issued to the
director on his own life, and the loan is within the surrender value of the policy.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), no insurer carrying on life insurance
business shall grant—
(a) any loans or temporary advances either on hypothecation of property or on
personal security or otherwise, except such loan as are specified in sub-section (1) of
section 27A;
(b) temporary advances to any chief, special or insurance agent to facilitate the
carrying out of his functions as such except in cases where such advances do not
exceed in the aggregate—
(i) in the case of a chief agent, the over-riding renewal commission earned
by him during the year immediately preceding,
(ii) in the case of a special agent, the renewal commission earned by him
during the year immediately preceding,
(iii) in the case of an insurance agent, the renewal commission earned by
him during the year immediately preceding.
Explanation.— The temporary advance referred to in clause ( b) of this sub-section
shall also be admissible in the case of any special agent or insurance agent newly appointed,
but such advance—
(a) shall be repayable within two years from the date on whcih such special
agent or insurance agent was first appointed, and
(b) shall not exceed, in the case of the special agent, five hundred rupees, and
in the case of the insurance agent, one hundred rupees, and the total amount of all
advances so made shall not exceed ten thousand rupees in the case of any insurer
whose business in force is one crore of rupees or more and five thousand rupees in
any other case.
Prohibition of
loans.
7 of 1913.

78
(4) Every loan or advance existing at the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1950  which contravenes the provision of sub-section (3) shall be notified
by the insurer to the Authority  within thirty days of such commencement and shall,
notwithstanding any contract to the contrary be repaid within one year from such
commencement.
(5) Where any event occurs giving rise to circumstances, the existence of which at
the time of the grant of any subsisting loan or advance would have made such grant a
contravention of this section, such loan or advance shall, notwithstanding anything in any
contract to the contrary, be repaid within three months from the occurrence of such event.
(6) In case of default in complying with the provisions of sub-section ( 4) or sub-
section (5), the director, manager, auditor, actuary, officer or partner, or the chief, special
or insurance agent concerned shall, without prejudice to any other penalty which he may
incur, cease to hold office under, or to act for, the insurer granting the loan on the  expiry of
the said period of one year or three months, as the case may be.
30.  If by reason of a contravention of any of the provisions of section 27, section
27A section 27B or section 29, any loss is sustained by the insurer or by the policy-holders,
every director, manager, managing agent, officer or partner who is knowingly a party to
such contravention shall, without prejudice to any other penalty to whcih he may be liable
under this Act, be jointly and severally liable to make good the amount of such loss.
31. (1) None of the assets in India of any insurer shall, except in the case of deposits
made with the Reserve Bank of India under section 7 or section 98 or in so far as assets are
required to be vested in trustees by sub-section (4) of section 27, be kept otherwise than in
the name of a public officer approved by the Authority or in the corporate name of the
undertaking, if a company, or in the name of the partners, if a firm, or in the name of the
proprietor, if an individual.
* * * * *
31A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Indian Companies
Act, 1913, or in the articles of association of the insurer, if a company, or in any contract or
agreement, no insurer shall after expiry of one year from the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1950,—
(a) be directed or managed by, or employ as manager or officer,
(b) be directed or managed by, or employ as manager or officer or in any capacity,
any person whose remuneration or any part thereof takes the form of commission or
bonus or a share in the valuation surplus in respect of the life insurance business of
the insurer, or
(c) be directed or managed  by, or employ as manager or officer or in any
capacity, any person whose remuneration or any part thereof takes the form of
commission  or bonus in respect of the general insurance business of the insurer:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to prohibit—
(i) the payment of commission to a chief agent, special agent or an insurance
agent, in respect of life insurance business procured by or through him;
(ii) the payment of commission to a prinicipal agent or an insurance agent in
respect of general insurance business procured by or through him;
(iii) the payment of commission, with the approval of the Central Government
and for such period as it may determine, to a person not being an officer of an insurer
who was, on the 1st day of November, 1944, employing on behalf of an insurer, chief
agents or special agents and continues so to do in respect of insurance business
procured by or through him;
* * * * *
Liability of
directors, etc.,
for loss due to
contravention
of sections 27,
27A, 27B and
29.
Assets of
insurer how to
be kept.
Provisions
relating to
managers, etc.
47 of 1950.
47 of 1950.
7 of 1913.

79
(iv) the employment of any individual in a clerical or other subordinate capacity
who, as an insurance agent, receives commission in respect of insurance business
procured by him;
(v) the employment as an officer of any individual who receives renewal
commission in respect of life insurance business procured by him in his capacity as
an insurance agent or as an employer of agents before such employment, or before
the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, whichever is later;
(vi) the payment of a share in the profits of general insurance business;
(vii) the payment of bonus in any year on a uniform basis to all salaried
employees or any class of them by way of additional remuneration.
(3) If in the case of any insurance company provision is made by the articles of
association of the company or by an agreement entered into between any person and the
company for empowering a director or manager or other officer  of the company to assign
his office to any other person, any assignment of office made in pursuance of the said
provision, shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the said provision or
in section 86B of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 be void.
* * * * *
31B.  (1) The Authority may if it is satisfied that any insurer, in the case of an insurer
specified in sub-clause (a)(ii) or sub-clause ( b) of clause (9) of section 2 in respect of all
insurance business transacted by him, and in the case of any other insurer in respect of the
insurance business transacted by him in India, is paying any person remuneration, whether
by way of commission or otherwise, on a scale disproportionate, according to the normal
standards prevailing in insurance business, to the resources of the insurer, call upon the
insurer to comply within six months with such directions as it may think fit to issue in the
matter, and if compliance with the directions so issued requires the alteration of any of the
terms of the contract entered into by the insurer with such person, no compensation shall be
payable to such person by the insurer by reason only of such alteration or of the resignation
of such person if the altered terms are not acceptable to him and no payment by way of
renewal commission or otherwise shall be made to such person by the insurer in respect of
any premiums paid after the date of such resignation except at such rate as may be approved
by the Authority in this behalf.
(2) Every insurer shall, before the close of the month following every year, submit to
the Authority a statement, in the form specified by the regulations made by the Authority
showing the remuneration paid, whether by way of commission or otherwise, to any person
in cases where such remuneration exceeds such sum as may be specified by the regulations
made by the Authority.
(3) Where any person not being a chief agent, principal agent or special agent is in
receipt of remuneration exceeding the sum of five thousand rupees in any year, the Authority
may, by notice in writing, require the insurer to submit certified copies of the agreement
entered into between the insurer and any such person, and in the insurer shall comply with
any such requisition within the time specified in the notice.
(4)  Every direction under this section shall be issued by an order made by the
Authority:
Provided that no order under this section shall be made unless the person concerned
has been given an opportunity of being heard.
32.  (1) No insurer shall, after the commencement of this Act, appoint a managing
agent for the conduct of his business.
Power to
restrict
payment of
excessive
remuneration.
Limitation on
employment of
managing
agents and on
the remune-
ration payable
to them.
47 of 1950.
7 of 1913.

80
(2) Where any insurer engaged in the business of insurance before the commencement
of this Act employs a managing agent for the conduct of his business, them, notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in the Indian Companies Act, 1913, and notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in the articles of the insurer, if a company, or in any
agreement entered into by the insurer, such managing agent shall cease to hold office on the
expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act and no compensation shall be
payable to him by the insurer by reason only of the premature termination of his employment
as managing agent.
(3) After the commencement of this Act, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian Companies Act, 1913, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
any agreement entered into by an insurer or in the articles of association of an insurer being
a company, no insurer shall pay to a managing agent and no managing agent shall accept
from an insurer as remuneration for his services as managing agent more than two thousand
rupees per month in all, including salary and commission and other remuneration payable
to and receivable by him, for his services as managing agent.
32A. (1) No insurer shall, after commencement of this Act, appoint a managing agent
for the conduct of his business.
 (2) Where an insurer specified in sub-clause (b) of clause (9) of section 2 has a life
insurance fund or more than twenty-five lakhs of rupees or insurance funds totalling more
than fifty lakhs of rupees, the manager, managing director or other officer of the insurer
shall be a whole-time employee of this insurer:
Provided that the Authority may, for such period as it thinks it, permit the employment
of any specified person as a part-time manager, managing director or other officer of such
insurer.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent—
(a) the manager, managing director or other officer of an insurer being the
manager, managing director or other officer of a subsidiary company of the insurer
with the previous apporval of the Authority;
(b) the manager, managing director or other officer of an insurer, exclusively
carrying on life insurance business being the manager, managing director or other
officer of an insurer not carrying on life insurance business;
(c) any officer of a branch of one insurer carrying on general insurance business
from being any officer of a branch in the same town of another insurer carrying on
general insurances business;
(d) an officer in the employment of an insurer from giving professional advice.
Explanation.—In this section the expression "officer" does not include a director.
32B.  Every insurer shall, after the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Act, 1999, undertake such percentages of life insurance business
and general insurance business in the rural or social sector as may by specified, in the
Official Gazette by the Authority, in this behalf.
* * * * *
Investigation
33.  (1) The Authority may, at any time, by order in writing, direct any person (hereafter
in this section referred to as "Investigating Authority") specified in the order to investigate
the affairs of any insurer and to report to the Authority on any investigation made by such
Investigating Authority:
Provided that the Investigating Authority may, wherever necessary, employ any
auditor or actuary or both for the purpose of assisting him in any investigation under this
section.
Power of
investigation
and inspection
by Authority.
7 of 1913.
Prohibition of
common
officers and
requirement as
to whole-time
officers.
Insurance
business in
rural or social
sector.
41 of 1999.
7 of 1913.
7 of 1913.

81
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 235 of the Companies
Act, 1956, the Investigating may, at any time, and shall, on being directed so to do by the
Authority, cause an inspection to be made by one or more of his officers books of account;
of any insurer and his and the Investigating Authority shall supply to the insurer a copy of
his report on such inspection.
(3) It shall be the duty of every manager, managing director or other officer of the
insurer to produce before the Investigating Authority directed to make the investigation
under sub-section (1), or inspection under sub-section (2), all such books of account, registers
and other documents in his custody or power and to furnish him with any statement and
information relating to the affairs of the insurer as the said Investigating Authority may
require of him within such time as the said Investigating Authority may specify.
(4) Any Investgating Authority, directed to make an investigation under sub-section (1),
or inspection under sub-section (2), may examine on oath, any manager, managing director
or other officer of the insurer in relation to his business and may administer oaths accordingly.
(5) The Investigating Authority shall, if he has been directed by the Authority may to
cause an inspection to be made, and may, in any other case, report to the Authority on any
inspection made under this section.
(6) On receipt of any report under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 5), the Authority
may, after giving such opportunity to the insurer to make a representation in connection
with the report as, in the opinion of the Authority, seems reasonable, by order in writing,—
(a) require the insurer, to take  in such action respect of any matter arising out
of the report as the Authority may think fit; or
(b) cancel the registration of the insurer; or
(c) direct any person to apply to the court for the winding up of the insurer, if
a company, whether the registration of the insurer has been cancelled under clause
(b) or not.
(7) The Authority may, after giving reasonable notice to the insurer, publish the report
submitted by the Investigating Authority under sub-section ( 5) or such portion thereof as
may appear to it to be necessary.
(8) The Authority may by the regulations made by it specify the minimum inforamtion
to be maintained by insurers in their books, the manner in which such information shall be
maintained, the checks an other varifications to be adopted by insurers in that connection
and all other matters incidental thereto as are, in its opinion, necessary to enable the
Investigating Authority to discharge satisfactorily his functions under this section.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, expression "insurer" shall include in
the case of an insurer incorporated in India—
(a) all its subsidiaries formed for the purpose of carrying on the business of
insurance exclusively outside India; and
(b) all its branches whether situated in India or outside India.
(9) No order made under this section other than an order made under clause ( b) of
sub-section (6) shall be capable of being called in question in any court.
(10) All expenses of, and incidental to, any investigation made under this section
shall be defrayed by the insurer, shall have priority over that debts due from the insurer and
shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.
* * * * *
34B .(1)* * * * *
(4) If any perosn in respect of whom an order is made by the Authority under sub-
section  ( 1) or under the proviso to sub-section  ( 2) contravenes the provisions of this
section, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees
for each day during which such contravention continues.
* * * * *
Power of
Authority to
remove
managerial
persons from
office.
10 of 1956.

82
34C.  (1) If the Authority is of opinion that in the public interest or in the interest of
an insurer, or his policy-holders it is necessary so to do, it may, from time to time, by order
in writing, appoint, with effect from such date as may be specified in the order, one or more
persons to hold office as additional directors of the insurer:
Provided that the number of additional directors so appointed shall not, at any time,
exceed five or one-third of the maximum strength fixed for the Board by the articles of
association of the insurer, whichever is less.
* * * * *
34E. The controller may,—
(a) caution or prohibit insurers, generally or any isurer  in particular against
entering into any particular transaction or class of transactions and generally give
advice to any insurer;
(b) at any time, if he is satisfied that in the public interest or in the interests of
the insurer or for preventing the affairs of the insurer being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the interests of the insurer or his policy-holders, it is necessary so to
do, by order in writing and on such terms and conditions as may be specified therein—
(i) require the insurer to call  a meeting of his directors for the purpose of
considering any matter relating to or arising out of the affairs of the insurer;
(ii) depute one or more of his officers to watch the proceedings at any
meeting of the Board of directors of the insurer or of any committee or of any
other body constituted by it; require the insurer to give an opportunity to the
officers so deputed to be heard at such meetings and also require such officers
to send a report of such proceeding to the Authority;
(iii) require the Board of directors of the insurer or any committee or any
other body constituted by it to give in writing to any officer specified by the
Authority in this behalf at his usual address all notices of, and other
communications relating to, any meeting of the Board, committee or other body
constituted by it;
(iv) appoint one or more of his officers to observe the manner in which
the affairs of the insurer or of his offices or branches are being conducted and
make a report thereon;
(v) require the insurer to make, within such time as may be specified in
the order, such changes in the management as the Authority may consider
necessary.
34G.  Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-section (1)
of section 34, the Authority may, if it has reason to believe that the working of any branch
outside India of an insurer being an insurer specified in sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 9) of
section 2, is generally resulting in a loss or that the affairs of that branch are being conducted
in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the policy-holders or the public interest, it may,
after giving an opportunity to the insurer of being heard, direct that the insurer shall cease,
within such period, not being less than one year, as may be specified in the order, to carry
on insurance business in the country in which such branch is situated and if the insurer fails
to comply with such order he shall be deemed to have failed to comply with the provisions
of this Act.
34H.  (1) Where the Chairperson of the Authority in consequence of information in
his possession, has reason to believe that—
(a) Any person who has been required under sub-section ( 2) of section 33 to
produce, or cause to be produced, any books, accounts or other documents in his
custody or power has omitted or failed to produce, or cause to be produced, such
books, accounts or other documents, or
Power of
Authority to
appoint
additional
director.
Search and
seizure.
Power of
Authority to
order closure
of foreign
branches.
Further
powers.

83
(b) Any person to whom a requisition to produce any books, accounts or other
documents as aforesaid has been or might be issued will not, or would not, produce
or cause to be produced, any books, accounts or other documents which will be
useful for, or relevant to, an investigation under sub-section ( 1) of section 33 or an
inspection under sub-section (1A) of that section, or
(c) a contravention of any provision of this Act has been committed or is likely
to be committed by an insurer, or
(d) any claim which is due to be settled by an insurer, has been or is likely to be
rejected or settled at a figure higher than a reasonable amount, or
(e) any claim which is due to be settled by an insurer, has been or is likely to be
rejected or settled at a figure lower than a reasonable amount, or
(f) any illegal rebate or commission has been paid or is likely to be paid by an
insurer, or
(g) any books, accounts receipts, vouchers, survey reports or other documents,
belonging to an insurer are likely to be tampered with, falsified or manufactured, he
may authorise any subordinate officer of his, not lower in rank than an officer authorised
by the Authority (hereafter referred to as the authorised officer) to—
(i) enter and search any building or place where he has reason to suspect
that such books, accounts or other documents, or any books or papers relating
to any claim, rebate or commission or any receipts, vouchers, reports or other
documents are kept;
(ii) break open the lock of any door, box, locker, safe, almirah or other
receptacle for exercising the powers conferred by clause ( i) where the keys
thereof are not available;
(iii) seize all or any such books, accounts or other documents, found as a
result of such search;
(iv) place marks of identification on such books, accounts or other
documents or make or cause to be made extracts or copies therefrom.
* * * * *
(7) If a person legally entitled to the books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers,
reports or other documents seized under sub-section (1) objects for any reason to the approval
given by the Chairperson of the Authority under sub-section (5), he may make an application
to the Central Government stating therein the reason for such objection and requesting for
the retrun of the books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, reports or other documents.
(8) On receipt of the application under sub-section (7), the Central Government may,
after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders as it thinks fit.
 35.  ( 1) No life insurance business of an insurer specified in sub-clause ( a) (ii) or
sub-clause (b) of clause (9) of section 2 shall be transferred to any person or transferred to
or amalgamated with the life insurance business of any other insurer except in accordance
with a scheme prepared under this section and approved by the Authority.
* * * * *
(3) Before an application is made to the Authority to approve any such scheme notices
of the intention to make the application together with a statement of the nature of the
amalgamation or transfer, as the case may be, and of the reason therefor shall, at least two
months before the application is made, be sent to the Authority and certified copies, four in
number, of each of the following documents shall be furnished to the Authority, and other
such copies shall during the two months aforesaid be kept open for the inspection of the
members and policy-holders at the principal and branch officers and chief agencies of the
insurers concerned, namely:—
* * * *
Amalgamation
and transfer of
insurance
business.

84
(b) balance-sheets in respect of the insurance business of each of the insurers
concerned in such amalgamation or tansfer, prepared in the form set forth in Part II of
the First Schedule and in accordance with the regulations contained in Part I of the
Schedule;
(c) actuarial reports and abstracts in respect of the life insurance business of
each of the insurers so concerned, prepared in conformity with the requirements of
Part II of the Fourth and Fifth Schedules and in accordance with the regulations
contained in Part I of the Schedule concerned;
36.   (1) When any application such as is referred to in sub-section ( 3) of section 35
is made to the Authority, the Authority shall cause, if for special reasons it so directs, notice
of the application to be sent to every person resident in India who is the holder of a life
policy of any insurer concerned and shall cause a statement of the nature and terms of the
amalgamation or transfer, as the case may be, to be published in such manner and for such
period as it may direct, and, after hearing the directors and such policy-holders as apply to
be heard and any other persons whom it considers entitled to be heard, may approve the
arrangement, it is satisfied that no sufficient objection to the arrangement has been established
and shall make such consequential orders as are necessary to give effect to the arrangement,
including orders as to the disposal of any deposit made under section 7 or section 98.
Provided that—
(a) no part of the deposit made by any party to the amalgamation or transfer
shall be returned except where, after effect is given to the arrangement, the whole of
the deposit to be made by the insurer carrying on the amalgamated business or the
person to whom the business is transferred is completed,
(b) only so much shall be returned as is no longer required to complete the
deposit last mentioned in clause ( a), and
(c) while the deposit last mentioned in clause ( a) remains incomplete no
accession, resulting from the arrangement, to the amount already deposited by the
insurer carrying on the amalgamated business or the person to whom the business is
transferred shall be appropriated as payment or part payment of any instalment of
deposit subsequently due from him under section 7 or section 98.
(2) If the arrangement involves a reduction of the amount of the insurance and other
contrancts of the transfer or insurer or of any or all of the insurers concerned in the
amalgamation, the Authority may approve the arrangement reducing the amount of such
contracts upon such terms and subject to such conditions as he may think proper, and the
reduction of contracts as approved by the Authority shall be valid and binding on all the
parties concerned.
* * * * *
37A. * * * * *
(4) The scheme shall thereafter be placed before the Central Government for its
sanction and the Central Government may sanction the scheme without any modification or
with such modifications as it may consider necessary; and the scheme as sanctioned by the
Central Government shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may
specify in this behalf:
Provided that different dates may be specified for different provisions of the scheme.
* * * * *
38.  (1) A transfer or assignment of a policy of life insurance, whether with or without
consideration may be made only by an endorsement upon the policy itself or by a separate
instrument, signed in either case by the transferor or by the assignor, his duly authorised
agent and attested by at least one witness, specifically setting forth the fact of transfer or
assignment.
(2) The transfer or assignment shall be complete and effectual upon the execution of
such endorsement or instrument duly attested but except where the transfer or assignment
Power of
Authority to
prepare scheme
of amalgama-
tion.
Assignment
and transfer of
insurance
policies.
Sanction of
amalgamation
and transfer by
Authority.

85
is in favour of the insurer shall not be operative as against an insurer and shall not confer
upon the transferee or assignee, or his legal representative, and right to sue for the amount
of such policy or the moneys secured thereby until a notice in writing of the transfer or
assignment and either the said endorsement or instrument itself or a copy thereof certified
to be correct by both transferor and transferee or their duly authorised agents have been
delivered to the insurer:
Provided that where the insurer maintains one or more places of business in India,
such notice shall be delivered only at the place in India mentioned in the policy for the
purpose or at his principal place of business in India.
(3) The date on which the notice referred to in sub-section ( 2) is delivered to the
insurer shall regulate the priority of all claims under a transfer or assignment as between
persons interested in the policy; and where there is more than one instrument of transfer or
assignment the priority of the claims under such instruments shall be governed by the order
in which the notices referred to in sub-section ( 2) are delivered.
(4) Upon the receipt of the notice referred to in sub-section ( 2), the insurer shall
record the fact of such transfer or assignment together with the date thereof and the name of
the transferee or the assignee and shall, on the request of the person by whom the notice
was given, or of the transferee or assignee, on payment of a fee not exceeding one rupee,
grant a written acknowledgement of the receipt of such notice; and any such
acknowledgement shall be conclusive evidence against the insurer that he has duly received
the notice to which such acknowledgement relates.
(5) Subject to the terms and conditions of the transfer or assignment, the insurer
shall, from the date of receipt of the notice referred to in sub-section ( 2) recognise the
transferee or assignee named in the notice as the only person entitled to benefit under the
policy, and such person shall be subject to all liabilities and equities to which the transferor
or assignor was subject at the date of the transfer or assignment and may institute any
proceedings in relation to the policy without obtaining the consent of the transferor or
assignor or making him a party to such proceedings.
(6) Any rights and remedies of an assignee or transferee of a policy of life insurance
under an assignment or transfer effected prior to the commencement of this Act shall not be
affected by the provisions of the section.
(7) Notwithstanding any law or custom having the force of law to the contrary, an
assignment in favour of a person made with the condition that it shall be inoperative or that
the interest shall pass to some other person on the happening of a specified event during the
lifetime of the person whose life is insured, and an assignment in favour of the survivor or
survivors of a number of persons, shall be valid.
39. (1) The holder of a policy of life insurance on his own life may, when effecting
the policy or at any time before the policy matures for payment, nominate the person or
persons to whom the money secured by the policy shall be paid in the event of his death:
Provided that, where any nominee is a minor,  it shall be lawful for the policy-holder
to appoint in the prescribed manner any person to receive the money secured by the policy
in the event of his death during the minority of the nominee.
(2) Any such nomination in order to be effectual shall, unless it is incorporated in the
text of the policy itself, be made by an endorsement on the policy communicated to the
insurer and registered by him in the records relating to the policy and any such nomination
may at any time before the policy matures for payment be cancelled or changed by an
endorsement or a further endorsement or a will, as the case may be, but unless notice in
writing of any such cancellation or change has been delivered to the insurer, the insurer
shall not be liable for any payment under the policy made bona fide by him to a nominee
mentioned in the text of the policy or registered in records of the insurer.
(3) The insurer shall furnish to the policy-holder a written acknowledgement of having
registered a nomination or cancellation or change thereof, and may charge a fee not exceeding
one rupee for registering such cancellation or change.
Nomination by
policy-holder.

86
(4) A transfer or assignment of a policy made in accordance with section 38 shall
automatically cancel a nomination:
Provided that the assignment, of a policy to the insurer who bears the risk on the
policy at the time of the assignment, in consideration of a loan granted by that insurer on
the security of the policy within its surrender value, or its reassignment on repayment of the
loan shall not cancel a nomination, but shall affect the rights of the nominee only to the
extent of the insurer's interest in the policy.
(5) Where the policy matures for payment during the lifetime of the person whose
life is insured or where the nominee or, if there are more nominees than one, all the nominees
die before the policy matures for payment, the amount secured by the policy shall be payable
to the policy-holder or his heirs or legal representatives or the holder of a succession
certificate, as the case may be.
(6) Where the nominee or, if there are more nominees than one, a nominee or nominees
survive the person whose life is insured, the amount secured by the policy shall be payable
to such survivor or survivors.
(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any policy of life insurance to
which section 6 of the Married Women's Property Act, 1874 applies or has at any time
applied:
Provided that where a nomination made whether before or after the commencement
of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1946, in favour of the wife of the person who has
insured his life or of his wife and children or any of them is expressed, whether or not on
the face of the policy, as being made under this section, the said section 6 shall be deemed
not to apply or not to have applied to the policy.
40.  (1) No person shall, after the expiry of six months from the commencement of
this Act, pay or contract to pay any remuneration or reward whether by way of commission
or otherwise for soliciting or procuring insurance business in India to any person except an
insurance agent or an intermediary or insurance intermediary.
(1A) In this section and sections 40A, 41 and 43, reference to an insurance agent shall
be construed as including reference to an individual soliciting or procuring insurance business
exclusively in the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were
comprised in a Part B State notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette and holding a valid licence as insurance agent under the law of that Part B State.
(2) No insurance agent shall be paid or contract to be paid by way of Commission or
as remuneration in any form an amount exceeding, in the case of  life insurance business,
forty per cent. of the first year's premium payable on any policy or policies effected through
him and five per cent. of a renewal premium, payable on such a policy or, in the case of
business of any other class, fifteen per cent. of the premium:
Provided that insurers, in respect of life insurance business only, may pay, during the
first ten years of their business to their insurance agents fifty-five per cent. of the first year's
premium payable on any policy or policies effected through them and six per cent. of the
renewal premiums payable on such policies:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in respect of any policy
of life insurance issued after the 31st day of December, 1950, or in respect of any policy of
general insurance issued after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950.
(2A) Save as hereinafter provided, no insurance agent or intermediary or insurance
intermediary shall be paid or contract to be paid by way of commission or as remuneration
in any form any amount in respect of any policy not effected through him:
Provided that where a policy of life insurance has lapsed, and it cannot under the
terms and conditions applicable to it be revived without further medical examination of the
person whose life was insured thereby, an insurer, after giving by notice in writing to the
insurance agent through whom the policy was effected if such agent continues to be an
agent of the insurer an opportunity to effect the revival of the policy within a time specified
Prohibition of
payment by
way of
commission or
otherwise for
procuring
business.
3 of 1874.
47 of 1950.

87
in the notice, being not less than one month from the date of the receipt by him of the
notice, may pay to another insurance agent who effects the revival of the policy an amount
calculated at a rate not exceeding half the rate of commission at which the agent through
whom the policy was effected would have been paid had the policy not lapsed, on the sum
payable on revival of the policy on account of arrear premiums (excluding any interest on
such arrear premiums) and also on the subsequent renewal premiums payable on the policy.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent the payment under any contract existing
prior to the 27th day of January, 1937, of gratitudes or renewal commission to any person,
whether an insurance agent within the meaning of this Act or not, or to his representatives
after his decease in respect of insurance business effected through him before the said date.
40A. (1) No person shall pay or contract to pay to an insurance agent, shall receive or
contract to receive by way of commission or remuneration in any form in respect of any
policy of life insurance issued in India by an insurer after the 31st day of December, 1950,
and effected through an insurance agent, an amount exceeding—
(a) where the policy grants an immediate annuity or a deferred annuity in
consideration of a single premium, or where only one premium is payable on the
policy, two per cent. of that premium.
(b) where the policy grants a deferred annuity in consideration of more than
one premium, seven and a half per cent. of the first year's premium, and two per cent.
of each renewal premium, payable on the policy, and
(c) in any other case, thirty-five per cent. of the first year's premium seven and
a half per cent. of the second and third year's renewal premium and thereafter five per
cent. of each renewal premium payable on the policy:
Provided that in a case referred to in clause (c) an insurer, during the first ten years of
his business, may pay to an insurance agent, and an insurance agent may receive from such
an insurer, forty per cent. of the first year's premium payable on the policy:
Provided further that in a case referred to in clause (c), where the rate of commission
payable on the first year's premium is equal to or less than twenty-one per cent. thereof, and
the rate on the fourth and fifth years' premiums does  not exceed six per cent. thereof, the
Life Insurance Corporation of India may pay to an insurance agent, and the insurance agent
may receive from it, commission on the sixth and subsequent years' renewal premiums
payable on the policy at a rate not exceeding six per cent. of each renewal premium.
(2) No person shall pay or contract to pay to a special agent, and no special agent
shall receive or contract to receive, by way of commission or as remuneration in any form,
in respect of any policy of life insurance issued in India by an insurer after the 31st day of
December, 1950, and effected through a special agent, an amount exceeding—
(a) in a case referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), one half per cent. of the
premium,
(b) in a case referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), two per cent. of the first
year's premium payable on the policy, and
(c) in a case referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1), fifteen per cent. of the
first year's premium payable on the policy:
Provided that in a case referred to in clause ( c), an insurer, during the first ten years
of his business, may pay to a special agent, and a special agent may receive from such an
insurer, seventeen and a half per cent. of the first year's premium payable  on the policy.
(3) No person shall pay or contract to pay to an insurance agent, and no insurance
agent shall receive or contract to receive, by way of commission or remuneration in any
form, in respect of any policy of general insurance issued in India by an insurer after the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968 and effected through an insurance
agent, an amount exceeding fifteen per cent. of the premium payable on the policy where
the policy relates to fire or marine insurance or miscellaneous insurance.
Limitation of
expenditure on
commission.
62 of 1968.

88
(4) No person shall pay or contract to pay to a principal agent, and no principal agent
shall receive or contract to receive, by way of commission or remuneration in any form, in
respect of any policy of general insurance issued  in India by an insurer after the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, and effected through a principal
agent an amount exceeding—
(a) in the case referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3), twenty per cent. of
the premium payable on the policy, and
(b) in the case referred to in clause ( b) of that sub-section, fifteen per cent. of
the policy,
less any commission payable to any insurance agent in respect of the said policy:
Provided that the Authority may, in such circumstances and to such extent and for
such period as may be specified, authorise the payment of commission or renumeration
exceeding the limits specified in this sub-section to a principal agent of an insurer
incorporated or domiciled elsewhere than in India, if such agent carries out and has
continuously carried out in his own office duties on behalf of the insurer which would
otherwise have been performed by the insurer.
(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 102 in respect of a contravention
of any of the provisions of the preceding sub-section by an insurer, any insurance agent
who contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 3) shall be punishable
with the fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.
40B.  (1) Every insurer transacting life insurance business in India shall furnish to the
Authority, within such time as may be prescribed, statements in the prescribed form certified
by an actuary on the basis of premiums currently used by him in regard to new business in
respect of mortality, rate of interest, expenses and bonus loading.
(2) After the 31st day of December, 1950, no insurer shall, in respect of life insurance
business transacted by him in India, spend as expenses of management in any calendar year
an amount in excess of the prescribed limits and in prescribing any such limits regard shall
be had to the size and age of the insurer and the provision generally made for expenses of
management in the premium rates of insurers:
Provided that where an insurer has spent such expenses in any year an amount in
excess of the amount permissible under this sub-section, he shall not be deemed to have
contravened the provisions of this section, if the excess amount so spent is within such
limits as may be fixed in respect of the year by the Auhority after consultation with the
Executive Committee of the Life Insurance Council constituted under section 64F, by which
the actual expenses incurred may exceed the expenses permissible under this sub-section.
(3) In respect of any statement mentioned in sub-section (1), the Authority may require
that it shall be submitted to another actuary appointed by the insurer for the purpose and for
certification by him, whether with or without modifications.
(4) Every insurer transacting life insurance business in India shall incorporate in the
revenue account—
(a) a certificate signed by the chairman and two directors and by the principal
officer of the insurer, and an auditor's certificate, certifying that all expenses of
management in respect of life insurance business transacted by the insurer in India
have been fully debited in the revenue account as expenses, and
(b) if the insurer is carrying on any other class of insurance business in addition
to life insurance business an auditor's certificate certifying that all charges incurred
in respect of his life insurance business and in respect of his business over than life
insurance business have been fully debited in the respective revenue accounts.
Explanation.—In this section,—
(a) "calendar year" or "year" means, in relation to an insurer who is required to
furnish returns in accordance with sub-section ( 2) of section 16, the period covered
by the revenue account furnished by such insurer under clause (b) of that sub-section;
Limitation of
expenses of
management in
life insurance
business.

89
(b) "expenses of management" means all charges wherever incurred whether
directly or indirectly, and includes—
(i) commission payments of all kinds;
(ii) any amount of expenses capitalised;
(iii) in the case of an insurer having his principal place of business outside
India, a proper share of head office expenses which all not be less than such
percentage as may be prescribed of the total premiums (less re-insurances)
received during that year in respect of life insurance business transacted by
him in India,
but does not include in the case of an insurer having his principal place of business in India
any share of head office expenses in respect of life insurance business transacted by him
outside India.
40C.  ( 1) After the 31st day of December, 1949, no insurer shall, in respect of any
class of general insurance business transacted by him in India, spend in any calendar year
as expenses of management including commission of remuneration for procuring business
an amount in excess of the prescribed limits and in prescribing any such limits regard shall
be had to the size and age of the insurer:
Provided that where an insurer has spent as such expenses in any year an amount in
excess of the amount permissible under this sub-section, he shall not be deemed to have
contravened the provisions of this section, if the excess amount so spent is within such
limits as may be fixed in respect of the year by the Authority after consultation with Executive
Committee of the General Insurance Council constituted under section 64F, by which the
actual expenses incurred may exceed the expenses permissible under this sub-section.
(2) Every insurer as aforesaid shall incorporate in the revenue account a certificate
signed by the chairman and two directors and by the principal officer of the insurer, and by
an auditor certifying that all expenses of management wherever incurred, whether directly
or indirectly, in respect of the business referred  to in this section have been fully debited in
the revenue account as expenses.
Explanation.—In this section,—
(a) "calendar year" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 40B;
(b) "expenses of management" means all charges, wherever incurred whether
directly or indirectly, including commission payments of all kinds and, in the case of
an insurer having his principal place of business outside India, a proper share of head
office expenses, which shall not be less than such percentage as may be prescribed,
of his gross premium income (that is to say, the premium income without taking into
account premiums or reinsurance ceded or accepted) written direct in India during
the year, but in computing the expenses of management in India the following, and
only the following, expenses may be excluded, namely:—
(i) in the case of an insurer having his principal place of business in
India, a share of head office expenses in respect of general insurance business
transacted by him outside India not exceeding such percentage of his gross
direct premium written outside India as may be prescribed;
(ii) in the case of an insurer having his principal place   of business outside
India, a share of the expenses of his office in India in respect of general insurance
business transacted by him outside India through his office in India, not
exceeding such percentage of his gross direct premium written outside India
through his office in India, as may be prescribed;
(iii) any expenses debited to profit and loss account relating exclusively
to the management of capital, and dealings with share-holders and a proper
share of managerial expenses calculated in such manner as may be prescribed;
and
Limitation of
expenses of
management in
general
insurance
business.

90
(iv) any expenses debited to claims in the revenue account in Form F of
Part II of the Third Schedule;
(c) "insurance business transacted in India" includes insurance business wherever
effected relating to any properly situate in India or to any vessel or aircraft registered
in India.
41. (1) * * * * *
(2) Any person making default in complying with the provisions of this section shall
be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
42.  (1) The Authority or an officer  authorised by it in this behalf shall, in the manner
determined by the regulations made by it and on payment of the fee determined by the
regulations, which shall not be more than two hundred and fifty rupees, issue to any person
making an application in the manner determined by the regulations, a licence to act as an
insurance agent for the purpose of soliciting or procuring insurance business:
Provided that,—
(i) in the case of an individual, he does not suffer from any of the disqualifications
mentioned is sub-section (4); and
(ii) in the case of a company or firm, any of its directors or partners does not
suffer from any of the said disqualifications:
Provided further that any licence issued immediately before the commencement of
the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 shall be deemed to have
been issued in accordance with the regulations which provide for such licence.
(2) A licence issued under this section shall entitle the holder to act as an insurance
agent for any insurer.
(3) A licence issued under this section, after the date of the commencement of the
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, shall remain in force for a
period of three years only from the date of issue, but shall, if the applicant, being an individual
does not, or being a company or firm any of its directors or partners does not, suffer from
any of the disqualifications mentioned in clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) of sub-section
(4) and the application of renewal of licence reaches the issuing authority at least thirty
days before the date on which the licence ceases to remain in force, be renewed for a period
of three years at any one time on payment of the fee determined by the regulations made by
the Authority which shall not be more than rupees two hundred and fifty, and additional fee
of an amount determined by the regulations not exceeding rupees one hundred by way of
penalty, if the application for renewal of the licence does not reach the issuing authority at
least thirty days before the date on which the licence ceases to remain in force.
(3A) No application for the renewal of a licence under this section shall be entertained
if the application does not reach the issuing authority before the licence ceases to remain in
force:
Provided that the Authority may, if satisfied that undue hardship would be caused
otherwise, accept any application in contravention of this sub-section on payment by the
applicant of a penalty of seven hundred and fifty rupees.
(4) The disqualifications above referred to shall be the following:—
(a) that the person is a minor;
(b) that he is found to be of unsound mind by a court of competent jurisdiction;
(c) that he has been found guilty of criminal misappropriation or criminal breach
of trust of cheating or forgery or an abetment of or attempt to commit any such offence
by a court of competent jurisdiction:
Provided that where at least five years have elapsed since the completion of the
sentence imposed on any person in respect of any such offence, the Authority shall
ordinarily declare in respect of such person that his conviction shall cease to operate
as a disqualification under this clause;
Prohibition of
rebates.
Licensing of
insurance
agents.
41 of 1999.

91
(d) that in the course of any judicial proceeding relating to any policy of insurance
or the winding up of an insurance company or in the course of an investigation of the
affairs of an insurer it has been found that he has been guilty of or has knowingly
participated in or connived at any fraud, dishonesty or misrepressentation against an
insurer or an insured;
(e) that in the case of an individual, he does not possess the requisite
qualifications and practical training for a period not exceeding twelve months, as
may be specified by the regulations made;
(ea) that in the case of a company or firm making an applicaiton under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (3), a director or a partner or one or more of its officers or
other employees so designated by it and in the case of any other person, the chief
executive, by whatever name called, or one or more of his employees designated by
him, do not possess the requisite qualificaitons and practical training and have not
passed such an examination as required under clauses ( e) and (f);
(f) that he has not passed such examiantion as may be specified by the regulations
made by the authority in this behalf:
Provided that a person who had been issued a licence under sub-section (1) of
this section or sub-section ( 1) of section 64UM shall not be required to possess the
requisite qualifications, practical  training and pass such examination as required by
clauses (e) and (f);
(g) that he violates the code of conduct as may be specified by the regulations
made by the Authority.
(5) If it be found that an insurance agent being an individual is, or being a company
or firm contains a director or partner who is suffering from any of the disqualifications
mentioned in sub-section (4), then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which he may
be liable, the Authority shall, and if the insurance agent has knowingly contravened any of
the provisions of this Act may, cancel the licence issued to the agent under this section.
(6) The Authority may issue a duplicate licence to replace a licence lost, destroyed or
mutilated, on payment of such fee not exceeding fifty rupees as may be determined by the
regulations.
(7) Any person who acts as an insurance agent without holding a licence issued under
this secton to act as such shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees, and any insurer or any person acting on behalf of an insurer, who appoints as an
insurance agent any person not licensed to act as such or transacts any insurance business
in India through any such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees.
(8) Where the person contravening sub-section ( 7) is a company or a firm, then,
without prejudice to any other proceedings which may be taken against the company or
firm, every director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, and every partner
of the firm who is knowingly a party to such contravention shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees.
42A.  (1) The Authority or an officer authorised by it in this behalf shall in the
prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee which shall not be more than
twenty-five rupees for a principal agent or a chief agent and ten rupees for a special agent,
register any person who makes an application to it in the prescribed manner if—
(a) in the case of an individual, he does not suffer from any of the
disqualifications mentioned in sub-section (4) of section 42, or
(b) in the case of a company or firm, any of its directors or partners does not
suffer from any of the said disqualifications,
and a certificate to act as a principal agent, chief agent or special agent, as the case may be,
for the purpose of procuring  insurance business shall be issued to him.
Registration of
principal
agents, chief
agents and
special agents.

92
(2) A certificate issued under this section shall entitle the holder thereof to Act as a
principal agent, chief agent or special agent, as the case may be, for any insurer,
(3) A certificate issued under this section shall remain in force for a period of twelve
months only from the date of issue, but shall, on application made in this behalf, be renewed
from year to year on production of a certificate from the insurer concerned that the provisions
of clauses 2 and 3 of the Part A of the Sixth Schedule in the case of a principal agent, the
provisions of clauses 2 and 4 of Part B of the said Schedule in the case of a chief agent, and
the provisons of clauses 2 and 3 of the Part C of the said Schedule in the case of a special
agent, have been complied with, and on payment of the prescribed free, which shall not be
more than twenty-five rupees, in the case of a principal agent or a chief agent, and ten
rupees in the case of a special agent, and an additional fee of the prescribed amount not
exceeding five rupees by way of the penalty, in cases where the application for renewal of
the certificate does not reach the issuing authority before the date on which the certificate
ceases to remain in force:
Provided that, where the applicant is an individual, he does not suffer from any of the
disqualifications mentioned in clauses (b) to (d) of sub-section (4) of section 42, and where
the applicant is a company or a firm, any of its directors or partners does not suffer from
any of the said disqualifications.
(4) Where it is found that the principal agent, chief agent or special agent being an
individual is, or being a company or firm contains a director or partner who is suffering from
any of the disqualifications mentioned in sub-section (4) of section 42, without prejudice to
any other penalty to which he may be liable, the Authority shall, and where a principal agent,
chief agent or special agent has contravened any of the provisions of this Act may, cancel the
certificate issued under this section to such principal agent, chief agent or special agent.
(5) The authority which issued any certificate under this section may issue a duplicate
certificate to replace a certificate lost, destroyed or mutilated on payment of the prescribed
fee, which shall not be more than two rupees.
(6) Any person who acts as a principal agent, chief agent or special agent, without
holding a certificate issued under this section to act as such, shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees, and any insurer or any person acting on behalf of
an insurer, who appoints as a principal agent, chief agent or special agent any person not
entitled to act as such or transacts any insurance business in India through and such person,
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
(7) Where the person contravening sub-section ( 6) is a company or a firm, then,
without prejudice to any other proceedings which may be taken against the company or
firm, every director, manager, secretary or any other officer of the company, and every
partner of the firm who is knowingly a party to such contravention shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
(8) The provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7) shall not take effect until the expiry of
six months from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950 .
(9) No insurer shall, on or after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 2002, appoint or transact any insurance business in India through any principal agent,
chief agent or special agent.
42B.  (1) No insurer shall, after the expiration of seven years from the commencement
of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, appoint, or transact any insurance business in
India, through a principal agent.
(2) Every contract between an insurer and a principal agent shall be in writing and the
terms contained in part A of the Sixth Schedule shall be deemed to be incorporated in, and
form part of, every such contract.
(3) No insurer shall, after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendmen) Act,
1950, appoint any person as a principal agent except in a presidency town unless the
appointment is by way of renewal of any contract subsisting at such commencement.
Regulation of
employment of
principal
agents.
47 of 1950.
47 of 1950.
47 of 1950.

93
(4) Within sixty days of the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950,
every principal agent shall file with the insurer concerned a full list of insurance agents
employed by  him indicating the terms of the contract between the principal agent and each
of such insurance agents, and, if any principal agent fails to file such a list within the period
specified, any commission payable to such principal agent on premiums received from the
date of expiry of the said period of sixty days until the date of the filing of the said list shall,
notwithstanding anything in any contract to the contrary, cease to be so payable.
(5) A certified copy of every contract as is referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall be
furnished by the insurer to the Authority within thirty days of his entering into such contract,
and intimation of any change in any such contract shall be furnished by the insurer with full
particulars thereof to the Authority within thirty days of the making of any such change.
(6) If the commission due to any insurance agent in respect of any general insurance
business procured by such agent is not paid by the principal agent for any reason, the
insurer may pay the insurance agent the commission so due and recover the amount so paid
from the principal agent concerned.
(7) Every contract as is referred to in sub-section (2), subsisting at commencement of
the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950 shall, with respect to terms regarding remuneration,
be deemed to have been so altered as to be in accordance with the provisions of sub-section
(4) of section 40A.
(8) If any dispute arises as to whether a person is or was a principal agent, the matter
shall be referred to the Authority, whose decision shall be final.
(9) Every insurer shall maintain a register in which the name and address of every
principal agent appointed by him, the date of such appointment and the date, if any, on
which the appointment ceased shall be entered.
42C.  (1) Every contract between an insurer carrying on life insurance business and a
chief agent shall be in writing, and shall specify the area (not being less in extent than a
district or the equivalent thereof) for which the chief agent is appointed, and the terms
contained in Part B of the Sixth Schedule shall be deemed to be incorporated in, and form
part of every such contract.
(2) No chief agent shall, either directly or through insurance agents or special agents
employed by or through him procure life insurance business for the insurer in any area
outside the area for which he has been appointed or in any area for which another chief
agent has been appointed or in any area in which the head office or any branch office of the
insurer is operating and, neither the head office or any branch office of the insurer shall
operate in any area for which a chief agent has been appointed:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to prohibit the head office
of an insurer which had been operating at the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1950 for a period of not less than ten years before such commencement within the
municipal limits of any town where the head office is situate, and a chief agent who, in
pursuance of an agreement in writing, had been operating for a similar period within such
limits, from continuing to operate within the said limits:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to prohibit an
insurance agent from procuring life insurance business in or from any area and submitting
the proposals direct to the principal office of the insurer in India.
(3) Within sixty days of the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950
every chief agent shall file with the insurer concerned a full list of the insurance agents
employed by him, indicating the terms of the contract between the cheif agent and each of
such insurance agents and the business secured by each of such agents, and if any chief
agent fails to file such a list with the period specified, any commission payable to such
chief agent on premiums received from the date of the expiry of the said period of sixty
days until the date of the filing of the said list, shall, notwithstanding anything in any contract
to the contrary, cease to be so payable.
Regulation of
employment of
chief agents
and special
agents.
47 of 1950.
47 of 1950.
47 of 1950.
47 of 1950.

94
(4) Every contract between an insurer carrying on life insurance business and special
agent, or between a chief agent of such insurer and a special agent, shall be in writing and
the terms contained in Part C of the Sixth Schedule shall be deemed to be incorporated in,
and form part of, every such contract:
Provided that the Authority may, in the case of a contract between a co-operative life
insurance society as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 95 and a co-operative
society registered under the Indian Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or under any other
law for the time being in force and acting as a special agent, alter, to such extent as he
thinks fit, all or any of the said terms.
(5) A certified copy of every contract as is referred to in sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section (4) shall be furnished by the insurer or the chief agent to the Authority within thirty
days of his entering into such contract, and intimation of any change in any such contract
shall be furnished by the insurer or the chief agent with full particulars thereof to the Authority
within thirty days of the making of any such change.
(6) No such contract as is referred to in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 4) shall be
entered into or renewed for a period exceeding ten years at any one time, and, notwithstanding
the terms of any contract to the contrary, no option to renew any such contract given to any
of the parties shall be enforceable with the consent of the other.
(7) Every contract between an insurer and person acting on behalf of such insurer
who before the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, has been
employing insurance agents for the purpose of life insurance business, which is subsisting
on such commencement, shall terminate after the expiration of ten years from such
commencement, if it does not terminate earlier:
Provided that every such contract shall be modified by the parties before the Ist day
of January, 1951, to bring it into conformity with this Act, and any such modification shall—
(i) as respects remuneration,whether in respect of business already procured or
in respect of business to be procured thereafter, be such as may be mutually agreed
upon between the parties, subject, in the case of remuneration payable on business
procured before such commencement, to a maximum of an over-riding commission
of two and a half per cent. plus a further commission not exceeding three-quarters
per cent. On premiums in respect of which no commission is payable to any insurance
agent;
(ii) be deemed to include all the terms specified in Part B or Part C of the Sixth
Schedule, as the case may be:
Provided further that, in the event of any dispute as to the terms of any fresh contract,
the matter shall be referred to arbitration.
(8) Any such contract as is referred to in sub-section (7) which was subsisting on the
1st day of January, 1949, but has terminated or has been terminated before the commencement
of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, shall be subject to the maximum limits specified
in clause (i) of the proviso to sub-section ( 7) as respects remuneration, if any, payable on
business procured before the termination of the contract.
(9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent any special agent from receiving
any renewal commission on policies effected through him as an insurance agent at any time
before his appointment as such special agent.
(10) If any dispute arises as to whether a person is or was a chief agent or a special
agent for the purposes of this Act, the matter shall be referred to the Authority whose
decision shall be final.
(11) Every insurer shall maintain a register in which the name and address of every
chief agent appointed by him, the date on which the appointment was made and the date, if
any, on which the appointment ceased shall be entered, and a separte register in which
2 of 1912.
47 of 1950.
47 of 1950.

95
similar particulars relating to every special agent shall be entered, and every chief agent
shall maintain a register in which similar particulars relating to every special agent appointed
by him shall be entered.
42D.  (1) The Authority or an officer authorised by it in this behalf shall, in the
manner determined by the regulations made by the Authority and on payment of the fees
determined by the regulations made by the Authority, issue to any perosn making an
application in the manner determined by the regulations, and not suffering from any of the
disqualifications herein mentioned, a licence to act as an intermediary or an insurance
intermediary under this Act:
Provided that,—
(a) in the case of an individual, he does suffer from any of the disqualifications
mentioned in sub-section (4) of section 42, or
(b) in the case of a company, or firm, any of its directors of partners does not
suffer from any of the said disqualifications.
* * * * *
(3) A licence issued under this section shall remain in force for a period of three years
only from the date of issue, but shall, if the applicant, being an individual does not, or being a
company or firm any of its directors or partners does not suffer from any of the disqualifications
mentioned in clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of sub-section (4) of section 42 and the application
for renewal of licence reaches the issuing authority at least thirty days before the date on which
the licence ceases to remain in force, be renewed for a period of three years at any one time on
payment of the fee, determined by regulations, made by the Authority and additional fee for an
amount determined by the regulations, not exceeding one hundred rupees by way of penalty, if
the application of renewal of the licence does not reach the issuing authority at least thirty days
before the date on which the licence ceases to remain in force.
* * * * *
42E. (1) No intermediary or insurance intermediary shall be paid or contract to be
paid by way of commission, fee or as remuneration in any form, an amount exceeding thirty
per cent of the premium payable as may be specified by the regulations made by the Authority,
in respect of any policy or policies effected through him:
Provided that the Authority may specify different amounts payable by way of
commission, fee or as remuneration to an intermediary or insurance intermediary or different
classes of business of insurance.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act, the Authority may, by
the regulations made in this behalf, specify the requirements of capital form of business
and other conditions to act as an intermediary or insurance intermediary.
* * * * *
43.  Every insurer and every person who acting on behalf of an insurer employs
insurance agents shall maintain a register showing the name and address of every  insurance
agents appointed by him and the date on which his appointment began and the date, if any,
on which his appointment ceased.
44.  (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any contract between
any person and an insurance agent, providing for the forfeiture or stoppage of payment of
renewal commission to such insurance agent no such person shall, in respect of life insurance
business transacted in India, refuse payment to an insurance agent of commission due to
him on renewal premium under the agreement by reason only of the termination of his
agreement, except for fraud:
Provided that—
(a) such agent ceases to act for the insurer concerned after the Central
Government has notified in the Official Gazette that it is satisfied that the circumstances
Issue of licence
to intermediary
or insurance
intermediary.
Register of
insurance
agents.
Prohibition of
cessation of
payments of
commission
Commission,
brokerage or
fee payable to
intermediary or
insurance
intermediary.

96
in which the said insurer is placed are such as to justify the agent's ceasing to act for
him; or
(b) such agent has served the insurer continually and exclusively in respect of
life  insurance business for at least five years and policies assuring a total sum of not
less than fifty thousand rupees effected through him for the insurer were in force on
a date one year before his ceasing to act as such agent for the insurer, and that the
commission on renewal premiums due to him does not exceed four per cent. in any
case; or
(c) such agent has served the insurer continually and exclusively for at least ten
years and after his ceasing to act as such agent he does not directly or indirectly
solicit or procure insurance business for any other person.
Explanation.— For the  purposes of this sub-section, service of an insurance agent
under a chief agent of the insurer, whether before or after the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1950, shall be deemed to be service under the insurer.
(2) Any commission payable to an insurance agent, under the provisions of clauses
(b) and (c) of the proviso to sub-section ( 1) shall, notwithstanding the death of the agent,
continue to be payable to his heirs for so long as such commission would have been payable
had such insurance agent been alive.
44A.  For the purposes of ensuring compliance with the provisions of sections 40A,
40B, 40C, 42B and 42C the Authority may by notice—
(a) require from an insurer, principal agent, chief agent or special agent such
information, certified if so required by an auditor or actuary, as he may consider
necessary;
(b) require an insurer, principal agent, chief agent or special agent to submit for
his examination at the principal place of business of the insurer in India any book of
account, register or other document, or to supply any statement which may be specified
in the notice;
(c) examine any officer of an insurer or a principal agent, chief agent or special
agent on oath, in relation to any such information, book, register, document or statement
and administer the oath accordingly,
and an insurer, principal agent, chief agent or special agent shall comply with any such
requirement within such time as may be specified in the notice.
S
PECIAL PROVISIONS OF LAW
45.  No policy of life insurance effected before the commencement of this Act shall
after the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this Act and no policy of
life insurance effected after the coming into force of this Act shall after the expiry of two
years from the date on which it was effected, be called in question by an insurer on the
ground that a statement made in the proposal for insurance or in any report of a medical
officer, or referee, or friend of the insured, or in any other document leading to the issue
of the policy, was inaccurate or false, unless the insurer, shows that such statement was
on a material matter or suppressed facts which it was material to disclose and that it was
fraudulently made by the policy-holder and that the policy-holder knew at the time of
making if that the statement was false or that it suppressed facts which it was material to
disclose:
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the insurer from calling for proof
of age at any time if  he  is entitled to do so, and no policy shall be deemed to be called in
question merely because the terms of the policy are adjusted on subsequent proof that the
age of the life insured was incorrectly stated in the proposal.
* * * * *
47A.  (1) In the event of any dispute relating to the settlement of a claim on a policy
of life insurance assuring a sum not exceeding two thousand rupees (exclusive of any profit
Power to call for
information.
Policy not to be
called in
question on
ground of mis-
statement after
two years.
Claims on small
life insurance
policies.
47 of 1950.

97
or bonus not being a guaranteed profit or bonus) issued by an insurer in respect of insurance
business transacted in India,  arising between a claimant under the policy and the insurer
who issued the policy or has otherwise assumed liability in respect thereof, the dispute may
at the option of the claimant be referred to the Authority for decision, and the Authority
may after giving an opportunity to the parties to be heard and after making such further
inquiries as it may think fit, decide the matter.
(2) The decision of the Authority under this sub-section shall be final and shall not be
called in question in any court, and may be executed by the court which would have been
competent to decide the dispute if it had not been referred to the Authority as if it were a
decree passed by that court.
(3) There shall be charged and collected in  respect of the duties of the Authority
under this section such fees whether by way of percentage or otherwise as may be prescribed.
48.  (1) Where the insurer is a company incorporated under the Indian Companies
Act, 1913 or under the Indian Companies Act, 1882, or under the Indian Companies Act,
1866, or under any Act repealed thereby and carries on the business of life insurance, not
less than one-fourth of the whole number of the directors of the company the number to be
elected not being less than two in any case shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in the Articles of Association of the company, be elected in the prescribed manner by the
holders of policies of life insurance issued by the company.
(2) Only and all persons holding otherwise than as assignees policies of life insurance
issued by the company of such minimum amount and having been in force for such minimum
period as may be prescribed shall unless disqualified under sub-section (2A) be eligible for
election as directors under sub-section  (1), and only and all persons holding policies of life
insurance issued by the company and having been in force at the time of the election for not
less than six months shall be eligible to vote at such elections:
Provided that the assignment of a policy to the person who took out the policy shall
not disqualify that person for being eligible for election as a director under sub-section (1).
(2A) A person shall be ineligible for election as a director under sub-section ( 1) of
any company if he is a director, officer, employee, or legal or technical adviser of that
company or of any other insurer, and shall cease to be a director under sub-section ( 1) if
after election he acquires any disqualification specified in this sub-section or no longer
holds the qualifications  required by  sub-section ( 2):
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall disqualify a person who is an elected
director under sub-section ( 1) and is not otherwise disqualified under this sub-section,
from being re-elected:
Provided further that the Authority may exempt any director of a subsidiary company
of the insurer from any disqualification imposed by this sub-section.
(3) The Central Government may, for such period, or to such extent and subject to such
conditions as may be specified by it in this behalf, exempt from the operation of this section—
(a) any Mutual Insurance Comapny as defined in clause (a) of sub-section (1)
of section 95, in respect of which the Authority certifies that in its opinion owing to
the conditions governing membership of the company or to the nature of the insurance
contracts undertaken by it the application of the provisions of this section to the
company is impracticable, or
(b) any company in respect of which the Authority certifies that in its opinion
the company, having taken all reasonable steps to achieve compliance with the
provisions of this section, has been unable to obtain the required number of directors
with the required qualifications.
(4) This section shall not take effect, in respect of any company in existence at the
commencement of this Act, until the expiry of one year therefrom, and in respect of any
company incorporated after the commencement of this Act, until the expiry of two years
from the date of registration to carry on life insurance business.
Directors of
insurers being
companies.7 of 1913.
6 of 1882.
10 of 1866.

98
48A.  No insurance agent who solicits or procures life insurance business, and no
chief agent or special agent, shall be eligible to be or remain a director of any insurance
company carrying on life insurance business:
Provided that any director holding office at the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1946, shall not become ineligible to remain a director by reason of this
section until the expiry of six months from the commencement of that Act.
* * * * *
49. (1) No insurer, being an insurer specified in sub-clause ( a) (ii) or sub-clause (b)
of clause (9) of section 2, who carries on the business of life insurance or any other class or
sub-class of insurance business to which section 13 applies shall, for the purpose of declaring
or paying any dividend to shareholders or any bonus to policy-holders  or of making any
payment in service of any debentures, utilize directly or indirectly any portion of the life
insurance found or of the fund of such other class or sub-class of insurance business, as the
case may be, except a surplus shown in the valuation balance-sheet in such form as may be
specified by the regulations made by the Authority submitted to the Authority as part of the
abstract referred to in section 15 as a result of an actuarial valuation of the assets and
liabilities of the insurer; nor shall he increase such surplus by contributions out of any
reserve fund or otherwise unless such contributions have been brought in as revenue through
the revenue account applicable to that class or sub-class of insurance business on or before
the date of the valuation aforesaid, except when the reserve fund is made up solely of
transfers from similar surpluses disclosed by valuations in respect of which returns have
been submitted to the Authority under section 15 of this Act or to the Central Government
under section 11 of the Indian Life Assurance Companies Act, 1912:
Provided that payments made out of any such surplus in service of any debentures
shall not exceed fifty per cent. of such surplus including any payment by way of interest on
the debentures, and interest paid on the debentures shall not exceed ten per cent. of any
such surplus except when the interest paid on the debentures is offset against the interest
credited to the fund or funds concerned in deciding the interest basis adopted in the valuation
disclosing the aforesaid surplus:
Provided further that the share of any such surplus allocated to or reserved for the
shareholders (including any amount for the payment of dividends guaranteed to them,
whether by way of first charge or otherwise) shall not exceed such sums as may be specified
by the Authority and such share shall in no case exceed ten per cent. of such surplus in case
of participating policies and in other cases the whole thereof.
*       *      *      *       *
52. ( 1) No insurer shall after the commencement of this Act begin, or after three
years from that date continue to carry on, any business upon the dividing principle, that is
to say, on the principle that the benefit secured by a policy is not fixed but depends either
wholly or partly on the results of a distribution of certain sums amongst policies becoming
claims within certain time-limits, or on the principle that the premiums payable by a policy-
holder depend wholly or partly on the number of policies becoming claims within certain
time-limits:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent an insurer from
allocating bonuses to holders of policies of life insurance as a result of a periodical actuarial
valuation either as reversionary additions to the sums insured or as immediate cash bonuses
or otherwise:
Provided further that an insurer who continues to carry on insurance business on the
dividing principle after the commencement of this Act shall withhold from distribution a
sum of not less than forty per cent. of the premiums received during each year after the
commencement of this Act in which such business is continued so as to make up the amount
required for investment under section 27.
(2) On the expiry of the period of three years referred to in sub-section (1), or on the
insurer's ceasing before such expiry but at any time after the commencement of the Insurance
Prohibition of
business on
dividing
principle.
6 of 1912.
Restriction on
dividends and
bonuses.
Life insurance
agents not to
be directors of
life insurance
companies.
6 of 1946.

99
(Amendment) Act, 1941 to carry on business on the dividing principle, the insurer shall
forthwith cause an investigation to be made by an actuary, who shall determine the amount
accumulated out of the contributions received from the holders of all policies to which the
dividing principle applies and the extent of the claims of those policy-holders against the
realisable assets of the insurer, and shall, before the expiration of six months from the date
on which he is entrusted with the investigation, make recommendations regarding the
distribution, whether by cash payments or by the allocation of paid-up policies or by a
combination of both methods, of such assets as he finds to appertain to such policy-holders;
and the insurer shall, before the expiry of six months from the date on which the actuary
makes his recommendations, distribute such assets in accordance with those
recommendations.
(3) Where at any time prior to the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1941, an insurer has ceased to carry on business on the dividing principle, the insurer
shall, before the expiration of two months from the commencement of that Act, report to
the Authority the measures taken or proposed by him for the distribution among holders of
policies to which the dividing principle applies of the assets due to them; and the Authority
may either sanction such measures or refuse its sanction, and, if it refuses its sanction or if
the insurer does not report to him as required by this sub-section the provisions of sub-
section (2) shall apply to the insurer forthwith.
M
ANAGEMENT BY ADMINISTRATOR
52A.  (1) If at any time the Authority has reason to believe that an insurer carrying on
life insurance business is acting in a manner likely to be prejudicial to the interests of
holders of life insurance policies, he may, after giving such opportunity to the insurer to be
heard as he thinks fit, make a report thereon to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government, if it is of opinion after considering the report that it is
necessary or proper to do so, may appoint an Administrator to manage the affairs of the
insurer under the direction and control of the Authority.
(3) The Administrator shall receive such remuneration as the Central Government
may direct and the Central Government may at any time cancel the appointment and appoint
some other person as Administrator.
* * * * *
52BB. (1)* * * * *
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Asministrator under sub-section
(1) may, within fourteen days from the date on which the order is served on him, appeal
against such order to the Central Government and the Central Government may pass such
order thereon as it thinks fit.
(3) An order made by the Administrator under sub-section ( 1) shall, subject to any
other order made by the Central Government on appeal, be in force for a period of three
months from the date of the order unless, before the expiry of the said period, an application
is made under sub-section (1) of section 106 to  the court competent to exercise jurisdiction
under that sub-section and when such an application is made, the order shall, subject to any
order made by that court, continue in force as if it were an order of attachment made by that
court in proceeding under that section.
* * * * *
When
Administrator
for manage-
ment of
insurance
business may
be appointed.
Powers of
Administrator
respecting
property liable
to attachment
under section
106.
13 of 1941.
13 of 1941.

100
(10)  Save as provided in this section or in section 106, and notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force,—
(a) no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie in any court to set aside or modify
any order  of the Administrator or the Central Government made under this section, and
* * * * *
52D. If at any time, on a report made by the authority in this behalf, it appears to the
Central Government that the purpose of the order appointing the Administrator has been
fulfilled or that for any reason it is undesirable that the order of appointment should remain
in force, the Central Government may cancel the order and thereupon the Administrator
shall be divested of the management of insurance business which shall, unless otherwise
directed by the Central Government, again vest in the person in whom it was vested
immediately prior to the date of appointment of the Administrator.
52E. Any order or decision of the Central Government made in pursuance of section
52A or section 52D shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court.
52F.  If any director or officer of the insurer of any other person fails to deliver to the
Admiistrator any books of account, registers or any other documents, in his custody relating
to the business of the insurer, the management of which has vested in the Administrator, or
retains any property of such insurer, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
52G. (1) * * * * *
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the
Authority for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done under section 52A, section 52B, or section 52D.
A
CQUISITION OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF INSURERS IN CERTAIN CASES
52H. (1) If, upon receipt of a report from the Authority, the Central Government is
satisfied that an insurer,—
(a) has persistently failed to comply with—
(i) any direction given to him under section 34, section 34F or section 34G, or
(ii) any order made under section 34E; or
(b) is being managed in a manner detrimental to the public interest or to the
interests of his policy-holders, or share-holders, and that—
(i) in the public interest, or
(ii) in the interests of the policy-holders or share-holders of such insurer,
it is necessary to acquire the undertaking of such insurer, the Central Government may, by
notified order, acquire the undertaking of such insurer (hereafter in this section and in
sections 52-I, 52J and 52N and in the Eighth Schedule referred to as the acquired insurer,
with effect from such date as may be specified in the order (hereinafter in this section and
in sections 52-I and 52J and in the Eighth Schedule referred to as the appointed day):
Provided that no undertaking of an insurer shall be so acquired unless such insurer
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed action.
Penalty for
withholding
documents of
property from
Administrator.
Termination of
appointment of
Administrator.
Finality of
decision
appointing
Administrator.
Protection of
action taken
under sections
52A to 52D.
Power of
Central
Government to
acquire
undertakings
of insurers in
certain cases.

101
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and of sections 52-I to 52N—
(a) "notified order" means an order published in the Official Gazette,
(b) "undertaking", in relation to an insurer incorporated outside India, means
the undertaking of the insurer in India.
(2) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section and in sections 52-I to
52M, on the appointed day all the assets and liabilities of the undertaking of the acquired
insurer shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government.
(3) The assets and liabilities of the undertaking of the acquired insurer shall be deemed
to include all rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, whether movable
or immovable, including, in particular cash balances, reserve funds, investments, deposits
and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such property, as may be in the
possession of, or held by, the acquired insurer immediately before the appointed day and
all books, accounts and documents relating thereto, and shall also be deemed to include all
debts, liabilities and obligations, of whatever kind, then existing of the acquired insurer.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Central Government
may, if it is satisfied that all the assets and liabilities of the undertaking of the acquired
insurer should, instead of vesting in the Central Government, or continuing to so vest, vest
in a corporation or company, whether established under the scheme made under section 52-I
or not (hereafter in this section and in sections 52-I to 52N and in the Eighth Schedule
referred to as the acquiring insurer), by order, direct that the assets and liabilities of the said
undertaking, shall vest in the acquiring insurer, either on the publication of the notified
order or on such other date as may be specified in this behalf in the direction.
(5) Where the undertaking of the acquired insurer vests in an acquiring insurer under
sub-section (4), the acquiring insurer shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed
to have become the transferee of the acquired insurer and all the rights and liabilities in
election to the acquired insurer shall, on and from the date of such vesting be deemed to
have been the rights and liabilities of such acquiring insurer.
(6) Unless otherwise expressly provided by or under this section or sections 52-I to
52M, all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, power-of-attorney, grants of legal
representation and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having effect
immediately before the appointed day and to which the acquired insurer is a party or which
are in favour of the acquired insurer shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour,
of the Central Government or, as the case may be, the acquiring insurer, and may be enforced
or acted upon as fully and effectually as if in the place of the acquired insurer the Central
Government or the acquiring insurer had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued
in favour of the Central Government or the acquiring insurer, as the case may be.
(7) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature,
is pending by or against the acquired insurer, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or
be, in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertaking of the
acquired insurer or of anything contained in this section or in sections 52-I to 52M, but the
suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against
the Central Government or the acquiring insurer, as the case may be.
52.-I (1) The Central Government may make a scheme for carrying out the purposes
of sections 52H and 52J to 52M (both inclusive) in relation to the acquired insurer.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the
said scheme may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) transfer of the undertaking, including the property, assets and liabilities of
the acquired insurer to an acquiring insurer, and the capital, constitution, name and
office of the acquiring insurer;
(b) the constitution of the first board of management (by whatever name called)
of the acquiring insurer and all such matters in connection therewith or incidental
thereto as the Central Government may consider to be necessary or expedient;
Power of
Central
Government to
make Scheme.

102
(c) the continuance of the services of all the employees of the acquired insurer
(excepting such of them as, not being workmen within the meaning of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947, are specifically mentioned in the scheme) in the Central
Government or in the acquiring insurer, as the case may be, on the same terms and
conditions, so far as may be, as are specified in clauses ( i) and (j) of sub-section (2)
of section 37A so far as they may apply;
(d) the continuance of the rights of any person who, on the appointed day, is
entitled to, or is in receipt of, a pension or other superannuation or compassionate
allowance or benefit from the acquired insurer or any provident, pension or other
fund or any authority administering such fund to be paid by, and to receive from the
Central Government or the acquiring insurer, as the case may be, or any provident,
pension or other fund or any authority administering such fund, the same pension,
allowance or benefit so long as he observes the conditions on which the pension,
allowance or benefit was granted, and if any question arises whether he had so observed
such condition, the question shall be determined by the Central Government and the
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final;
(e) the manner of payment to the acquired insurer in full satisfaction of his
claim in relation to the compensation payable in accordance with the provisions of
section 52J;
(f) the provision, if any, for completing the effectual transfer to the Central
Government or the acquiring insurer of any asset or liability which forms part of the
undertaking of the acquired  insurer in any country outside India;
(g) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as may be necessary
to secure that the transfer of the undertaking, property, assets and liabilities of the
acquired insurer to the Central Government or the acquiring insurer, as the case may
be, is effectual and complete.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and to,
amend or vary any scheme made under this section.
(4) Every scheme made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.
(5) Copies of every scheme made under this section shall be laid before each House
of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made.
(6) The provisions of sections 52H and 52J to 52M and of any scheme made under
this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
other provision of this Act or in any other law or any agreement, award or other instrument
for the time being in force.
52J. (1) The acquired insurer shall be given by the Central Government or the acquiring
insurer, as the case may be, such compensation in respect of the transfer of the undertaking
of the acquired insurer as is determined in accordance with the principles contained in the
Eighth Schedule.
(2) The amount of compensation to be given in accordance with the principles
contained in the Eighth Scheduled shall be determined, in the first instance, by the Central
Government or the acquiring insurer, as the case may be, in consultation with the Authority,
and shall be offered by it to the acquired insurer, in full satisfaction thereof.
(3) If the amount of compensation offered in terms of sub-section (2) is not acceptable
to the acquired insurer, he may, before such date as may be notified by the Central
Government in the Official Gazette, request the Central Government in writing to have the
matter referred to the Tribunal constituted under section 52K.
(4) If before the date notified under sub-section (3) the Central Government does not
receive request as provided in that sub-section, the amount of compensation offered under
sub-section (2), or where a reference has been made to the Tribunal, the amount determined
by it, shall be compensation payable under sub-section  ( 1) and shall be final and binding
on all the parties concerned.
Compensation
to be given to
the acquired
insurer.
14 of 1947.

103
(5) Where the Central Government does not receive request as provided in sub-section
(3), the compensation payable in pursuance of the provisions of this section shall become
due for payment on the expiry of one year from the appointed day, and where a reference
has been made to the Tribunal under sub-section (3), the amount determined by the Tribunal
as compensation shall become due for payment on the expiry of one year from the appointed
day or on the date of decision of the Tribunal, whichever is earlier.
(6) If between the appointed day and the date on which the compensation becomes
due in pursuance of sub-section ( 5), any facts come to light which call for revision of the
amount of the compensation, the necessary modification of the amount of the compensation
shall be made and the amount of the compensation so determined shall be compensation
payable in pursuance of sub-section ( 1).
(7) There shall also be paid simple interest at the rate of three per cent. per annum on
the amount of the compensation for the period from the appointed day to the date on which
payment of the compensation becomes due.
52K. (1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of sections 52H to 52J,
constitute a Tribunal which shall consist of a chairman and two other members.
(2) The chairman shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or of
the Supreme Court and of the two other members, one shall be a person who, in the opinion
of the Central Government has had experience of matters connected with general insurance
and the other shall be a person who is chartered accountant within the meaning of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
(3) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the office of the chairman or any other
member of the Tribunal, the Central Government may fill the vacancy by appointing another
person thereto in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 2), and any proceeding
may be continued before the Tribunal so constituted from the stage at which the vacancy
occurred.
(4) The Tribunal may, for the purpose of determining any compensation payable
under section 52J, choose one or more persons having special knowledge or experience of
any relevant matter to assist it in the determination of such compensation.
52 L.  ( 1) The Tribunal shall have the powers of a Civil Court, while trying a suit,
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or in any other law for the
time being in force, the Tribunal shall not compel the Central Government or the Authority—
(a) to produce any books of account, or other documents which the Central
Government or the Authority claims to be a confidential nature;
(b) to make any such books or documents a part of the record of the proceedings
before the Tribunal;
(c) to give inspection of any such books or documents to any party before it
and to any other person.
(3) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Tribunal shall
be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.
38 of 1949.
Constitution of
the Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
Tribunal to
have powers of
Civil Court.
45 of 1860.
5 of 1898.

104
52M.  (1) The Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
(2) The Tribunal may hold the whole or any part of its inquiry in camera.
(3) Any clerical or arithmetical error in any order of the Tribunal or any error arising
therein from any accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the Tribunal
either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.
52N.  Where any acquired insurer, being a company, has in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, collected and distributed any monies paid to him by the Central
Government or the acquiring insurer, as the case may be, by way of compensation or
otherwise, and has also complied with any directions given to him by the Central Government
or the acquiring insurer, as the case may be, for the purpose of securing that the ownership
of any property or any right is effectively transferred to the Central Government or the
acquiring insurer, as the case may be, the Central Government may, on application being
made to it in this behalf by such insurer, grant a certificate to the insurer that there is no
reason  for the continued existence of the insurer and upon the publication of such certificate,
the insurer shall be dissolved.
W
INDING UP
53.  (1) The Tribunal may order the winding up in accordance with the Companies
Act, 1956 of any insurance company and the provisions of the Act shall subject to the
provisions of this Act, apply accordingly.
(2) In addition to the grounds on which such an order may be based, the Tribunal may
order the winding up of an insurance compnay—
(a) * * * * *
(b) if the Authority who is hereby authorized to do so, applies in this behalf to
the Tribunal on any of the following grounds, namely:—
(i) that the company has failed to deposit or to keep deposited with the
Reserve Bank of India the amounts required by section 7 or section 98;
* * * *
58. (1)* * * * *
(4) An order of the Tribunal confirming a scheme under this section whereby the
memorandum of a company is altered with respect to its object shall as respects the alteration
have effect as if it were on order confirmed under section 12 of the Indian Companies Act,
1913, and the provisions of sections 15 and 16 of that Act shall apply accordingly.
59.  In the winding up of an insurance company  otherwise than in a case of which
section 58 applies and in the insolvency of any other insurer the liquidator or assignee as
the case may be shall apply to the Tribunal for an order for the return of the deposit made
by the company or the insurer as the case may be under section 7 or section 98 and the
Tribunal shall on such application order a return of the deposit subject to such terms and
conditions as it shall direct.
* * * * *
S
PECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXTERNAL COMPANIES
62. Where by the law or practice of any country outside India in which an insurer
carrying on insurance business in India is constituted, incorporated or domiciled, insurance
companies incorporated in India are required as a condition of carrying on insurance business
in that country to comply with any special requirement whether as to the keeping of deposits
or assets in that country or otherwise which is not imposed upon insurers of that country
under this Act, the Central Government shall, if satisfied of the existence of such special
requirement, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the same requirement, or
requirements as similar thereto as may, be, shall be imposed upon insurers of that country
as a condition of carrying on the business of insurance in India.
Procedure of
the Tribunal.
Special
provisions for
the dissolution
of acquired
insurers.
Winding up by
the Court. 1 of  1956.
Scheme for
partial winding
up of insurance
companies.
Return of
deposits.
Power of
Central
Government to
impose
reciprocal
disabilities on
non-Indian
Companies.
7 of 1913.

105
63.  Every insurer, having his principal place of business or domicile outside India,
who establishes a place of business within India,  or appoints a representative in India with
the object of obtaining insurance business, shall, within three months from the establishment
of such place of business or the appointment of such representative, file with the Authority—
(a) a certified copy of the charter, statutes, deed of settlement or memorandum
and articles or other instrument constituting or defining the constitution of the insurer
and, if the instrument is not written in the English language, a certified translation
thereof,
(b) a list of the directors, if the insurer is a company,
(c) the name and address of some one or more persons resident in India authorised
to accept on behalf of the insurer service of process and any notice required to be
served on the insurer, together with a copy of the power-of-attorney granted to him,
(d) the full address of the principal office of the insurer in India,
(e) a statement of the classes of insurance business to be carried on by the
insurer, and
(f) a statement verified by an affidavit setting forth the special requirements, if
any, of the nature specified in section 62 imposed in the country of origin of the
insurer on Indian nationals,
and, in the event of any alteration being made in the address of the principal office or in the
classes of business to be carried on, or in any instrument here referred to, or in the name of
any of the persons here referred to, or in the matters specified in clause ( f) above, the
company shall forthwith furnish to the Authority particulars of such alteration.
64.  Every insurer having his principal place of business or domicile outside India
shall keep at his principal office in India such books of account, registers and documents as
will enable the accounts, statements and abstracts which he is required under this Act to
furnish to the Authority in respect of the insurance business transacted by him, in India to
be compiled and, if necessary, checked by the Authority and shall furnish to the Authority
on or before the last day of January in every calendar year a certificate from an auditor to
the effect that the said books of account, register and documents are being kept as required
at the principal office of the insurer in India.
PART II A
I
NSURANCE ASSOCIATION OF INDIA, COUNCILS OF THE ASSOCIATION AND COMMITTEES THEREOF
64A.  (1) All insurers carrying on insurance business in India at the commencement
of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, all insurers who may after such commencement
begin to carry on insurance business in India, and, if the Central Government, by notification
in the Official Gazette, so declares all provident societies carrying on insurance business in
India on the date of such notification and all provident societies which may begin to carry
on insurance business in India after such date are hereby consituted body corporate by the
name of the Insurance Association of India.
(2) All insurers and provident societies incorporated or domiciled in India shall be
known as members of the Insurance Association of India, and all insurers and provident
societies incorporated or domiciled elsewhere than in India shall be known as associate
members of that Association.
(3) The Insurance Association of India shall have perpetual succession and a common
seal and shall have power to acquire, hold and dispose of all property, both movable and
immovable, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
Particulars to
be filed by
insurers
established
outside India.
47 of 1950.
Books to be
kept by
insurers
established
outside India.
Incorporation of
the Insurance
Association of
India.

106
64B.  (1) The Authority shall take or cause to be taken through such agency as he
thinks fit such steps as may be necessary to have the names of all insurers and provident
societies, who or which are entitled to have their names entered in the register of members
and associate members of the Insurance Association of India maintained for this purpose
entered therein.
(2) Where any insurer or provident society has ceased to carry on business as such,
the Authority shall cause such steps to be taken as may be necessary to have the name of
such insurer or provident society, as the case may be, removed from the register.
64C.  There shall be two Councils of the Insurance Association of India, namely:—
(a) the Life Insurance Council consisting of all the members and associate
members of the Association who carry on life insurance business in India, and
(b) the General Insurance Council consisting of all the members and associate
members of the Association who carry on general insurance business in India.
64D.  It shall be lawful for any member of the Life Insurance Council or the General
Insurance Council to authorise any individual, whether an officer of the insurer or not, to
act as the representative of such member at any meeting of the Council concerned or to
stand as a candidate for any election held by that Council.
* * * * *
64F.  (1) The Executive Committee of the Life Insurance Council shall consist of the
following persons, namely:—
(a) two official nominated by the Authority one as the chairman and the other
as a member;
(b) eight representatives of members of the Insurance Association of India
carrying on life insurance business elected in their individual capacity by the said
members in such manner, from such groups of members and from such areas as may
be specified by the Authority.
(c) one non-official not connected with any insurance business, nominated by
the Authority; and
(d) five persons connected with life insurance business, nominated by the
Authority for the purpose of representing such groups of insurers carrying on life
insurance business or such areas as have not been able to secure adequate
representation on the Executive Committee of the Life Insurance Council or for any
other purpose.
(2) The Executive Committee of the General Insurance Council shall consist of the
following persons, namely:—
(a) two officials nominated by the Authority one as the chairman and the other
as a member;
(b) eight representatives of members of the Insurance Association of India
carrying on general insurance business elected in their individual capacity by the said
members in such manner, from such groups of members and from such areas as may
be specified by the Authority;
(c) one non-official not connected with any insurance business, nominated by
the Authority; and
(d) five persons connected with life insurance business, nominated by the
Authority for the purpose of representing such groups of insurers carrying on general
insurance business or such areas as have not been able to secure adequate
representation on the Executive Committee of the General Insurance Council or for
any other purpose.
(3) If anybody of persons specified in sub-sections (1) and (2) fails to elect any of the
members of the Executive Committees of the Life Insurance Council or the General Insurance
 Entry of names
of members in
the register.
Councils of the
Insurance
Association of
India.
Authority of
members of
Association to
act through
agents.
Executive
Committees of
the Life
Insurance
Council and
the General
Insurance
Council.

107
Council, the Authority may nominate any person to fill the vacancy, and any person so nominated
shall be deemed to be member of the Executive Committee of the Life Insurance council or the
General Insurance Council, as the case may be, as if he had been duly elected thereto.
(4) No official nominated by the Authority shall be entitled, whether as chairman or
as a member, to vote in respect of any matter coming up before any meeting of the Executive
Committee of the Life Insurance Council or the Executive Committee of the General
Insurance Council, as the case may be, and subject thereto each of the said Executive
Committees may, with the approval of the Authority, make bye-law as for the transaction of
any business at any meeting of the said Committee, and any such bye-law may provide that
any member of the Committee who is interested in any matter for the time being before
that.  Committee may not be present at or take part in any meeting thereof.
(5) The Life Insurance Council or the General Insurance Council may from such
other committees consisting of such persons as it may think fit to discharge such functions
as may be delegated thereto:
Provided that any action taken by any of the said Councils under this sub-section
shall be with the previous consent of the Authority and nothing in this sub-section shall
derogate from any of the powers vested in the Executive Committees.
(6) The secretary of the Executive Committee of the Life Insurance Council and of
the Executive Committee of the General Insurance Council shall in each case be an official
nominated by the Authority.
64G .(1) * * * * *
(2) Casual vacancies in the Executive Committee of the Life Insurance Council or of
the General Insurance Council, whether caused by resignation, death or otherwise, shall be
filled by nomination by the Authority and any person nominated to fill the vacancy shall
hold office until the dissolution the Committee to which he has been nominated.
* * * * *
64-I.  The Life Insurance Council may, with the approval of the Authority, authorise
its Executive Committee to  hold examinations for individuals wishing to qualify themselves
as insurance agents for the purpsoe of procuring life insurance business, and, if the Authority,
by notification in the Official Gazette, so declares then, notwithstanding anything contained
in section 42, only individuals who have passed any such examination shall be eligible to
apply for a licence under section 42:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall  affect the right of any individual, who
has been licensed to act as an insurance agent under section 42 before the date of such
notification, to act as such, or to have his licence renewed from time to time.
64J. (1)* * * * *
(2) For the purpose of enabling it effectively to discharge its functions, the Executive
Committee of the Life Insurance Council may collect such sums of money, whether by way
of fees or otherwise, as may be prescribed from all members and associated members of the
Insurance Association of India who carry on life insurance business.
* * * * *
64L. (1)* * * * *
(2) For the purpose of enabling it effectively to discharge its functions, the Executive
Committee of General Insurance Council may collect such fees as may be prescribed from
all insurers carrying on general insurance business:
Provided that if the General Insurance Council thinks fit, it may by a resolution passed
by it, waive the collection of the prescribed fees for any year and where any such resolution
has been approved by the Authority, the Executive Committee of the General Insurance
Council shall not collect any fees in relation to that year.
* * * * *
64N.  The Central Government may prescribe the circumstances in which, the manner
in which, and the conditions subject to which, the Executive Committee of the Life Insurance
Council and the Executive Committee of the General Insurance Council may hold joint
Resignation
and filling up
of casual
vacancies.
Power of
Executive
Committee of
Life Insurance
Council to hold
examinations
for insurance
agents.
Functions of
Executive
Committee of
Life Insurance
Council.
Functions of
the Executive
Committee of
General
Insurance
Council.
Powers of the
Executive
Commitees to
act together in
certain cases.

108
meetings for the purpose of dealing with any matter of common interest to both Committees,
and it shall be lawful for the two Committees at any such joint meeting to delegate any
matter under consideration for the determination of a sub-committee appointed for this
purpose from amongst the members of the two Committees.
64R.  (1) For the efficient performance of its duties, the Life Insurance Council or the
General Insurance Council, as the case may be, may—
* * * * *
(c) keep and maintain up to date a copy of the list of all insurers who are
members or associate members of the Insurance Association of India;
(d) with the pervious approval of the Authority, make regulations for—
(i) the holding of elections  other than the first elections;
(ii) the summoning and holding of meetings, the conduct of business
thereat and the number of persons necessary to form a quorum;
(iii) the submission by insurers to the Executive Committee of the Life
Insurance Council, or the General Insurance Council, of such statements or
information as may be required of them and the submission of copies thereof
by the insurers to the Authority;
(iv) the levy and collection of any fees;
(v) the regulation of any other matter which may be necessary for the
purpose of enabling it to carry out its duties under this Act.
*        *      *      *      *
64S.   The Central Government may exercise such powers as may be necessary for
bringing the Life Insurance Council, the General Insurance Council or the Executive
Committee of any of the said Councils, as the case may be, into effective existence for the
purposes of this Part, and any such powers shall  include—
(a) the power to hold, in such manner as may be directed by the Central
Government, the first elections to the Executive Committees of the Life Insurance
Council and the Central Insurance Council;
(b) where a notification under sub-section ( 1) of section 64A has been issued
declaring provident societies to be members of the Insurance Association of India,
the powers to associate provident societies effectively in the exercise of all powers
and the discharge of all functions of the Life Insurance Council and the Executive
Committee thereof;
(c) the power to make the provisions of section 40B applicable to the provident
societies specified in clause (b) in the same manner as they apply to insurers.
64T.  The Central Government may, subject to such conditions and restrictions as it
may think fit to impose, exempt any insurers specified in sub-clause ( c) of clause ( 9) of
section 2 from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Part.
PART IIB
T
ARIFF ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND CONTROL OF TARIFF RATES
64U.  (1) With effect from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act,
1968, there shall be established a Committee, to be called the Tariff Advisory Committee
(hereafter in this Part referred  to as the Advisory Committee) to control and regulate the
rates, advantages, terms and conditions that may be offered by insurers in respect of general
insurance business.
(2) The Advisory Committee shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession
and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and may, by the said
name, sue and be sued.
62 of 1968.
General powers
of Life
Insurance
Council and
General
Insurance
Council.
Power of
Central
Government to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
exempt.
Establishment
of Tariff
Advisory
Committee.

109
64UA.  (1) The Advisory Committee  shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Chairperson of the Authority ex officio, who shall be the Chairman;
(b) a senior officer of the office of the authority nominated by the Authority
who shall be the Vice-Chairman;
(c) not more than ten representatives of Indian insurers, elected (in their
individual capacities) by such insurers in such manner, from such areas and from
among such insurers or groups of insurers as may be prescribed;
(d) not more than four representatives of insurers incorporated or domiciled
elsewhere than in India but registered in India, elected (in their individual capacities)
by such insurers in such manner, and from among such insurers or groups of insurers
as may be prescribed.
(2) The Secretary to the Advisory Committee shall be an officer of the office of the
Authority nominated by the Authority.
64UB.  (1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations
to carryout the purposes of this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the functions to be discharged by the Advisory Committee;
(b) the term of office of the members of the Advisory Committee, the precedure
for their election and the manner of filling casual vacancies in the Advisory Committee;
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to the members of the Advisory
Committee;
(d) the procedure for holding the meetings of the Advisory Committee and for
transaction of business thereat.
(3) The Advisory committee may, by notification in the Official Gazette, with the
previous approval of the Authority make regulations for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the constitution, powers and duties of Regional Committees and of sub-
committees constituted by the Advisory Committee or any Regional Committee;
(b) the method of election of candidates for Regional Committees and sub-
committees, their eligibility, term of office and method of filling casual vancancies;
(c) the procedure for convening meetings and transaction of business by Regional
Committees and sub-committees;
(d) the appointment of officers and other employees of the Advisory Committee
and of Regional Committees or sub-committees constituted by or under the Advisory
Committee or any Regional Committee and the terms and conditions of their service
including travelling and other allowances;
(e) such other matters pertaining to procedure as are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder,
and may, from time to time, with the previous approval of the Authority add to amend or
vary any such regulations.
(4) The regulations made by the Tariff Committee of the General Insurance Council
under section 64-O as they were in force immediately before the commencement of the
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, shall, after such commencement, continue to be in force
until rules are made by the Authority under sub-section ( 1) and immediately after such
rules have come into effect, the regulations aforesaid shall cease to be valid.
(5) The Chairperson of the Authority shall be in direct charge of the establishment of
the Advisory Committee and the Secretary of the Advisory Committee shall work under his
direction and control.
64UC.   (1) The Advisory Committee may, from time to time and to the extent it
deems expedient, control and regulate the rates, advantages, terms and conditions that
may be offered by insurers in respect of any risk or of any class or category of risks, the
rates, advantages, terms and conditions of which, in its opinion, it is proper to control
and regulate, and any such rates, advantages, terms and conditions shall be binding on all
insurers:
62 of 1968.
Composition of
the Advisory
Committee.
Power to make
rules in respect
of matters in
this Part.
Power of the
Advisory
Committee to
regulate rates,
advantages,
etc.

110
Provided that the Authority may, permit any insurer to offer, during such period (being
not more than two years but which may be extended by periods of not more than two years
at a time) and subject to such conditions as may be specified by him, rates, advantages,
terms and conditions different from those fixed by the Advisory Committee in respect of
any particular category of risks, if it is satisfied that such insurer generally issues policies
only to a restricted class of the public or under a restricted category of risks.
(2) In fixing, amending or modifying any rates, advantages, terms or conditions,
relating to any risk, the Advisory Committee shall try to ensure, as far as possible, that there
is no unfair discrimination between risks of essentially the same hazard, and also that
consideration is given to past and prospective loss experience:
Provided that the Advisory Committee may, at its discretion, make suitable allowances
for the degree of credibility to be assigned to the past experience, including allowances for
random fluctuations and may also, at its discretion, make suitable allowances for future
fluctuations and unforeseen future contingencies, including hazards of conflagration or
catastrophe or both.
(3) Every decision of the Advisory Committee shall be valid only after and to the
extent it is  ratified by the Authority, and every such decision shall take effect from the date
on which it is so ratified by the Authority or, if the Authority so orders in any case, from
such earlier date as he may specify in the  order.
(4) The decisions of the Advisory Committee in pursuance of the provisions of this
section shall be final.
(5) Where  an insurer is guilty of breach of any rate, advantage, term or condition
fixed by the Advisory Committee, he shall be deemed to have contravened the provisions
of this Act:
Provided that instead of proceeding against the insurer for such contravention, the
Authority  may, if the insurer removes  the contravention by recovering the  deficiency in
the premium, or where it is not practicable to do so, modifies suitably  or cancels the
contract of insurance, compound the offence on payment to the  Advisory Committee of
such fine, not exceeding rupees one thousand, as he may decide in consultation with the
Advisory Committee.
64UD.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, until the names of the
members of the Advisory Committee elected for the  first  time after the commencement of
the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, are  notified, the Tariff Committee of the General
Insurance Council appointed under  regulations made under sub-section  (2)  of  section 64-O
as it was in force  immediately before the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1968,  and in existence on each commencement (hereafter in this Part referred to as
the  Tariff Committee) shall continue to function and shall be deemed to be the Advisory
Committee duly elected under  this Part and the Authority of Insurance shall become  the
Chairman of that Committee with effect from the commencement of the  Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1968,  and function as such, and any Chairman of the  Tariff Committee
holding office immediately before such commencement shall cease  to be the Chairman
thereof from the date of such commencement but shall continue  to be an ordinary member
of the Advisory Committee:
Provided that  the Chairperson  of the Authority shall become the Chairman of  the Advisory
Committee with effect from the commencement of the Insurance  Regulatory and Development
Authority Act, 1999 and function as such, and any  Chairman of the Tariff Committee holding
office immediately before such  commencement shall cease to be the Chairman.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the constitutions of the Regional
Councils established under section 64P, as in force immediately before the  commencement
of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968 (hereafter referred to as the  Regional Councils),
and of the Sectional Committees formed thereunder, existing  immediately, before such
Transitional
provisions.
62 of 1968.
41 of 1999.
62 of 1968.

111
commencement, shall continue to be in full force and be of  full effect, until the regulations
made by the Advisory Committee for the first time  under section 64UB come into effect and
as soon as such regulations have come into effect such constitutions shall cease to have effect.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, until the Secretary to the Advisory
Committee is nominated under sub-section (2) of section 64UA, the Secretary to the Tariff
Committee holding office immediately before the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1968, shall function as the Secretary and shall be deemed to have been
duly nominated under this Part.
(4) All rates, advantages, terms and conditions fixed by the Tariff Committee or the
Regional Councils prior to the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968,
and in force immediately before such commencement shall continue, except to such extent
as they may be altered, replaced or abolished by the Advisory Committee, to be valid and
fully in force as if they were rates, advantages, terms and conditions fixed by the Advisory
Committee.
64UE.  (1) The Advisory Committee require, by notice in writing, any insurer to
supply to it such information or statements, periodical or ad hoc, as it may consider necessary,
to enable it to discharge its functions under this Part and every insurer shall comply with
such requirements within such period as may be specified by the Advisory Committee in
this behalf, failing which the insurer shall be deemed to have contravened the provisions of
this Act.
(2) Any information supplied under this section shall be certified by a principal officer
of the insurer or where the Advisory Committee has agreed in advance, by such other
officer or officers of the insurer as the principal officer of the insurer may nominate for the
purpose and if the notice so requires, also by an auditor.
(3) The Authority may, at any time, in writing, depute any subordinate of it to make a
personal inspection of the books of account, ledgers, policy-registers and other books or
documents of any insurer to verify the accuracy of any return or statement furnished by him
under sub-section (1), or to verify that full particulars have been supplied by him in respect
of all policies issued by him, and the insurer shall provide all facilities for such inspection
and make available to such person all the books of account, ledgers, policy-registers and
other books or documents of the insurer which might be needed by him for such verification
and the person deputed may himself extract from out of the books and records of the insurer
such information as may be needed to fill up or complete the returns required to be submitted
to the Advisory Committee under this section.
(4) The advisory Committee may, at any time, on the application of an insurer, make
arrangements for the inspection of an organisation which is concerned with the inspection
of risks, adjustment of losses or fire-fighting appliances, and may, whenever necessary,
advise insurers about the adequacy of the arrangements for the inspection of risks and
adjustment of losses or the suitability of such appliance:
Provided that no such inspection shall be made without the written permission of the
concerned organisation.
64UF. (1) On the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, all the
assets and liabilities of the General Insurance Council appertaining to its Tariff Committee
and to its Regional Councils and their Sectional Committees existing on that day shall be
transferred to, and vest in, the Advisory Committee.
(2) The assets appertaining to the Tariff Committee, the Regional Councils, and
their Sectional Committees shall be deemed to include all rights and powers and all
property, whether movable or immovable including, in particular, cash balances, reserve
funds, investments, deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such
property as may be in the possession of the Tariff Committee, Regional Councils and
their Sectional Committees and all books of account or documents thereof; and liabilities
Power of the
Advisory
Committee to
require
information,
etc.
Assets and
liabilities of
the General
Insurance
Council to vest
in the advisory
Committee.
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.

112
shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind existing
and appertaining to the work of the Tariff Committee, the Regional Councils and their
Sectional Committees.
(3) Where the General Insurance Council has established a provident or superannuation
fund or any other fund for the benefit of the employees of its Tariff Committee or Regional
Councils and constituted a trust in respect thereof (hereafter in this section referred to an
existing trust), the monies standing to the credit of any fund at the commencement of the
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), stand
transferred to, and vest in, on such commencement, the Advisory Committee.
(4) Where any employee of the Tariff Committee, or the Regional Councils, of the
General Insurance Council does not become an employee of the Adivsory Committee, the
monies and other assets appertaining to any fund referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall be
apportioned between the trustees of the fund and the Advisory Committee in the prescribed
manner; and in case of any dispute regarding such apportionment, the decision of the Central
Government thereon shall be final.
(5) The Advisory Committee shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of the
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, constitute in respect of the monies and other assets
which are transferred to, and vested in, it under sub-section (3), one or more trusts having,
as far as practicable, objects similar to the objects of the existing trust.
(6) Where all the monies and other assets belonging to an existing trust are transferred
to, and vested in, the Advisory Committee under sub-section (3), the trustees of such trust
shall, on the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, be discharged from
the trust except as respects things done or omitted to be done by them before such
commencement.
64UG . (1) Unless otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, all contracts,
agreements and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having effect
immediately before the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, and to
which the Tariff Committee, or any Regional Council is a part or which is in favour of
that Committee or that Council, shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of
the Advisory Committee and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if,
instead of the Tariff Committee, or the Regional Council, the Advisory Committee had
been a party thereto or as if they had been entered into or issued in favour of the Advisory
Committee.
(2) If, at the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, any suit, appeal
or other legal proceeding of whatever nature is pending by or against the Tariff Committee,
or any Regional Council then it shall not abate, be discontinued or in any way be prejudicially
effected by reason of the transfer to the Advisory Committee of the assets and liabilities of
the Tariff Committee, and the Regional Councils or of anything done under this Act, but the
suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued prosecuted or enforced by or against the
Advisory Committee.
64UH. (1) Every whole-time employee of the Tariff Committee, or the Regional
Councils who was employed by that Committee or those Councils wholly or mainly in
connection with its or their statutory duties immediately before the commencement of the
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, shall, on and from such commencement, become an
employee of the Advisory Committee and shall hold his office in it by the same tenure, at
the same remuneration, and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rates
and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as he would have held on such
commencement if this Part had not been enacted, and shall continue to do so until his
employment under the Advisory Committee is terminated or until the remuneration, terms
and conditions, are duly altered by the Advisory Committee:
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.
Contracts, etc.,
to be effective
by or against
the Advisory
Committee.
Employees,
etc., to
continue.
62 of 1968.

113
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any employee who
has given notice to the Central Government in writing either prior to or within two months
from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, intimating his intention
of not becoming an employee of the Advisory Committee.
(2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for the purpose of securing
uniformity in the scales of pay, remuneration and other terms and conditions of service
applicable to employees of the Tariff Committee, or the Regional Councils, it is necessary
so to do, or that a reduction in the remuneration payable or revision of the other terms and
conditions of service applicable to employees or any class of them is called for, the Central
Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), or in the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force or in any award, settlement,
or agreement for the time being in force, alter (whether by way of reduction or otherwise)
the remuneration and other terms and conditions of service to such extent and in such
manner as it thinks fit; and if the alteration is not acceptable to any employee, the Advisory
Committee may terminate his employment by giving him compensation equivalent to three
months' remuneration, unless the contract of service with such employees provides for a
shorter notice of termination.
Explanation.—The compensation payable to an employee under this sub-section shall
be in addition to, and shall not affect any pension, gratuity, provident fund money or any
other benefit to which the employee may be entitled under his contract of service.
(3) If any question arises as to whether any person was a wholetime employee of the
Tariff Committee, or the Regional Council, on the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1968, or as to whether any employee was employed wholly or mainly in
connection with the statutory duties of the Tariff Committee, or any Regional Council,
immediately before such commencement, the question shall be referred to the Central
Government whose decision thereon shall be final.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in
any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any employees of
the Tariff Committee, or the Regional Councils, to the Advisory Committee, shall not entitle
any such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law, and no such claim
shall be entertained by any court, Tribunal or other authority.
64UI.  (1) Where any property of the Tariff Committee, or the Regional Councils
(appertaining to its or their statutory duties) has been transferred to, and vested in, the
Advisory Committee, then,—
(a) every person in whose possession, custody or control any such property
may be, shall deliver the property to the Advisory Committee forthwith;
(b) any person, who, on the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1968, has in his possession, custody or control any books, documents and other
papers relating to the Tariff Committee, or the Regional Councils, shall be liable to
account for the said books, documents and papers to the Advisory Committee and
shall deliver them to the Advisory Committee or to such person as the Committee
may direct.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this section, it shall be lawful for
the Advisory Committee to take all necessary steps for securing possession of all properties
which have been transferred to, and vested in, it under this Act.
64UJ. (1) The Advisory Committee may constitute such Regional Committees as
and when it deems fit for one or more of the prescribed regions.
(2) Each Regional Committee shall consist of not more than seven persons of which
not more than five shall be elected by such groups of insurers carrying on general insurance
business in the region as may be prescribed and not more than two shall be nominated by
the Authority.
62 of 1968.
14 of 1947.
14 of 1947.
Duty of person
having custody
or control of
property to
deliver such
property to the
Advisory
Committees.
Power of the
Advisory
Committee to
constitute
Regional
Committees.
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.

114
(3) For the purpose of enabling it effectively to discharge its duties, any Regional
Committee may constitute such sub-committees as it may think fit, whether consisting of
members of the Regional Committee or not.
(4) It shall be the duty of every Regional Committee to advise the Advisory Committee
on any question connected with the fixation of rates, advantages, terms and conditions for
risks in its region which may be referred to it by the Advisory Committee for advice, and in
additon, every Regional Committee shall perform such other functions as may be delegated
to it by the Advisory Committee by regulations made by it with the previous approval of the
Central Government.
(5) Where, in the exercise of any functions delegated to it under this section, any
Regional Committee or any sub-committee thereof restrains an insurance agent from
procuring or causing to be procured general insurance business in any area, such agent may
prefer an appeal to the Authority against such order within thirty days from the date of
service of that order on him and the Authority may, after giving such agent an opportunity
of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it may think fit and the orders made by the
Authority on such appeal shall be final.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, every Regional Council and
every Sectional or other Committee of such Regional Council, in existence immediately
before the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, shall, until it is
abolished by the Advisory Committee, be deemed to be a Regional Committee or sub-
committee as the case may be, established in accordance with the provisions of this section
and shall function as such and shall have all the powers and responsibilities which it had
immediately before such commencement, and if the term of any such Council or Committee
expires before Regional Committees constituted under sub-section (1) and sub-committees
constituted under sub-section (3) come into existence, such terms shall be deemed to have
been validly extended up to the time when such Regional Committees and sub-committees
are established.
64UK.  (1) Every insurer shall annually before the prescribed date make payment to
the Advisory Committee in the prescribed manner of such fees, not exceeding for any year,
in the case of an insurer doing only re-insurance business in India, one per cent. of his total
premiums in respect of facultative re-insurance accepted by him in India  in the preceding
year and in the case of any other insurer, one per cent. of the total gross premium written
direct by him in India in the preceding year, as may be specified by the Advisory Committee
for the purpose of this Part.
(2) The Advisory Committee may collect, in addition to the fees mentioned in sub-
section (1), reasonable fees and charges from any person to cover the cost of any specific
services rendered by it.
(3) If an insurer fails to make payment within the prescribed date of any fee required
to be paid under sub-section ( 1) he shall be deemed to have failed to comply with the
provisions of this Act.
(4) The Authority may, so long as an application to the court under sub-section (5D)
of section 3 has not been made, revive the registration which might have been cancelled for
failure to make payment of the fee required to be made  under sub-section (1), if the insurer
makes payment of such fee together with such penalty not exceeding the actual amount of
fee payable as the Authority may require.
 64UL.  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Part, the
Central Government may, by order, make such pr ovisions or give such directions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as  may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such power shall be exercised after the expiry of a period of four
years from the commencement of this Part.
62 of 1968.
Levy of fees by
the Advisory
Committee.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

115
64UM.  (1) (A) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall act as a
surveyor or loss assessor in respect of general insurance business after the expiry of a
period of one year from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968,
unless he holds a valid licence issued to him by the  Authority.
(B) Every person who intends to act as a surveyor, or loss assessor after the expiry of
a period of one year from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968 but
before the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act,
1999, shall make an  application to the Authority within such time, in such form, in such
manner and on payment of such fee, not exceeding rupees two hundred and fifty, as may be
prescribed.
(BA) Every person who intends to act as a surveyor or loss assessor after the expiry of
a period of one year from the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority Act, 1999, shall make an application to the Authority within such time, in such
manner and on payment of such fee as may be determined by the regulations made by the
Authority:
Provided that any licence issued immediately before the commencement of the
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, shall be deemed to have been
issued in accordance with the regulations providing for such licence.
(C) Every licence issued under this section shall remain in force, unless cancelled
earlier, for a period of five years from the date of issue thereof, and may  be renewed for a
period of five years at a time, on payment  of such fee, not exceeding  rupees two hundred,
as may be determined by the regulations.
(D) No licence to act as a surveyor or loss assessor shall be issued  unless—
(i) the applicant, where he is an individual, satisfies the Authority that he—
(a)  has been in practice as a surveyor or loss assessor on the date of
commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act,
1999, or.
(b)  holds a degree of a recognized University in any branch of engineering,
or
(c)  is a fellow or associate member of the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India or the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India,
or
(d)  possesses actuarial qualifications or holds a degree or diploma of
any recognized University or Institute in relation to insurance, or
(e)  holds a diploma in insurance granted or recognized by the
Government, or
(f)  possesses such other technical qualifications as may be specified by
the regulations made by the Authority, and
(g)  does not suffer from any of the disqualifications mentioned in sub-
section (4) of section 42;
(ii) the applicant, where he is a company or firm, satisfies the Authority that all
his directors or partners, as the case may be, possess one or more  of the qualifications
specified in clause (i) and none of such directors or partners  suffer from any of the
disqualifications mentioned in sub-section (4) of section 42.
(E) Every application for the renewal of the licence shall be made at least thirty days
before the expiry of the period of validity thereof.
(F) The Authority may, if he is satisfied that any licence issued or renewed under this
section has been lost or destroyed, issue a duplicate licence on payment of a fee of rupees
62 of 1968.
41 of 1999.
41 of 1999.
41 of 1999.
Licensing of
surveyors and
loss assessors.
41 of 1999.
62 of 1968.

116
five and the duplicate licence so issued shall remain in force for the remainder of the period
of validity of the licence in lieu of which it is issued.
(G) Without prejudice to the powers conferred by sub-section ( 7), the Authority, if
satisfied that the holder of any licence has made a statement which is false in material
particulars with regard to his eligibility for obtaining such licence or has, after the issue or
renewal of such licence, acquired any of the disqualifications mentioned in sub-section (4)
of section 42, may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the holder of such licence of
being heard, by order cancel such licence and notify such cancellation in the Official Gazette.
(1A) Every surveyor and loss assessor shall comply with the code of conduct in respect
of their duties, responsibilities and other professional requirements as may be specified by
the regulations made by the Authority.
(2) No claim in respect of a loss which has occurred in India and requiring to be paid
or settled in India equal to or exceeding twenty thousand rupees in value on any policy of
insurance, arising or intimated to an insurer at any time after the expiry of a period of one
year from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, shall, unless
otherwise directed by the Authority, be admitted for payment or settled by the insurer unless
he has obtained a report, on the loss that has occurred, from a person who holds a licence
issued under this section to act as a sureyour or loss assessor (hereafter referred to as
"approved surveyor or loss assessor"):
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the
right of the insurer to pay or settle any claim at any amount different from the amount
assessed by the approved surveyor or loss asessor.
(3) The Authority may, at any time, in respect of any claim of the nature referred to in
sub-section (2), call for an independent report from any other approved surveyor or loss
assessor specified by him and such surveyor or loss assessor shall furnish such report to the
Authority within such time as may be specified by the Authority or if no time limit has been
specified by it within a reasonable time and the cost of, or incidental to such report shall be
borne by the insurer.
(4) The Authority may, on receipt of a report referred to in sub-section (3), issue such
directions as it may consider necessary with regard to the settlement of the claim including
any direction to settle a claim at a figure less than, or more than, that at which it is proposed
to settle it or it was settled and the insurer shall be bound to comply with such directions:
Provided that where the Authority issues a direction for settling a claim at a figure
lower than that at which it has already been settled, the insurer shall be deemed to comply
with such direction if he satisfies the Authority that all reasonable steps, with due regard to
the question whether the expenditure involved is not disproportionate to the amount required
to be recovered, have been taken with due despatch by him:
Provided further that no direction for the payment of a lesser sum shall be made
where the amount of the claim has already been paid and the Authority is of opinion that the
recovery of the amount paid in excess would cause undue hardship to the insured:
Provided also that nothing in this section shall relieve the insurer from any liability,
civil or criminal, to which he would have been subject but for the provisions of this sub-
section.
(5) No insurer shall, after the expiry of a period of one year from the commencement
of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, pay to any person any fee or remuneration for
surveying, verifying or reporting on a claim of loss under a policy of insurnace unless the
person making such survey, verification or report is an approved surveyor or loss assessor.
(6) Where, in the case of a claim of less than twenty thousand rupees in value on
any policy of insurance it is not practicable for an insurer to employ an approved
62 of 1968.
62 of 1968.

117
surveyor or loss assessor without incurring expenses disproportionate to the amount of
the claim, the insurer may employ any other person (not being a person disqualified for
the time being for being employed as a surveyor or loss assessor) for surveying such
loss and may pay such reasonable fee or remuneration to the person so employed as he
may think fit.
(7) If the Authority is satisfied that an approved surveyor or loss assessor has been
guilty of wilfully making a false statement knowing it to be false or of being knowingly a
party to the settlement of a claim in a fraudulent manner, he may, after giving such surveyor
or loss assessor an opportunity of being heard, cancel the licence issued to him with effect
from such date as may be specified by him and shall notify such cancellation in the Official
Gazette.
(8) Any surveyor or loss assessor whose licence has been cancelled shall not be eligible
for having a licence to act as a surveyor or loss assessor for a period of three years from the
date on which the cancellation is notified in the Official Gazette.
(9) The Authority may, in respect of any claim of value of less than twenty thousand
rupees on an insurance policy, if the claim has not been or is not proposed to be reported
upon by a surveyor or loss assessor, direct that such claim shall be reported upon by an
approved surveyor, or loss assessor and where the Authority makes such direction, the
provisions of sub-sections (3)  and (4) shall apply in respect of such claim.
(10) Where, in relation to any class of claims, the Authority is satisfied that it is
customary to entrust the work of survey or loss assessment to any person other than a
licensed surveyor or loss assessor, or it is not practicable to make any survey or loss
assessment, it may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, exempt such class of
claims from the operation of this section.
PART IIC
S
OLVENCY MARGIN, ADVANCE PAYMENT OF PREMIUM AND RESTRICTIONS ON THE OPENING
OF A NEW PLACE OF BUSINESS
64V.   (1) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of section
64V A,—
(i) assets shall be valued at values not exceeding their market or realisable
value and the assets hereafter mentioned shall be excluded to the extent indicated,
namely:—
(a) agent's balances and outstanding premiums in India, to the extent
they are not realised within a period of thirty days;
(b) agents' balances and outstanding premium outside India, to the extent
they are not realisable;
(c) sundry debts, to the extent they are not realisable;
(d) advances of an unrealisable character;
(e) furniture, fixtures, dead stock and stationery;
(f) deferred expenses;
(g) profit and loss appropriation account balance and any fictitious assets
other than pre-paid expenses;
(h) such other asset or assets as may be specified by the regulations made
in this behalf;
(ii) a proper value shall be placed on every item of liability and liabilities in
respect of share capital, general reserve and other reserves of similar nature not created
Assets and
liabilities how
to be valued.

118
to meet specific liabilities and investment reserve, reserve for bad and doubtful debts,
and depreciation fund shall be excluded and liabilities thereafter mentioned shall be
included to the extent indicated, namely:—
(a) provision for dividends declared or recommended, and outstanding
dividends in full;
(b) reserves for unexpired risks in respect of—
(i) fire and miscellaneous business, 50 per cent.
(ii) marine cargo business, 50 per cent, and
(iii) marine full business, 100 per cent.,
of the premium, net of re-insurances, during the preceding twelve months;
(c) estimated liability in respect of outstanding claims, in full;
(d) amount due to insurance companies carrying on insurance business,
in full;
(e) amounts due to sundry creditors, in full;
(f) provision for taxation, in full;
(g) such other liability which may be made in this behalf to be included
for the purpose of clause (ii).
Explanation.—In case of an insurer whose principal place of business or domicile is
outside India, where, in the accounts filed with the public authority of the country in which
the insurer is constituted, incorporated or domicilated, in respect of marine insurance
business, the provisions for unexpired risks and outstanding claims are not shown separately,
the liabilities under items (b) and (c) of clause (ii) in respect of marine insurance business
shall be taken together at a figure of not less than the total premium less re-insurances in
respect of that class of business during the preceding twelve months.
(2) Every insurer shall furnish to the Authority with his returns under section 15 or
section 16; as the case may be, a statement certified by an auditor approved by the Authority
in respect of general insurance business, or an actuary approved by the Authority in respect
of life insurance business, as  the case may be, of his assets and liabilities assessed in the
manner required by this section as on the 31st day of March of the preceding year.
(3) Every insurer shall value his assets and liabiliteis in the manner required by this
section and in accordance with the regulations which may be made by the authority in this
behalf.
64VA.  (1) An insurer shall, at all times before the commencement of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, maintain an excess of the value of his
assets over the amount of his liabilities of not less than the amount arrived at as follows
(hereafter in this section referred to as the "relevant amount"), namely:—
(i) in the case of an insurer whose total premium income less re-insurances in
respect of general insurance business (hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the
"said income") in the preceding twelve months did not exceed five crores of rupees,
one-fifth of the said income subject to a minimum of—
(a) five lakhs of rupees in the case of an insurer who is a co-operative
society registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or any other law
for the time being in force in any State relating to co-operative societies, or
(b) ten lakhs of rupees  in the case of any other insruer; and
41 of 1999.
2 of 1912.
Sufficiency of
assets.

119
(ii) in the case of an insurer whose said income in the preceding twelve months
exceeded five crores of rupees, the aggregate of one-fifth of the first five crores of
rupees of the said income and one-tenth of the amount by which the said income in
the preceding twelve months exceeded five crores of rupees:
Provided that where a number of insurers occupying the status of parent and subsidiary
companies prepare, under the laws of the country of origin of the parent company, a
consolidated balance-sheet, the provisions of this sub-section shall apply to such of them
as are not members of any group as if they  constituted a single insurer, subject to the
further condition that the relevant amount shall, in no case, be less than a sum equal to—
(i) the number of such insurers multiplied by ten lakhs of rupees, or
(ii) where all the insurers are co-operative societies registered under the
Cooperative Societies Act, 1912, or any other law for the time being in force in any
State relating to co-operative societies, the number of such insurers multiplied by
five lakhs of rupees:
Provided further that if in respect of any insurer the Central Government is satisfied
that either by reason of an unfavourable claim experience or because of a sharp  increase in
the volume of new business, or for any other reason, compliance with  the provisions of this
sub-section would cause undue hardship to the insurer, if may direct that for such period
and subject to such conditions as it may specify,  the provisions of this sub-section shall
apply to that insurer with the modification that instead of the proportion of one-fifth, wherever
mentioned in this sub-section, such other proportion being not less than one-tenth as may
be specified by that Government shall be applicable to that insurer:
Provided also that in the case of an insurer carrying on insurance business at the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, it shall be sufficient compliance
with the provisions of this sub-section until the 31st December, 1972 or until such subsequent
date, not being later than 31st December, 1976 as the Central Government may, at its
discretion, allow for any particular insurer, if he progressively brings up the excess of the
value of his assets over the amount of his liabilities, in such manner as may be prescribed,
to the relevant amount.
(1A) Every insurer shall, at all times, on or after the  commencement of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, maintain an excess of the value of his
assets over the amount of his liabilities of not less than the amount arrived at as follows
(hereinafter to in this section as the "required solvency margin" namely:—
(i) in the case of an insurer carrying on life insurance business, the required
solvency margin shall be the higher of the following amounts—
(a) fifty crores of rupees (one hundred crores of rupees in case of re-
insures); or
(b) the aggregate sums of the results arrived at in items (I) and (II) stated
below:—
(I) the aggregate of the results arrived at by applying the calculation
described in item (A) below (Step I) and the calculation described in
item (B) below (Step II):
(A) for Step I—
(A.1) there shall be taken, a sum equal to a percentage
determined by the regulations not exceeding five per cent. of
the mathematical reserves for direct business and re-insurance
acceptances without any deduction for re-insurance cessions;
(A.2) the amount of mathematical reserves at the end
of the preceding financial year after the deduction of
2 of 1912.
62 of 1968.
41 of 1999.

120
re-insurance cessions shall be expressed as a percentage of
the amount of those mathematical reserves before any such
deduction; and
(A.3) the sum mentioned in item (A.1) above shall be
multiplied—
(A.3.1) where the percentage arrived at under
item (A.2) above is greater than eighty-five per cent.
(or in the case of a re-insurer carrying on exclusive re-
insurance business, fifty per cent.) by that greater
percentage; and
(A.3.2) in any other case, by eighty-five per cent.
(or in the case of a re-insurer carrying on exclusive re-
insurance business, by fifity per cent.);
(B) for Step ll—
(B.1) there shall be taken, a sum equal to a percentage
determined by the regulations made by the Authority not
exceeding one per cent. of the sum at risk for the policies on
which the sum at risk is not a negative figure, and
(B.2) the amount of sum at risk at the end of the
preceding financial year for policies on which the sum at risk
is not a negative figure after the deduction of re-insurance
cession shall be expressed as a percentage of the amount of
that sum at risk before any such deduction, and
(B.3) the sum arrived at under item (B.1) above shall
be multiplied—
(B.3.1) where the percentage arrived at under
item (B.2) above is greater than fifty per cent. by that
greater percentage; and
(B.3.2) in any other case by fifty per cent.
(II) a percentage determined by the regulations made by the Authority of the
value of assets determined in accordance with the provisions of section 64V;
(ii) in the case of an insurer carrying on general insurance business, the required
solvency margin, shall be the highest of the following amounts:—
(a) fifty crores of rupees (one hundred crores of rupees in case of re-insurer);
or
(b) a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of net premium income; or
(c) a sum equivalent to thirty per cent. of net incurred claims.
subject to credit for re-insurance in computing  net premiums and net incurred claims being
actual but a percentage, determined by the regulations not exceding fifty per cent:
Provided that if in respect of any insurer, the Authority is satisfied that either be
reason of an unfavourable claim experience or because  of sharp increase in the volume of
the business, or for any other reason, compliance with the provisions of this sub-section
would cause undue hardship to the insurer, the Authority may direct, for such period and
subject to such conditions, such solvency margin not being less than the lower of the amount
mentioned in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) above, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, the expressions—
(i) "mathematical reserves" means the provision made by a insurer  to cover
liabilities (excluding liabilities which have fallen due and liabilities arising from
deposit back arrangement in relation to any  policy whereby an amount is deposited
by re-insurer with the cedant) arising under or in connection with policies or contracts

121
for life insurance business. Mathematical reserves also include specific provision
for adverse deviations of the bases, such as mortality and morbidity rates interest
valuation for this purpose;
(ii) “net incurred claims” means the average  of the net incurred claims during
the specified period of not exceeding three preceding financial years;
(iii) "sum at risk", in relation to a life insurance policy, means a sum which is—
(a) in any case in which an amount is payable in consequence of death
other than a case falling within sub-clause ( b) below, the amount payable on
death, and
(b) in any case in which the benefit under the policy in question consists
of the making, in consequence of death, of the payments of annuity, payment of
a sum by instalments or any other kind of periodic payments, the present value
of that benefit, less in either case the mathematical reserves in respect of the
relevant policies.
(2) An insurer who does not comply with the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be
deemed to be inslovent any may be wound-up by the court.
(2A) If, at any time an insurer does not maintain the required solvency margin in
accordance with the provisions of this section, he shall, in accordance with the directions
issued by the Authority, submit a financial plan, indicating a plan of action to correct the
deficiency to the Authority within a specified period not exceeding three months.
(2B) An insurer who has submitted a plan under sub-section ( 2A) to the Authority
shall propose modifications to the plan if the Authority considers it inadequate, and shall
give effect to any plan accepted by the Authority as adequate.
(2C) An insurer who does not comply with the provisions of sub-section (2A) shall be
deemed to be insolvent and may be wound-up by the court.
(3) The Authority shall be entitled at any time to take such steps as he may consider
necessary for the inspection or verification of the assets and liabilities of any insurer or for
securing the particulars necessary to establish that the requirements of this section have
been complied with as  on any date and the insurer shall comply with any requisition made
in this behalf by the Authority, and if he fails to do so within two months from the receipt of
the requisition, he shall be deemed to have made default in complying with the requirements
of this section.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to an insurer, specified in sub-clause
(c) of clause (9) of section 2.
(5) In applying the provisions of sub-section (1) to any insurer, who is a member of a
group, the relevant amount for that insurer shall be an amount equal to that proportion of
the relevant amount which that group, if considered as a single insurer, would have been
required to maintain as the proportion of his share of the risk on each policy issued by the
group bears to the total risk on that policy:
Provided that when a group of insurers ceases to be a group, every insurer in that
group who continues to carry on any class of insurance business in India, shall comply with
the requirements of sub-section (1) as if he had not been an insurer in a group at any time:
Provided further that it shall be sufficient compliance with the provisions of the
foregoing proviso if the insurer brings up the excess of the value of his assets over the
amount of his liabilities to the required amount within a period of six months from the date
of cessation of the group:
Provided also that the Central Government may, on sufficient cause being shown,
extend the said period of six months by such further periods as it may think fit, so however
that the total period may not in any case exceed one year.
(6) The Central Govenment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, reduce the
sum of ten lakhs of rupees or five lakhs of rupees, as the case may be, referred to in sub
section (1) to a lower figure not less than one hundred thousand rupees in respect of a
country craft insurer or in respect of an insurer not having a share capital and carrying on

122
only such insurance business as, in the opinion of the Central Government, is not carried on
ordinarily by insurers under separate policies.
(7) Every insurer shall furnish to the Authority his returns under section 15 or section
16, as the case may be, in case of life insurance business a statement certified by an actuary
approved by the Authority, and in case of general insurance business a statement certified
by an auditor approved by the Authority, of the required solvency margin maintained by the
insurer in the manner required by sub-section ( 1A).
*      *      *      *       *
64VC. (1) No insurer shall, after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1968, open a new place of business in India or change otherwise than within the same
city, town or village, the location of an existing place of business situated in India without
obtaining the prior permission of the Authority.
(2) The Authority may grant permission under sub-section (1) subject to such conditions
as he may think fit to imose either generally or with reference to any particular case.
(3) Where, in the opinion of the Authority, an insurer has, at any time, failed to comply
with any of the conditions imposed on him under this section, the Authority may, by order
in writing and after affording reasonable opportunity to the insurer for showing cause against
the action proposed to be taken against him, revoke any permission granted under this
section.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "place of  business" includes a branch,
a sub-branch, inspectorate, organisation office and any other office, by whatever name called.
* * * *
PART III
P
ROVIDENT SOCIETIES
65.  (1) In this Part "provident society" means, a person who, or a body of persons
(whether corporate or unincorporate) which, not being an insurer registered for the time
being under Part II of this Act, carries on the business of insuring the payment, on the
happening of any of the contingencies mentioned in sub-section ( 2), of—
(a) an annuity of or equivalent to one hundred rupees or less payable  for an
uncertain period, or
(b) a gross sum of one thousand rupees or less, whether paid or payable in a
lump sum or in two or more instalments over a certain period,
exclusively in both cases (a) and (b) of any profit or bonus not being a guaranteed profit or
bonus.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a period is "certain" if its duration
is ascertainable in advance and "uncertain" if its duration is not so ascertainable.
(2) The contingencies referred to in sub-section ( 1) are the following, namely:—
(a) the birth, marriage or death of any person or the survival by a person of a
stated or implied age or contingency;
(b) failure of issue;
(c) the occurrence of a social, religious or other ceremonial occasion;
(d) loss of or retirement from employment;
(e) disablement in consequence of sickness or accident;
(f) the necessity of providing for the education of a dependent;
(g) any other contingency which may be prescribed or which may be authorised
by the State Government with the approval of the Central Government.
Restrictions on
the opening of
a new place
business.
Defination of
"provident
society".
62 of 1968.

123
(3) For the purposes of sub-sections ( 1) and (2)—
(a) contracts entered into before the commencement of this Act shall not be
taken into account;
(b) two or more policies issued to one person shall, for the purposes of
determining whether the limits fixed by sub-section (1) have or have not been exceeded,
be deemed to be one policy if the contingencies on the happening of which the sums
are payable under the policies (whether the contingencies be the same of different)
relate to one person only, whether he be the policy-holder or some other person.
(4) Every person or body of persons for the time being registered as a provident
society under the Provident Insurance Societies Act, 1912, and every person or body of
persons for the time being registered as a provident society under this Act shall be deemed
to be a provident society for all the purposes of this Act.
(5) If the question arises whether any person or body of persons is or is not a provident
society within the meaning of this section Authority shall decide the question and its decision
shall be final.
65A.  No person shall, after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1950, begin to carry on in
 India any business specified in sub-section ( 1) of section
65, and no provident society carrying on any such business in India shall, after the expiry
of one year from such commencement, continue to carry on any such business, unless he
or it is—
(a) a public company, or
(b) a society registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or under
any other law for the time being in force in any State relating to co-operative societies,
or
(c) a body corporate incorporated under the law of any country outside India
not being of the nature of a private company.
66.  No provident society shall undertake any form of insurance not falling within the
limits fixed by sub-section (1) of section 65, nor shall any provident society be eligible to
be registered under section 3.
67.  No provident society established after the commencement of this Act shall adopt
as its name, and no provident society established before the commencement of this Act
shall continue after the expiry of six months from the commencement thereof to use as its
name, any combination of words which fails to include the word "provident" or which
includes the word "life".
68.  [Rep. by the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, sec. 48 ( w.e.f. 1-6.1950).]
69.   (1) No provident society shall carry on any business upon the dividing principle,
that is to say, on the principle that the benefit secured by a policy is not fixed but depends
either wholly or partly on the results of a distribution of certain sums amongst policies
becoming claims within certain time-limits, or on the principle that the premiums payable
by a policy-holder depend wholly or partly on the number of policies becoming claims
within certain time-limits.
(2) The Authority shall, as soon as possible, take steps to have any provident society
which carries on business on dividing principle wound-up:
Provided that, where any such provident society in existence at the commencement
of this Act applies within three months of such commencement to the Authority for permission
to continue carrying on its business with a view meanwhile to reorganise its business in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, the Authority may at its discretion, with due
Prohibition of
transaction of
insurance
business by
provident
societies other
than public
companies or
co-operative
societies.
Restrictions on
provident
societies.
Dividing
business.
Name.
5 of 1912.
2 of 1912.
47 of 1950.
47 of 1950.

124
regard to the past history of the society, permit the society to continue business for a period
not exceeding two years from the date of receipt of such permission, so however that no
new business on the dividing principle is undertaken by the society.
(3) Where after the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1941, a
provident society is to be wound-up in pursuance of this section, or where, whether before
or after the commencement of that Act, a provident society ceases to carry on business on
the dividing principle, the provisions of sub-section ( 2) and sub-section ( 3) of section 52
shall, so far as may be, apply in like manner as they apply to an insurer ceasing to carry on
business on the dividing principle.
70.  (1) No provident society except a provident society registered under the provisions
of the Provident Insurance Societies Act, 1912, shall receive any premium or contribution
until it has obtained from the Authority, before the date of commencement of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, a certificate of registration.
(2) Every application for registration shall be accompanied by—
(a) a certified copy of the rules of the society, and when the society is a company
incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913  or under the Indian Companies
Act, 1882  or under the Indian Companies Act, 1866 or under any Act repealed thereby,
a certified copy of the Memorandum and Articles of Association or where the society
is not such a company a certified copy of the deed of constitution of the society;
(b) the names and addresses of the proprietors or directors, and the managers
of the society, the full address of the registered office of  the society, the full address
of the principle office of the society in India, the name of the manager at such office,
and the name and address of some one or more persons resident in India authorised
to accept any notice required to be served on the society;
(c) a certificate from the Reserve Bank of India that the initial deposit referred
to in section 73 has been made;
(d) a declaration verified by an affidavit made by the principal officer of the
society authorised in that behalf that the minimum working capital required by section
72, is available; and
(e) the receipt showing payment in the prescribed manner of the prescribed fee
for registration being not more than two hundred rupees.
(3) The Authority may refuse to issue a certificate of registration until he is satisfied
that the rules of the society comply with the provisions of this Act and that the society
complies with the provisions of sections 65A, 67 , 71, 72, 73, and 73A but if he is so
satisfied he shall register the society and its rules.
(4) The Authority may, after giving previous notice in writing in such manner as he
thinks fit specifying the grounds for the proposed cancellation, and allowing the society
concerned an apportunity of being heard, apply to the Court and obtain sanction for
cancellation of the registration made under this section or made under the provisions of the
Provident Insurance Societies Act, 1912—
(a) if it is satisfied from the returns furnished under the provisions of this Act
or as the result of an inquiry made under section 87—
5 of 1912.
7 of 1913.
6 of 1882.
10 of 1866.
5 of 1912.
13 of 1941.
41 of 1999.
Registration.

125
(i) that the society is insolvent or is likely to become so, or
(ii) that the business of the society is conducted fraudulently or not in
accordance with the rules thereof, or what it is in the interests of the policy-
holders that the society should cease to carry on business, or
(c) if the society, having failed to comply with any requirement or having
contravened any provision of this Act, has continued such failure or contravention
for a period of one month after notice of such failure or contravention has been
conveyed to the society by the Authority:
Provided that the Authority may, if it thinks, fit, instead of applying for cancellation
of the registration under sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of this sub-section make a
recommendation to the court that the contracts of the society should be reduced in such
manner and subject to such conditions as he may indicate:
Provided further that the Authority may, without previous notice and without
application to the court for sanction,—
(a) cancel the registration of a provident society which has failed to have its
registration renewed, or
(aa) cancel the registration of a provident society if any deposit required by
section 73, has not been made, or
(b) cancel, on such terms and conditions as it think fit, the registration of any
provident society which applies to it for such cancellation if  it is satisfied that the
society has ceased to carry on insurance business and that all its liabilities inrespect
of insurance policies are either satisfied or otherwise provided for, or
(c) cancel the registration of a provident society if he has reason to believe that
any claim upon the society arising in India under any policy of insurance remains
unpaid for three months after final judgment in regular course of law.
(5) When a registration is cancelled the provident society shall not, after the
cancellation has taken effect, enter into any new contracts of insurance, but all rights and
liabilities in respect of contracts of insurance entered into by it before such cancellation
takes effect shall, subject to the provisions of section 88, continue as if the cancellation had
not takes place.
(6) Where a registration is cancelled under clause (b) of sub-section (4), or clause (c)
of the second proviso to that sub-section, or because the society has failed to have its
registration renewed, the Authority may at its discretion revive the registration of the
provident society, within six months from the date on which the concellation took effect,
makes the deposits required by section 73 or satisfies the Authority that no claim upon it
such as is referred to in the said clause (c) remains unpaid or has had an application under
sub-section (3) of section 70A accepted, as the case may be, and complies with any directions
which may be given to it by the authority.

126
(7) The Authority may, on payment of the prescribed fee which shall not exceed five
rupees, issue a duplicate certificate of registration to replace a certificate lost, destroyed or
mutilated, or in any any other case where it is of opinion that the issue of a duplicate
certificate is necessary.
70A.  (1) Every provident society registered under this Act, or under the Provident
Insurance Societies Act, 1912, shall have its registration renewed annually for each period
of twelve months after that ending on the 30th day of June, 1942.
(2) An application for the renewal of a registration shall be made by the society to the
Authority before the 30th day of June preceding the period for which renewal is sought,
and shall be accompanied as provided in sub-section ( 3) by evidence of payment of the
prescribed fee which shall not exceed two hundred rupees but may vary according to the
volume of insurance business done by the society.
(3) The prescribed fee for the renewal of a registration for any year shall be paid into
the Reserve Bank of India, or, where there is no office of that Bank, into the Imperial Bank
of India acting as the agent of that Bank, or into any Government treasury, and the receipt,
shall be sent along with the application for renewal of the registration.
(4) If a provident society fails to apply for renewal of registration before the date
specified in sub-section ( 2) the Authority may, so long as it has taken no action under
section 88 to have the society wound-up, accept an application for renewal of registration
on receipt from the society of the fee payable with the applications and such penalty,
not exceeding the prescribed fee payable by the society, as he may require.
(5) The Authority shall, on being satisfied that the society has fulfilled the requirements
of this section, renew the registration and grant it a certificate of renewal of registration.
70B.  (1) Every provident society registered under section 70 before the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1941 shall, before the expiration of
three months from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1941 furnished
to the Authority such particulars in addition to those already supplied for the purpose of
obtaining registration as are required by sub-section (2) of section 70 of this Act as amended
by the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1941.
(2) Every provident society registered under the provisions of the Provident Insurance
Societies Act, 1912, shall, before the expiration of three months from the commencement
of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1941 furnished to the Authority so far as it has not
already done so the documents and information required by clauses ( a) and ( b) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 70 to accompany an application by a provident society for
registration under the section.
(3) When any alteration occurs or is made which affects any of the matters which are
required under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 70 to accompany an application
by a provident society for registration under that section, or are to be furnished to the
Supplementary
information
and reports of
alterations in
particulars
furnished with
application for
registration.
5 of 1912.
13 of 1941.
5 of 1912.
13 of 1941.
Renewal of
registration.

127
Authority under this section, the provident society shall furnish forthwith to the Authority
full particulars duly authenticated of such alternation.
71.  The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 10, section 20, sub-section
(1) of section 27, sections 27A, 28, 29, 31A, 31B, 32, 46 and 53 shall apply to provident
societies as they apply to insurers, and in such application references to shareholders of an
insurer shall be construed as references to members of a  provident society and references
to section 7 or section 98 shall be construed as references to section 73:
Provided that a provident society may charge a fee not exceeding one rupee for
supplying a copy of any document referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 20.
72.  No provident society shall be registered unless it has a paid-up capital sufficient
to provide as working capital a net sum of not less than five thousand rupees exclusive  of
deposits made under this Act and exclusive in the case of a company of any expenses
incurred  in connection with the formation of the company.
73.  ( 1) Every provident society shall, if established before the commencement of
this Act within one year from such commencement, or, if established after the commencement
of this Act before the society applies for registration under section 70, deposit and keep
deposited with the Reserve Bank of India in one of the offices in India of the Bank, for and
on behalf of the Central Government, cash or approved securities acounting at the market
value of the securities on the date of deposit to five thousand rupees, and shall thereafter
make in each calendar year a further deposit amounting to not less than one-fifth of the
premimum income for the preceding calendar year as shown in the revenue account of the
society (including admission fees and other fees received by the society) until the total
amount so depoited and kept is fifty thousand rupees.
(2) The provisions of sub-sections 8, 9, 9A, 9B and 10 of section 7 and of sub-section
(1) of section 8 and of section 9 shall apply to the deposits made under this section as they
apply to deposits made by an insurer.
73A.  (1) A provident society shall not be registered by a name identical with that by
which an insurer or another provident society in existence is already registered, or so nearly
resembling that name as to be calculated to deceive, except when the provident society in
existence is in the course of being dissolved and signifies its consent, or the insurer in
existence signifies his consent, to Authority.
(2) If a provident society,  through inadvertence or otherwise, is without such consent
as aforesaid registered by a name identical with that they by which an insurer or another
provident society already in existence is registered, or so nearly resembling it as to be
calculated to deceive, the  first-mentioned society shall, if called upon to do so by the
Authority on the application of the insurer or the second-mentioned society, change its
name within a time to be fixed by the Authority:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any provident society carrying on
business before the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1946.
Restriction on
name of
provident
society.
6 of 1946.
Certain
provisions of
Part II to apply
to provident
societies.
Working
Capital.
Deposits.

128
74.  (1) Every provident society shall in its rules set forth—
(a) the name, the object and the location of the registered office of the society;
(b) the contingencies or classes of contingency on the happening of which money
is to be paid;
(c) the conditions to be complied with before, and the payments to be made on,
admission to society;
(d) the rates of premium or contribution, and the periods for which or the times
at which premiums or contributions are payable;
(e) the maximum amount payable to a subscriber or policy-holder;
(f) the nature and amounts of the benefits provided for by the society;
(g) the circumstances in which a bonus may be paid to a policy-holder;
(h) the nature of the evidence required for the proof of the happening of any
contingency on which money is to be paid;
(i) the circumstances in which policies may be forfeited or renewed or the
whole or a part of the premiums paid on a policy may be returned, or surrender value
of a policy may be granted;
(j) the penalities for delay in paying or failure to pay premiums or
contributions;
(k) the proportion of the annual income of society which may be disbursed on
and the provisions to be made for meeting the expenses of the management of the
society;
(l) the person or persons who or the authority which shall have power to invest
the funds of the society;
(m) the provisions for appointment of auditors and their remunerations;
(n) the procedure to be adopted in altering the rules of the society;
(o) unless these are provided for in the articles of association of a society which
is a company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913  or under the Indian
Companies Act, 1882, or under the Indian Companies Act, 1866, or under any Act
repealed thereby,—
(i) the mode of appointment and removal, the qualification and  the  powers
of a director, manager, secretary or other officer of the society;
(ii) the manner of raising additional capital; and
7 of 1913.
6 of 1982.
10 of 1866.
Rules.

129
(iii) the provisions for the holding of general meetings of the members
and policy-holders and for the prowers to be exercised and procedure to be
followed thereat; and
(p) such other matters as may be prescribed.
(2) Where the rules of any provident society registered under the Provident Insurance
Societies Act, 1912  fail to comply with the expiry of twelve months from the commencement
of this Act amend the rules so as to comply with these provisions.
75.  (1) No amendment of any rule of a provident society shall be valid until it has
been sent to the Authority and has been registered by it.
(2) The Authority on being satisfied that the proposed amendment is not contrary to
the provisions of this Act shall, unless it is of opinion that the amendment unfairly affects
the rights of existing members or policy-holders of the society, issue to the society an
acknowledgement of the registration of the amended rule.
76. Every provident society shall on demand deliver free of cost to any member of
the society a copy of the rules of the society and to any person other than a member a copy
of such rules on the payment of a sum not exceeding on rupee.
77.  Every provident society shall have in India a principal office (on the outside of
which it shall keep displayed its name in a conspicuous position in legible characters) to
which all communications and notices may be addressed, and shall give notice to the
Authority of any change in the location thereof within twenty-eight days of its occurrence.
78. Where any notice, advertisement or other official publication of a provident society
contains a statement of the amount of the authorised capital of the society, the publication
also contain a statement of the amount the capital which has been subscribed and the amount
paid-up.
79.  Every provident society shall keep at its principal office in India—
(a) such registers in such form as may be prescribed;
(b) a cash-book in which shall be entered separately for each class of contingency
separately specified in section 65 all sums received and expended by the society and
the matters in respect of which the receipt or expenditure takes place;
(c) a ledger;
(d) a journal.
80.  (1) Every provident society shall at the expiry of the calender year prepare a
revenue account and balance-sheet in the prescribed  form verified in the prescribed manner,
together with a report on the general state of the society's affairs and shall cause the revenue
account and balance-sheet to be audited by an auditor, and the auditor shall so far as may be
in the audit of a provident society have the powers of, exercise the functions vested in, and
discharge the duties and be subject to the liabilities imposed on, an auditor of companies by
section 145 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913.
(2) Every provident society shall at the expiry of the calender year prepare with
respect to that year—
(a) a statement showing separately for each class of contingency separately
specified in section 65—
(i) the number of new policies effected, the total amount insured thereby
and the total premium income received  in respect thereof and the number of
existing policies discontinued during the year with the total amount insured
thereby, and
5 of 1912.
7 of 1913.
Amendment of
rules.
Supply of copy
of rules.
Registered
office.
Publication of
authorised
capital to
contain also
subscribed and
paid-up
capital.
Registers and
books.
Revenue
account,
balance-sheet
and annual
statements.

130
(ii) the total  amount of claims made and the total amount paid in
satisfaction thereof;
(b) a statement showing details of every insurance effected on a life other than
the life of the person insuring; and
(c) a statement  showing the total amount paid as allowances to agents and
canvassers.
(3) Until the expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act this section and
section 73 shall apply to provident societies registerd before the commencement of this Act
under  the Provident Insurance Societies Act, 1912 as if the reference to the calender year
were a reference to either the financial year or the calender year.
81.  (1) Every provident society shall once in every five years or at such shorter
intervals as may be laid down by the rules of the society cause an investigation to be made
as at the last day of a calender year into its financial condition including the valuation of its
liabilities and assets by an actuary.
(2) The report of the actuary shall contain an abstract in which shall be stated—
(a) the general principal adopted in the valuation, including the method by
which the valuation age of lives was ascertained,
(b) the rate at each age of the mortality and any other factor assumed and the
annuity values used in valuation,
(c) the reserve values held against policies effected,
(d) the rate of interest assumed, and
(e) the provision made for expenses,
and shall have appended to it a certificate signed by a principal officer of the society that all
material necessary for proper valuation has been placed at the disposal of the actuary and
that full and accurate particulars of every policy under which there is a liability either
actual or contingent have been furnished to the actuary for the purpose of the investigation.
(3) If the actuary finds that the financial condition of the society is such that no
surplus exists for distribution as bonus to the policy-holders, or as dividend to the share-
holders, he shall state  in his report whether in his opinion the society is insolvent and, if so,
whether it should be wound up or not, and the extent to which in his opinion existing
contracts should be modified or existing rates of premium should be adjusted to make good
the deficiency in the assets.
82.  (1) The revenue account and balance-sheet with the auditor’s report thereon and
the report on the general state of the society's affairs referred to in sub-section  ( 1) of
section 80 shall be printed and four copies of these and of the statements referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 80, shall be furnished as returns to the Authority within six months
from the end of the period to which they relate.
(2) All the material necessary for the proper valuation of the liabilities of the society
under the provisions of section 81 shall be placed at the disposal of the actuary within three
months from the end of the period to which such mateiral relates, and the report and abstract
referred to in section 81 shall be furnished as a return to the Authority within a further
period of three months:
Provided that the Central Government may in any case extend the time allowed by
this sub-section for the furnishing of such return by a period not exceeding three months.
(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 15 relating to the copies therein
referred to shall apply to the returns referred to in sub-section ( 1) of this section, and the
provisions of section 17 shall apply to the accounts and balance-sheet of a provident society
 5 of 1912.
Actuarial report
and abstract.
Submission of
returns to
Authority.

131
being a company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913,  or under the Indian
Companies Act, 1882, or under the Indian Companies Act, 1866  or under any Act repealed
thereby, as they apply to the accounts and balance-sheet of an insurer, and the Authority
may exercise, in respect of returns made by a provident society and in respect of an
investigation or valuation to which section 81 refers, the same powers as are exercisable by
it under section 21 and section 22, respectively, in the case of an insurer.
83.  (1) Every provident society, registered after the commencement of this Act, shall
cause every scheme of insurance which it proposes  to put into operation, and every provident
society registered before the commencement of this Act under the provisions of the Provident
Insurance Societies Act, 1912, shall cause any scheme which it proposes to put into operation
for  the first time, after such commencement to be examined by an actuary, and shall not
receive any premium or contribution in connection with the scheme until the actuary has
certified that the rates, advantages, terms and conditions of the scheme are workable and
sound and such certificate has been forwarded to the
 Authority.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to any  alteration of a scheme already
in operation, but the Authority may, if it is of opinion that the alteration unfairly affects the
interests of existing policy-holders, prohibit the alteration, and, if he does so, the society
shall not put the altered scheme into operation, unless it first discharges to the satisfaction
of the Authority all its liabilities to those of the existing policy-holders who dissent from
the alteration.
(3) Every provident society registered before the commencement of this Act under
the provisions of the Provident Insurance Societies Act, 1912  shall, as soon as may be and
in any event before the expiry of six months from the commencement of this Act, submit all
scheme of insurance which the society has in operation at the commencement of this Act to
examination by an actuary and shall, before the expiration of six months from the
commencement of the Insurance  (Amendment) Act, 1941 send the report of the actuary
thereon to the Authority.
(4) The report of the actuary shall state in respect of each scheme whether
 the rates,
advantages, terms and conditions are workable and sound and, where no actuarial report
such as is referred to in section 81 has been made within the two years preceding the
examination,  the report shall also state whether the assets of the society are sufficient to
meet its liabilities under the existing schemes, and, if not, how in the opinion of the actuary
the existing contracts should be modified.
(5) If the rates, advantages, terms and conditions of any scheme are not reported by
the actuary to be workable and sound, the Authority shall give notice to the society prohibiting
the scheme, and the society shall not after its receipt of such notice enter into any new
contract of insurance under the scheme, but all rights and liabilities in respect of contracts
of insurance entered into by the society before receipt of the notice shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (6), continue as if the notice has not been given.
(6) Where a scheme is prohibited under the provisions of sub-section (5) the society
shall, where its assets are sufficient to meet all existing liabilites, set apart out its assets the
sum sufficient in the opinion of the actuary to meet the liabilities incurred under the scheme
so prohibited and where its assets are not so sufficient, within three months from the date of
the Prohibition, apply to the court for a modification of its existing contracts or failing such
modification for the winding-up of the society.
84.  Where a provident society effects policies of insurance in connection with more
than one of the classes of contingency separately specified in sub-section (2) of  section 65,
the receipts and payments in respect of each such class shall be recorded in a separate
account in the cash-book kept in accordance with seciton 79.
7 of 1913.
6 of 1882.
10 of 1866.
5 of 1912.
5 of 1912.
Separation of
accounts and
funds.
Actuarial
examination of
schemes.
13 of 1914.

132
85. (1) * * * * *
(2) No funds or investments of a provident society except a deposit made under
section 73 or under the law of any state or country relating to insurance shall be kept
otherwise than in the name of the society
  for in the name of a public officer approved by the
Central Government.
(3) No loan shall be made out of the assets of a provident society to any director,
manager, managing agent, auditor, actuary, officer or partner of the society, except on the
security of a policy of insurance held in the society and within its surrender value and no
such loans shall be made to any concern of which a director, manager, managing agent,
actuary, officer or partner  of the society is a director, manager, managing agent, actuary,
officer or partner:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to loans made by a provident
society to a banking company:
Provided further that where any event occurs giving rise to circumstances, the existence
of which at the time of the grant of any subsisting loan would have made such grant a
contravention of this sub-section, such loan shall, notwithstanding any contract to the
contrary, be repaid within three months from the occurrence of such event or from the
commencement of the Insurance  (Amendment) Act, 1946 whichever is later; and in case of
default, the director, manager, auditor, actuary or partner concerned shall without prejudice
to any other penalty which he may incur, ceases to hold office in the society on the expiry
of the said three months.
(3A) Any loan prohibited under sub-section (3), made before and outstanding at the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1940 shall be repaid before the 1st day
of January, 1941, and in case of default the director, manager, managing agent, auditor,
actuary, officer or partner who has received the loan or is connected with the concern which
has received the loan, as the case may be, shall cease to hold office in or be partner of the
society and shall be ineligible to hold office in or to be a partner of the society until the loan
is repaid.
(4) Any director,
 manager, managing agent, auditor, actuary, officer or partner, of a
society which contravences the provisions of sub-section (3), who is knowingly a party to
the contravention, shall without prejudice to any other penalty which he may incur be jointly
and severally liable to the society for the amount of the loan, and such amount, together
with interest from the date of the loan at such rate not exceeding twelve per cent. per annum
as the Authority may fix, shall on application by the Authority to any Civil Court of competent
jurisdiction be recoverable by execution as if a decree for such amount had been passed by
that court.
(5) The provisions of section 86D of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 shall not apply
to a loan granted to a director of a provident society being a company if the loan is one
granted on the security of a policy on which the society bears the risk and the policy was
issued to the director on his own life and the loan is within the surrender value of the policy.
86.  The books of every provident society shall at all reasonable times be open to
inspection by the Authority or any person appointed by it in this behalf  by any member or
policy-holder of the society who has, on application in this behalf, been permitted by the
Authority, subject to such condition, if any, as it impose, to make such inspection.
87.  (1) The Authority shall at least once in two years and may, if it thinks fit, at any
time visit personally or depute a suitable person to visit the principal office of a provident
society or the principal office in India of a society having its principal place of business or
domicile outside India and inquire into the affairs of the society, or may, after giving notice
to the society any giving it an opportunity to be head, direct such an inquiry to be made by
an auditor or actuary appointed by it or by both an auditor and an actuary appointed
simultaneously, or first by an auditor only or an actuary only and afterwards by an actuary
or auditor.
6 of 1946.
20 of 1940.
7 of 1913.
Investment
funds.
Inspection of
books.
Inquiry by or on
behalf of
Authority.

133
(2) For the purposes of any such inquiry the Authority or the auditor or actuary, at the
case may be, shall be entitled to exmine all books and documents of the society and may
demand from the society or any officer of the society such explanations as he may require
on any matter relating to the affairs of the society.
(3) The results of any such inquiry shall be recorded in writing by the person making
the inquiry, and four copies of the record shall be supplied to the Authority and when the
inquiry is completed, a copy of the record, or of each such record where more than one are
made in the course of the same inquiry, shall be sent by the Authority to the society concerned
and shall be open to inspection by any member or policy-holder of the society.
(4) All expenses of an incidental to any inquiry made by an auditor or actuary under
sub-section (1) including any expenses incurred before the date on which the Authority
receives notice of  an appeal under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 110 shall be
defrayed by the provident society, shall have priority over other debts due from the society,
and shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.
(5) The Authority may by notice in writing require the provident society to comply
within a time to be specified therein (not being less than fifteen days from the receipt of the
notice by the society) with any directions he may issue to remedy defects disclosed by an
inquiry under this section.
(6) If the society fails to comply with any directions issued under sub-section (5), the
Authority may, after giving notice to the society and giving it an opportunity to be heard,
apply to the Court for the  winding up of the society.
87A.  (1) The insurance business of a provident society may be transferred to any
person or transferred to or amalgamated with the insurance business of any other provident
society in  accordance with a scheme prepared under this section and sanctioned by the
Authority.
(2) Any scheme prepared under this section shall set out the agreement under which
the transfer or amalgamation is proposed to be effect, and shall contain such further
provisions as may be necessary  for giving effect to the scheme.
 (3) Before an application is made to the  Authority to sanction any such scheme,
notice of the intention to make the application together with a statement of the nature of the
amalgamation or transfer, as the case may be, and of the reason therefor, shall at least two
months before the application is made, be sent to the  Authority and certified copies, four in
number, of each of the following documents shall be furnished to him and other such copies
shall during the two months aforesaid, be kept open for the inspection of the members and
policy-holders at the principal and branch offices of the provident societies concerned,
namely:—
(a) a draft of the agreement or deed under which it is proposed to effect the
amalgamation or transfer,
(b) balance-sheets in respect of the insurance business of each of the provident
societies concerned in such amalgamation or transfer,
(c) actuarial reports and abstracts in respect of the insurance business of each
of the provident societies so concerned,
(d) a report on the proposed amalgamation or transfer prepared by an
independent actuary,
(e) any other reports on which the scheme of amalgamation or transfer was
founded,
and the balance-sheets, reports and abstracts referred to in clauses ( b), (c) and (d) shall be
prepared as at the date at which the amalgamation or transfer if sanctioned by the Authority
is to take effect, which date shall not be more than twelve months before the date on which
the application to the Authority is made under this section:
Amalgamation
and transfer of
insurance
business.

134
Provided that the Authority may exempt the provident society or societies concerned
from furnishing to him and from keeping open for inspection any one or more of the above
documents.
(4) When any application such as is referred to in sub-section ( 3) is made to the
Authority he may require, if for special reasons he so directs, notice of the application to be
sent to every person resident  in India who is the holder of a policy of any provident society
concerned and may cause a statement  of the nature and terms of the  amalgamation or
transfer, as the case may be, to be published in such manner and for such periods as he may
direct, and after hearing the societies concerned, such policy-holders as apply to be heard
and such other persons as he may  deem fit, may sanction the arrangement, if he is satisfied
that no sufficient objection to the arrangement has been established and shall make such
consequential orders as are necessary to give effect to the arrangement, including orders as
to the disposal of any deposit made under section 73:
Provided that—
(a) no part of the deposit made by any party to the amalgamation or transfer
shall be returned except where, after effect is given to the  arrangement the whole of
the deposit to be made by the provident society carrying on the amalgamated business
or the person to whom the business is transferred is completed;
(b) only so much shall be returned as is no longer required to complete the
deposit last mentioned in clause ( a);
(c) while the  deposit last mentioned in clause ( a) remains uncompleted, no
accession, resulting from the arrangement, to the amount already deposited by the
provident society carrying on the amalgamated business or the  person to whom the
business is transferred shall be appropriated as payment or part payment of any
instalment of deposit subsequently due from it or him under section 73.
(5) A copy of the order under sub-section (4) sanctioning or refusing to sanction the
arrangement shall be sent to each of the societies concerned and to each of the policy-
holders who applied to be heard.
(6) If the scheme involves a reduction of the amount of the insurance and other contracts
of the transfer or society or of any or all of the societies concerned in the amalgamation, the
Authority may sanction the scheme, reducing the amount of such contracts upon such terms
and subject to such conditions as he may think proper, and the reduction of the contracts as
sanctioned by the Authority shall be valid and binding on all the parties concerned.
88.  (1) The court may order the winding up of a provident society being a company
incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 or under the Indian Companies Act,
1882 or under the Indian Companies Act, 1866  or under any Act repealed thereby and the
provisions of the Indian Companies Act, 1913  shall subject to the provisions of this Part,
apply accordingly.
(2) In addition to the grounds on which such an order may be based, the court may
order the winding up of a provident society if the Authority, who is hereby authorised to do
so, applies in this behalf to the court on any of the following grounds, namely:—
(a) that the registration of the society has been cancelled under sub-section (4)
of section 70;
(b) that it appears from the returns furnished under the provisions of this Act or
as the result of an inquiry made under section 87 that the society is insolvent;
(c) that the continuance of the society is prejudicial to the interests of the policy-
holders.
(3) A provident society being a company incorporated under the Indian Companies
Act, 1913  or under the Indian Companies Act, 1882  or under the Indian Companies Act,
7 of 1913.
6 of 1882.
10 of 1866.
7 of 1913.
6 of 1882.
Winding up by
court and
voluntary
winding up.

135
1866 or under any Act repealed thereby may be wound up voluntarily in accordance with
the provisions of  the Indian Companies Act, 1913 but shall not be so wound up except for
the purpose of effecting an amalgamation or reconstruction of the society or on the ground
that by reason of its liabilities it cannot continue its business.
(4) A provident society not being a company incorporated under the Indian Companies
Act, 1913 or under the Indian Companies Act, 1882 or under the Indian Companies Act,
1866 or under any Act repealed thereby, may be wound up voluntarily under this Act, if a
resolution is passed by proprietors that the society should be wound up voluntarily for the
purpose or on the ground specified in sub-section ( 3), and the Authority may, in any case
where  he has ordered the cancellation of the registration of a society under sub-section (4)
of section 70, order the winding up of the society under this Act.
89.  The court may make an order reducing the amount of the insurance contracts of
a provident society upon such terms and subject to such conditions as the court think just—
(a) if the Authority as an alternative to cancelling the registration of a society
under sub-section (4) of section 70 applies to the court in this behalf;
(b) if while a society is in liquidation the court thinks fit;
(c) if when a society has been proved to be insolvent, the court thinks fit to do
so in place of making an order for the winding up of the society; or
(d) if the court is satisfied on an application made in this behalf by the society
supported by the report of an actuary, and after giving the policy-holders an opportunity
to be heard that it is desirable to do so.
90.  (1) Where a provident society is to be wound up whether under the Indian
Companies Act, 1913 or under this Act, the society shall, within seven days from the date
of the order of the court ordering the winding up or the passing of the resolution authorising
the winding up, as the case may be, give notice thereof to the Authority, and, except where
the winding up is done by an order of the Court, the Authority shall appoint the liquidator
and shall determine the remuneration to be paid to him:
Provided that if the Authority is not satisfied that the assets of the society are sufficient
to meet the costs of liquidation including the remuneration of the liquidator,  he may decline
to make such appointment, and in such a case the society shall itself appoint a liquidator
who shall carry out the liquidation as if the winding up was being done by an order of the
court.
(2) Any liquidator appointed by the Authority under sub-section (1) may be removed
by the Authority if satisfied that the duties entrusted to him are not being properly
discharged.
90A.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Indian Companies
Act, 1913 the provisions of sections 91, 92 and 93 shall apply to any liquidator appointed
to wind up a provident society, whether by the court, the Authority or the society itself.
91.  (1) A liquidator appointed to wind up a society shall have power—
(a) to institute or defend any legal proceedings on behalf of the society by his
name of office;
(b) to determine the contribution to be made by members of the society
respectively to the assets of the society;
(c) to investigate all claims against the society and to decide questions of priority
arising between claimants;
(d) to determine by what persons and in what proportion the costs of the
10 of 1866.
7 of 1913.
7 of 1913.
6 of 1882.
10 of 1866.
7 of 1913.
7 of 1913.
Reduction of
Insurance
contracts.
Appointment of
liquidator.
Application of
Act to
liquidators.
Powers of
liquidator.

136
liquidation including the remuneration of the liquidator and any expenses incurred
under clause (g) of this sub-section are to be borne;
(e) to give such directions in regard to the collection and distribution of the
assets of the society as may appear to him to be necessary for winding up the affairs
of the society;
(f) to summon, and enforce the attendance of, witnesses and to compel the
production of documents by the same means and as far as may be in the same manner
as is provided in the case of a Civil Court by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
(g) with the sanction of the Authority to employ such establishment and to
obtain such assistance from an actuary or an auditor as may be necessary for the
discharge of his duties;
(h) to sell the immovable and movable property of the society by public auction
or private contract, with power to transfer the whole thereof to any person or society
or to sell the same in parcels.
(2) The liquidator shall, for settling the list of contributories and realising the amount
of contributions, have the same powers as an official liquidator appointed by the court for
the winding up of a company under the Indian Companies Act, 1913.
92.  (1) As soon as a liquidator is appointed to wind up a society he shall take charge
of all property movable or immovable of the society and of all its books and documents.
(2) If any proprietor or officer of the society or any other person retains any portion
of the assets of the society or fails to deliver  to the liquidator any book or document when
so required by the liquidator, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both, and the
court may order the delivery of  the assets or book or document to the liquidator.
(3) The liquidator shall within fifteen days of his appointment send notice by post to
all persons who appear to him to be creditors of the society that a meeting of the creditors
of society will be held on a date not being less than twenty-one or more than twenty-eight
days after his appointment, and at a place and hour to be specified in the notice, and shall
advertise notice of the meeting once in the local Official Gazette and once at least in two
newspapers circulating in the State in which the society is situated.
(4) At the meeting so held the creditors shall determine whether an application shall
be made for the appointment of any person as liquidator in the place of or jointly with the
liquidator already appointed, or for the appointment of a committee of inspection, and, if
they so resovle and an application accordingly is made at any time not later than fourteen
days after the date of the meeting by any creditor appointed for the purpose at the meeting,
the Authority may, if it thinks fit, appoint a suitable person in place of or jointly with the
liquidator already appointed, and, determine the remuneration to be paid to him and if he
considers it desirable, may also appoint a committee of inspection.
(5) The committee of inspection shall, subject to any prescribed conditions have a
general power of supervision over the acts of the liquidator and shall have the right to
inspect his accounts at all reasonable times.
(6) The liquidator shall, with such assistance from an actuary as may be required,
ascertain as soon as practicable the amount of the society's liabiality to every person
appearing by the society's books to be entitled to or interested in any policy issued by the
society, and shall give notice of the amount so found to each such person in the prescribed
manner and each such person on receiving such notice shall be bound by the value so
ascertained.
5 of 1908.
7 of 1913.
Procedure at
liquidation

137
(7) The liquidator shall make a valuation of the assets of the society and an estimate
of the costs of the winding up, and shall on the basis of these settle the list of contributories.
(8) The liquidator shall apply to the Authority for an order for the return of the deposit
made by the society under section 73 and the Authority shall on such application order the
return of the deposit subject to such terms and conditions as he may think fit.
(9) In administering and distributing the assets of the society the liquidator shall have
regard to any directions that may be given by the creditors or contributories at a general
meeting or by the Authority.
(10) The liquidator shall keep books of account in which he shall record the
proceedings at all meetings attended by him, all amounts received or expended by him and
any other matter that may be prescribed, and these books may, with the sanction of the
Authority be inspected by any creditor or contributory.
(11) If the winding up continues for more than a year the liquidator shall summon a
meeting of the creditors and contributories at the end of the first year and of each succeeding
year, and shall lay before them an account of his acts and dealings and of the conduct of the
winding up, and that account together with any views expressed thereon by the meeting
shall be forwarded by the liquidator within one week after the meeting to the Authority.
(12) So far as is not otherwise provided herein or is not otherwise prescribed under
this Act, the liquidator shall so far as practicable follow the procedure to be followed by an
official liquidator appointed by the court for the winding up of a company under the Indian
Companies Act, 1913.
(13) The costs of the liquidation including the remuneration of the liquidator and any
expenses incurred under clause (g) of sub-section  (1) of section 91 or shall, if the liquidator
decides that they shall be payable of the assets of the society, be payable in priority to all
other claims.
93.  (1) As soon as the affairs of a provident society are fully wound up the liquidator
shall prepare an account of the winding up showing how the winding up has been conducted
and the property of the society has been disposed of and shall call a meeting of the members,
creditors and contributories for the purpose of laying before it the account and giving any
explanation thereof.
 (2) Notice of the meetings shall be sent to each person individually and shall be
advertised in the local Official Gazette and in at least two newspapers circulating in the
State in which the society is situated.
 (3) Within one week after the meeting of the liquidator shall send to the Audhority a
copy of the account and shall report to the holding of the meeting and its date and shall
forward to it a copy of the proceedings of the meeting.
 (4) The Authority may return the account to the liquidator if it is incomplete or
unsatisfactory and may require the liquidator to carry out any further steps necessary to
complete the winding up and the liquidator shall comply with such requirement and shall
submit a further report to the Authority within six months.
 (5) If the Authority is satisfied that the affairs of the society have been fully wound
up he shall register the account of the liquidator who shall forthwith make over to the
Authority sums, if any, remaining undisposed of; and on the expiry of three months from
the registering of the account the Authority shall declare the society dissolved and cause
the dissolution of the society to be notified in the local Official Gazette, and the liquidator
shall thereupon be discharged from further responsibility.
 (6) If within a period of five years from the date on which any sums have been made
over to the Authority under sub-section ( 5) an order of a court  of competent jurisdiction
has not been obtained at the instance of any claimant to such sums for their disposal, the
said sums shall become the property of Government.
7 of 1913.
Dissolution of
provident
society.

138
 94.  (1) The provisions of section 38 and section 39 relating to assignment, transfer
and nomination in the case of life insurance policies shall, subject to the provisions of this
section, apply to policies of insurance issued by any provident society covering any of the
contingencies specified in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 65.
PART III A
I
NSURANCE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
94A.  (1) Every insurance co-operative society shall be deemed to be an insurer for
the purposes of this Act.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all the provisions applicable to an insurer
being an Indian insurance company shall, so far as may be, apply to an insurance co-operative
society:
 Provided that the Authority may, by notification, direct that any of the provisions of
this Act,—
(a) shall not apply to any insurance co-operative society; or
(b) shall apply to any insurance co-operative society only with such exceptions,
modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification.
(3) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under proviso to sub-section
(2), shall be laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification
or both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification shall not be issued or,
as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by
both the Houses.
PART IV
M
UTUAL INSURANCE COMPANIES AND CO-OPERATIVE
LIFE INSURANCE SOCIETIES
95.  (1) In this Part, before the date of commencement of the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority Act, 1999—
 ( a) "Mutual Insurance Company" means an insurer, being a company
incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 or under the Indian Companies
Act, 1882, or under the Indian Companies Act, 1866, or under any Act, repealed
thereby, which has no share capital and of which by its constitution only and all
policy-holders are members; and
(b) "Co-operative Life Insurance Society" means an insurer being a society
registered under the co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or under an Act of a State,
Legislature governing the registration of co-operative societies which carries on the
business of life insurance and which has no share capital on which divident or bonus
is payable and of which by its constitution only original members on whose application
the society is registered and all policy-holders are members:
Provided that any Co-operative Life Insurance Society in existence at the
commencement of this Act shall be allowed a period of one year to comply of this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), other co-operative societies
may be admitted as members of a Co-operative Life Insurance Society, without being eligible
to any dividend, profit or bonus.
7 of 1913.
6 of 1882.
10 of 1866.
Nominations
and assign-
ments.
Insurance co-
operative
society to be an
insurer.
Definitions.
2 of 1912.
41 of 1999.

139
(3) A State Government may, subject to  any rules made by the Central Government,
empower the Registrar of co-operative societies of the State to  register co-operative societies
for the insurance of cattle or crops or both under the provisions of the Co-operative Societies
Act in force in the State.
(4) A State Government may make rules not inconsistent with any rules made by the
Central Government to govern such societies, and the provisions of this Act, in so far as
they are inconsistent with those rules, shall not apply to such societies.
96.  The provisions of sections 6 and 7 and of sub-section (2) of section 20, so far as
those provisions are inconsistent with the  provisions of this Part, shall not apply, and the
provisions of this Part shall apply, to Co-operative Life Insurance Societies.
97.  No co-operative life insurance society registered after the 26th day of January
1937 under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912, or under an Act of a State Legislature
governing the registration of co-operative societies shall be registered  under this Act,
unless it has as working capital a sum of fifteen thousand rupees, exclusive of the deposit to
be made before or at the time of application for registration in accordance with sub-section
(2) of section 98 of this Act and of the preliminary expenses, if any, incurred in the formation
of the company or society.
98.  (1) Every Co-operative Life Insurance Society shall, in respect of the life insurance
business carried on by it in the States deposit and keep deposited with one of the offices in
India of the Reserve Bank of India, for and on behalf of the Central Government, a sum of
two hundred thousand rupees in cash or in approved securities estimated at the market
value of the securities on the day of deposit:
The deposit referred to in sub-section (1), may be made in instalments, of which the
first shall be a payment, made before or at the time the application for registration under
this Act is made of not less than twenty-five thousand rupees or such sum as with any
deposit previously made by the insurer under the provisions of the Indian Life Insurance
Companies Act, 1912, brings the amount deposited up to not less than twenty-five thousand
rupees and the subsequent instalments shall be annual instalments made before the expiry
of each subsequent calendar year of an amount in cash or in approved securities estimated
at the market value of the securities on the day of payment of the instalment, equal to not
less than one-third of the premium income in the preceding calendar year as shown in  the
revenue account.
(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 7) of section 7 shall apply in respect of a
Co-operative Life Insurance Society as if for the words ‘under the foregoing provisions of
this section’ the words and figures ‘under the provisions of section 98’ were substituted.
98A.  The provisions of section 29 shall apply to Co-operative Life Insurance Societies
as they apply to other insurers.
99.  No transferee or assignee of a policy issued by an insurer to whom this Part
applies shall become a member of   a Mutual Insurance Company or a Co-operative Life
Insurance Society merely by reason of any such transfer or assignment.
100.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 79 and section 131 of the Indian
Companies Act, 1913, a Mutual Insurance Company or a Co-operative Life Insurance Society
may, instead of sending the notices and the copies of the balance-sheet, revenue account
and other documents which they are required to send to the members under those sections,
publish such notice together with a summary in the prescribed form of the balance-sheet
and revenue account once in a newspaper published in the English language and in newspaper
published in an Indian language circulating in the place where the principal office of the
company  in situated:
2 of 1912.
6 of 1912.
Application of
Act to Mutual
Insurance
Companies and
Co-operative
Life Insurance
Societies.
Working capital
of  Mutual
Insurance
Companies and
Co-operative
Life Insurance
Societies.
Deposits to be
made by
Mutual
Insurance
Companies and
Co-operative
Life Insurance
Societies.
Prohibition of
loans.
Transferees and
assignees of
policies not to
become
members.
Publication of
notices and
documents of
Mutual
Insurance
Companies and
Co-operative
Life Insurance
Societies.
7 of 1913.

140
Provided that, where any members of the company are domiciled in a State other
than that in which the principal office of the company is situated, publication of the notice
of the meetings shall be made in a newspaper or newspapers published in the principal
languages of that State and circulating therein and any member of the company domiciled
in that State shall be entitled on application to the company to receive from it a copy of the
balance-sheet and revenue account.
101.  Every Mutual Insurance company and every Co-operative Life Insurance Society
shall, on the application of any member made within two years from the date on which any
such document is furnished to the Registrar of companies under the provisions of section
134 of the Indian Companies Act, 1937, or to the Registrar of Co-operative Societies of the
State in which the Co-operative Life Insurance Society is registered, furnish a copy of the
document free of cost to the member within fourteen days of the application.
* * * * *
PART V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
102. If any person, who is required under this Act, or rules or regulations made
thereunder,—
(a) to furnish any document, statement, account, return or report to the Authority,
fails to furnish the same; or
(b) to comply with the directions, fails to comply with such directions;
(c) to maintain solvency margin, fails to maintain such solvency margin;
(d) to comply with the directions on the insurance treaties, fails to comply with
such directions on the insurance treaties,
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees for each such failure and
punishable with fine.
103.  If a person makes a statement, or furnishes any document, statement, account
return or which is false and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not
believe to be true,—
(a) he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees for each such
failure, and
(b) he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years
or with fine for each such failure.
104.  If a person fails to comply with the provisions of section 27 or section 27A or
section 27B or section 27C or section 27D, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
five lakh rupees for each such failure.
105. If any director, managing director, manager or other officer or employees of an
insurer wrongfully obtains possession of any property or wrongfully applies to any purpose
of the Act, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding two lakh rupees for each such
failure.
* * * * *
105B. If an insurer fails to comply with the provisions of section 32B, he shall be
liable to a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees for each such failure and shall be punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine for each such failure.
* * * * *
7 of 1913.
Supply of
documents to
members.
Penalty for
default in
complying
with, or act in
contravention
of this Act.
Penalty for
carrying on
insurance
business in
contravention
of sections 3, 7
and 98.
Penalty for false
statement in
document.
Wrongfully
obtaining or
withholding
property.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
section 32B.

141
106A. (1) * * * * *
(2) The orders to which this section applies are the following, namely:—
(a) an order for the attachement in execution of a decree of any deposit made
under section 7 or section 98;
(b) an order under section 9 or section 59 for the return of any such deposit;
* * * * *
(f) an order under section 89 reducing the amount of the insurance contracts of
a provident society.
107.  (1) Except where proceedings are instituted by the Authority or an Administrator
appointed under section 52A no proceedings under this Act against an insurer or any director,
managing agent, manager, secretary or other officer of an insurer or any liquidator or any
employee or agent of an insurer or any person who is liable under sub-section (2) of section
41 or any other person shall be instituted by any person unless he has previous thereto
obtained the sanction of the Advocate-General of the State where the principal place of
business in India of such insurer is situate to the institution of such proceedings:
Provided that where the principal place of business of such insurer is situated in a
Union territory references in this section to the Advocate-General of the Province shall be
construed as references to the Attorney-General for India.
(2) This section shall apply in respect of a provident society as defined in Part III as
it applies in respect of an insurer.
107A.  Every whole-time chairman, whole-time director, auditor, liquidator, manager
and any other employee of insurer shall be deemed to be a public servant for the purposes
of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code.
* * * * *
109.  (1) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the
first class shall try any offence under this Act.
(2) No court shall take congnizance of any offence punishable under sub-section (4)
of section 34B or sub-section ( 1A) of section 102 except upon complaint in writing made
by an officer of the Central Government generally or specially authorised in writing, in this
behalf by the Authority and no Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a
Magistrate of the first class shall try any such offence.
110.  (1) An appeal shall lie to the court having jurisdiction from any of the following
orders, namely:—
(a) an order under section 3 cancelling the registration of an insurer;
(b) an order under section 5 directing the insurer to change his name;
(c) an order under section 42 cancelling the licence issued to an agent;
(d) an order under section 75 refusing to register an amendment of rules;
(e) an order under section 87 or section 87A;
(f) an order made in the course of the winding up or insolvency of a porovident
society.
45 of 1860.
Notice to an
hearing of
Authority.
Previous
sanction of
Advocate-
General for
institution of
proceedings.
Chairman, etc.,
to be public
servants.
Cognizance of
offences.
Appeals.

142
(2) The court having jurisdiction for the purposes of sub-section ( 1) shall be the
principal court of civil jurisdiction within whose local limits the principal place of business
of the insurer concerned is situate.
(3) An appeal shall lie from any order made under sub-section ( 1) to the authority
authorised to hear appeals from the decisions of the court making the same and the decision
on such appeal shall be final.
(4) No appeal under this section shall be entertained unless it is made before the
expiration of four months from the date on which the order appealed against was
communicated to the appellant.
* * * * *
110E.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Life Insurance Corporation Act,
1956, the provisions of sections 3A, 27B, 28B, 33, 34A, clause ( a) of sections 34E, 34F,
40C, 44A, 64U to 64UM  (both inclusive), 64V, 64VA, 64VB, 64VC, 101C, 110D, 110G
and 110H, shall also apply, so far as may be, to and in relation to the general insaurance
business carried on by the Life Insurance Corporation of India and the provisions of section
37A shall also apply to that Corporation if it becomes an acquiring insurer.
* * * * *
110G.  ( 1) The Central Government shall constitute a Consultative Committee
consisting of the Chairperson of the Authority (who shall be the Chairman thereof) and not
more than four other members having special knowledge and experience of the business of
insurance.
(2) The term of office of, and the allowances payable to the members of the
Consultative Committee, the procedure to be followed by, and the quorum necessary for
the transaction of business of, the Consultative Committee and the manner of filing casual
vacancies therein shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) Before making any order under sections 34, 34A, 34B, 34C, 34E, 34F, 34G, sub-
sections (4) and (7) of sections 64UM and section 64VC, the Chairperson of the Authority
shall consult the Consultative Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1).
110H.  (1) Any person aggrieved by any order made by the Authority under sections
27D, 34A, 34B, 34C, 34E, 34F, 34G, sub-sections ( 1), ( 4) and ( 7) of section 64UM or
section 64VC may, within a period of thirty days from the date of such order prefer an
appeal against such order to the Central Government and that Government may, by order,
confirm, modify or reverse the order made by the Authority and the order so made by the
Government shall be final.
(2) No claim for compensation shall lie in favour of any person for anything done in
pursuance of an order of the Authority so long as such order was effective.
(3) The Central Government may, on the application of an appellant, stay, until the
decision of the appeal, the operation of any order made under section 34 or sub-section (5)
of section 34B or sub-clause ( v) of clause (b) of section 34E.
111.  ( 1) Any process or notice required to be served on an insurer or provident
society shall be sufficiently served if addressed to any person registered with the Authority
as a person authorised to accept notices on behalf of the insurer of provident society and
left at, or sent by registered post to the address of such person as registered with the Authority.
(2) Any notice or other document which is by this Act required to be sent to any
policy-holder may be addressed and sent to the person to whom notices respecting such
policy are usually sent and any notice so addressed and sent shall be deemed to be notice to
the holder of such policy:
31 of 1956.
Sections  3A,
27B, 28B,33,
etc., to apply to
general
insurance
business of the
Life Insurance
Corporation of
India.
Constitution of
Consultative
Committee.
Appeals.
Service of
notices.

143
Provided that, where any person claiming to be interested in a policy as transferee,
assignee or nominee has given to an insurer or to a provident society notice in writing of his
interest, any notice which is by this Act required to be sent to policy-holders shall also be
sent to such person at the address specified by him in his notice.
* * * * *
113. (1) A policy of life insurance under which the whole of the benefits become
payable either on the occurrence, or at a fixed interval or fixed intervals after the accurrence,
of a contingency which is bound to happen, shall, if all premiums have been paid for at
least three consecutive years in the case of a policy issued by an insurer, or five years in the
case of a policy issued by a provident society as defined in Part III, acquire a guaranteed
surrender value, to which shall be added the surrender value of any subsisting bonus already
attached to the policy, and every such policy issued by an insurer shall show the guaranteed
surrender value of the policy at the close of each year after the second year of its currency
or at the close of each period of three years throughout the currency of the policy:
Provided that the requirments of this sub-section as to the addition of the surrender
value of the bonus attaching to a policy at surrender shall be deemed to have been complied
with where the method of calculation of the guaranteed surrender value of the policy makes
provisions for the surrender vlaue of the bonus attaching to the policy:
Provided further that the requirements of this sub-section as to the showing of the
guaranteed surrender value on a policy shall be deemed to have been complied with where
the insurer shows on the policy the guranteed surrender value of the policy by means of a
formula accepted in this behalf by the Authority as satisfying the said requirements:
Provided further that the provisions of this sub-section as to the showing of the
guaranteed surrender value on a policy shall not take effect until after the expiry of six
months from such date as the Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint
in this behalf.
(2) Nothwithstanding any contract to the contrary, a policy which has acquired a
surrender value shall not lapse by reason of the non-payment of further premiums but shall
be kept alive to the extent of  paid-up sum insured, and the paid-up sum insured shall for the
purposes of this sub-section include in full all subsisting reversionary bonuses that have
already attached to the policy, and shall, where the policy is one on which the maximum
number of annual premiums payable is fixed and the premiums are of uniform amount,
before the inclusion of such bonuses not less than the amount bearing to the total sum
insured by the policy exclusive of bonuses the same proportion as the total period for
which premiums have already been paid bears to the maximum period for which premiums
were originally payable.
(3) A policy kept alive to the extent of the paid-up sum insured under sub-section (2)
shall not be entitled by virtue of that sub-section to participate in any profits declared
distributable after the conversion of the policy into a paid-up policy.
(4) Sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) shall not apply—
(a) where the paid-up sum insured by a policy, being a policy issued by an
insurer, is less than one hundred rupees inclusive of any attached bonus, or takes the
form of an annuity of less than twenty-five rupees, or where the paid-up sum insured
by a policy, being a policy issued by a provident society, as defined in Part III, is less
than fifty rupees inclusive of any attached bonus or takes the form of an annuity of
less than twenty-five rupees, or
(b) where the parties after the default has occurred in the payment of the premium
agree in writing to some other arrangement, or
(c) to policies in which the surrender value is automatically applied under the
terms of the contract to maintaining the policy in force after its lapse through non-
payment of premium.
Acquisition of
surrender
values by
policy.

144
114. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may prescribe—
* * * * *
(c) the procedure to be followed by the Reserve Bank of India in dealing with
deposits made in pursuance of this Act, including the receipt of, custody of, withdrawal
of, and payment of interest on securities lodged as such deposits, and their inspection
and verification by the Authority.
* * * * *
114A. (1) * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters namely:—
(a) the qualifictions to be possessed by actuaries;
(aa) the matters including fee relating to the registration of insurers under section 3;]
(b) the manner of suspension or cancellation of registration under sub-section
(5E) of section 3;
(c) such fee, not exceeding five thousand rupees, as may be determined by the
regulations for issue of a duplicate certificate of registration under sub-section (7) of
section 3;
(d) the matters relating to the renewal of registration and fee therefor under
section 3A;
(e) the manner and procedure for divesting excess share capital under sub-
section (2) of section 6AA;
(f) the preparation of balance-sheet, profit and loss account and a separate
account of receipts and payaments and revenue account under sub-section ( 1A) of
section11;
(g) the manner in which an abstract of the report of the actuary to be specified
under the fifth proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 13;
(h) the form and manner in which the statement referred to in sub-section (4) of
section 13 shall be appended;
(i) the time, manner and other conditions of investment of assets held by an
insurer under sub-sections (1), (1A) and (2) of section 27D;
(ia) the form in which a return showing the investments made out of the
controlled fund shall be submitted by an insurer carrying on life insurance business
under sub-section (2) of section 28A;
(ib) the form in which a return showing all the changes that occurred in the
investments shall be submitted by an insurer carrying on life insurance business under
sub-section (2) of section 28A;
(ic) the form in which a return showing the investment made out of assets shall
be submitted by an insurer carrying on general insurance business under sub-section
(1) of section 28B;
(id) the form in which a return showing all the changes that occurred in the
investment shall be submitted by an insurer carrying on general insurance business
under sub-section (2
) of section 28B;
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.
Power of
Authority to
make regulations.

145
(ie) the form of the statement and the sum to be specified under sub-section (2)
of section 31B;]
(j) the minimum  information to be maintained by insurer in their books, the
manner in which such information should be maintained, the checks and other
verifications to be adopted by insurers in that connection and all other matters
incidental thereto under sub-section (8) of section 33;
(k) the manner for making an application, the manner and the fee for issue of a
licence to act as an insurance agent under sub-section ( 1) of section 42;
(l) the fee and the additional fee to be determined for renewal of licence of
insurance agent under sub-section (3) of section 42;
(m) the requisite qualifications and practical training to act as an insurance
agent under clause (e) of sub-section (4) of section 42;
(n) the passing of examination to act as an insurance agent under clause ( f) of
sub-section (4) of section 42;
(o) the code of conduct under clause ( g) of sub-section (4) of section 42;
(p) the fee not exceeding rupees fifty for issue of duplicate licence under sub-
section (6) of section 42;
(q) the manner and the fees for issue of a licence to an intermediary or an
insurance intermediary under sub-section (1) of section 42D;
(r) the fee and the additional fee to be determined for renewal of licence of
intermediaries or insurance intermediairies under sub-section ( 3) of section 42D;
(s) the requisite qualifications and practical training of intermediaries or
insurance intermediaries under clause (e) of sub-section (5) of section 42D;
(t) the examination to be passed to act as an intermediary or insurance
intermediary under clause (f) of sub-section (5) of section 42D;
(u) the code of conduct under clause ( g) of sub-section (5) of section 42D;
(v) the fee for issue of duplicate licence under sub-section ( 7) of section 42D;
(va) the amount of commission, fee or as remuneratioin in any form not
exceeding  thirty per cent. to be paid or contract to be paid under sub-section ( 1) of
sectiion 42E;
(vb) the requirements of capital, form of business and other conditions to act as
an intermediary or insurance intermediary under sub-sectiion ( z) of section 42E;
(vc) the form of balance-sheet, as may be specified by the Authority under sub-
section (1) section 49;
(w) such matters as specified under sub-section (2) of section 64UB relating to
the Tariff Advisory Committee;
(x) the matters relating to licensing of surveyors and loss assessors, their duties,
responsibilities and other professional requirements under section 64UM;
(y) such other asset or assets as may be specified under clause (h) of sub section
(1) of section 64V for the purposes of ascertaining sufficiency of assets under section
64V A;
(z) the valuation of assets and liabilities under sub-section ( 3) of section 64V;
(za)  the matters specified under sub-section ( 1A) of section 64V A relating to
sufficiency of assets;

146
(zb) the manner of receipt of premium to be specified under sub-section (6) of
section 64VB;
(zb) the matters relating to re-insurance under sections 101 A and 101B;
(zc) the matters relating to redresal of grievances of policy-holders to protect
their interest and to lregulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of insurance industry;
and
(zd) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified by the regulations
made by he Authority or in respect  of which provision is to be made or may be made
by the regulations;
(f) the matters to be prescribed for the purposes of section 48;
* * * * *
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
(See section 13)
R
EGULATIONS FOR PREPARING STATEMENTS OF BUSINESS IN FORCE AND REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE
TO SUCH STATEMENTS
PART I
REGULATIONS
1. Statements prepared under this Schedule must be prepared, so far as practicable,
in tabular form and must be identified by numbers and letters corresponding with those of
the paragraphs of Part II of this Schedule.
2. Except with respect to rates of premium or contribution, items in statements prepared
under this Schedule are to be shown to the nearest rupee.
3. Extra premium shown in the Forms of Summary and Valuation prepared under the
Fourth Schedule to this Act must  not be included in statements prepared under this Schedule.
4. Every statement prepared under this Schedule shall be signed by the actuary making
the investigation in connection with which it is prepared.
5. For the purposes of this Schedule the following expressions have the meanings
hereby respectively assigned to them, namely:—
(a) "annual loading" means the provision made for future expenses and profits;
(b) "extra premiums" means a charge for any risk not provided for in the minimum
contract premium;
(c) "net premiums" means the premiums taken credit for in the valuation in
connection with which any statement is prepared; and
(d) "valuaton date" means as respects any valuation the date as at which the
valuation is made.
PART II
R
EQUIREMENTS FOR STATEMENTS APPLICABLE TO LIFE INSURANCE
The statements required to be prepared under this Part of this Schedule are as follows,
namely:—
1. Statements, separately prepared in respect of policies with and without participation
in profits, showing:—
(a) as respects policies for the whole term of life, the rates of office premiums
charged, in accordance with the published tables in use, for new policies giving
the rates for decennial ages at entry from 20 to 70 inclusive; and

147
(b) as respects endowment insurance policies, the rates of office premiums charged,
in accordance with the published tables in use, for new policies with original
terms of ten, fifteen, twenty, thirty and forty years, giving the rates for decennial
ages at entry from 20 to 40 inclusive, but excluding policies under which the
age at maturity exceeds 60.
2. Statements, separately prepared in respect of policies with immediate profits, with
deferred profits, with profits under discounted bonus systems, and without profits, showing
in quinquennial groups—
(a) as respects policies for the whole term of life—
(i) the total amount assured (specifying sums assured and reversionary
bonuses separately), grouped according to ages attained;
(ii) the amount per annum, after deducting abatements made by application
of bonus, of office premiums payable throughout life, and of the
corresponding net premiums, grouped according to ages attained; and
(iii) the amount  per annum, after deducting abatements made by application
of bonus, of office premiums payable for a limited number of years and,
either, the corresponding net premiums grouped in accordance with the
grouping adopted for the purposes of the valuation, or, the annual loading
reserved for the remaining duration of the policies, grouped according to
ages attained.
(b) as respects endowment insurance policies—
(i) the total amount assured (specifying sums assured and reversionary
bonuses separately) grouped in accordance with the grouping adopted
for the purposes of the valuation; and
(ii) the amount per annum, after deducting abatements made by application
of bonus, of office premiums payable and of the corresponding net
premiums, grouped in accordance with the grouping adopted for the
purposes of the valuation:
Provided that—
(a) as respects endowment insurance policies which will reach maturity in less
than five years, the information required by sub-paragraph ( b) ( i) of this
paragraph must be given for each year instead of in quinquennial groups; and
(b) where the office premiums payable under policies for the whole term of life
for a limited number of years, or the office premiums payable under endowment
insurance policies, or the corresponding net premiums, are grouped for the
purposes of the valuation otherwise than according to the number of years'
payments remaining to be made, or where the sums assured under endowment
insurance policies are grouped for the purposes of the valuation otherwise
than according to the years in which the policies will  mature for payment or
in which they are assumed to mature if earlier than the true year, then, in any
such case the valuation constants and an explanation of the method by which
they are calculated must be given for each group, and in the case of the sums
assured under endowment insurance policies a statement must also be given
of the amount assured maturing for payment in each of the two years following
the valuation date.
3. Statements as respects any policies in force under which premiums cease to be
payable, whether permanently or temporarily, during disability arising from sickness or
accident, showing the total amount of the office premiums payable.

148
4. Statements as respects immediate annuities on single lives for the whole term of
life, separately prepared in respect of annuities on male and female lives, showing in
quinquennial age groups the total amount of such annuities.
5. Statements as respects deferred annuities, separately prepared in respect of annuities
on male and female lives, showing the specimen reserve values for annuities of one hundred
rupees which will be produced on maturity on the basis of valuation adopted at ages, in the
case of male lives, 60 and 65, and in the case of female lives, 55 and 60; the said statements
must show the specimen reserve values which will be produced under the table of annual
premiums in use for new policies, and if under any other table of annual premiums in use
for any other deferred annuity policies in force smaller reserve values will be produced, the
like specimens of these must also be given.
6. Statements as respects any policies of insurance upon the lives of a group of persons,
whereby sums assured are payable in respect of the several persons included in the group,
showing the total claims paid since the date as at which the last statements were prepared
under this Part of this Schedule or, where no such statements have been prepared, since the
date on which the insurer began to carry on the class of business to which the statements
relate, and the reserve  for unexpired risks and outstanding claims.
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
PART A
[See section 42B( 1)]
T
ERMS DEEMED TO BE INCLUDED IN EVERY CONTRACT BETWEEN
AN INSURER CARRYING ON GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS
AND A PRINCIPAL AGENT
1. All payments of commission to insurance agents shall be made by the principal
agent on behalf of the insurer.
2. The principal agent shall procure or cause to be procured  through insurance agents
such an amount of general insurance business of any class for the procurement of which  he
has been appointed, as will yield a gross premium income of not less than twenty thousand
rupees in each calender year.
3. In the event of the principal agent failing in any celender year to comply with the
requirements of clause 2, he shall forfeit to the insurer—
(i) one-quarter of the total remuneration payable to him by the insurer for that
year, if the class of  business for the procurement of which he has been
appointed is fire or miscellaneous insurance business, or
(ii) one-third  of the total remuneration payable to him by the insurer for that
year, if the class of business for the procurement of which he has been appointed
is marine insurance business.
4. In the event of the principal agent failing to comply with the requirements of clause
2 in any two successive calender years, the contract shall without prejudice to the provisions
of clause 3, terminate on the 31st day of March immediately following the second calendar
year.
5. Except in cases where the business relates to any property under his immediate
control, a principal agent shall not by himself procure any class of the general insurance
business without utilising the services of an insurance agent.

149
PART B
[See section 42C ( 1)]
TERMS DEEMED TO BE INCLUDED IN EVERY CONTRACT BETWEEN
AN INSURER CARRYING ON LIFE INSURANCE BUSINESS
AND A CHIEF AGENT
1. All payments of commission to insurance agents shall be made by the insurer
direct or by the chief agent, who may make the  payment either directly or through a special
agent on behalf of the insurer.
2. The chief agent shall employ or cause to be employed for and on behalf of the
insurer either directly or through special agents at least six insurance agents in cases where
the business in force of the insurer is less than one crore of rupees and in any other case at
least twelve agents each of whom will procure in each calender year new business amounting
to not less than ten thousand rupees.
3. Save as provided in respect of cases specified in clause 7 of the part, the remuneration
payable to the  chief agent in respect of life insurance business effected through him for the
insurer shall only be in the form of an overriding commission.
4. In the event of the chief agent failing in two successive calendar  years to comply
with the requirements of clause 2, he shall forfeit  to the insurer one-half of the total
remuneration payable to him by the insurer for those years.
5. In the event of the chief agent failing to comply with the requirements of clause 2
in four successive calendar years, the contract shall, without prejudice to the provisions of
clause 4, terminate on the 31st day of March immediately following the last of such calendar
years.
6. Not more  than one intermediary to be remunerated by the insurance concerned,
whether on a salary basis or by way of commission, shall be employed  between  the chief
agent and any insurance  agent, but the chief  agent may employ as many  persons as he
thinks fit on a salary basis, provided such salaries are paid out of his overriding commission.
7. In cases where the commission payable on a policy of life insurance effected through
an insurance agent working under a chief agent is stopped on or after the 1st day of January,
1949 and not paid to the insurance agent, an amount not exceeding one-quarter of such
commission payable to the insurance agent concerned shall also be payable to the chief
agent, if he continues to render service in connection with that policy and if such commission
is otherwise payable to him.
PART C
[See section 42C(4)]
T
ERMS DEEMED TO BE INCLUDED IN EVERY CONTRACT BETWEEN AN INSURER
CARRYING ON LIFE INSURANCE  BUSINESS AND A SPECIAL AGENT OR
BETWEEN A CHIFE AGENT AND A SPECIAL AGENT
1. All payments of commission to insurance agents shall be made by the insurer
direct or, on behalf of the insurer, either by the chief agent under whom the special agent is
working or by the special agent.
2. The special agent shall employ at least two insurance agents and shall procure or
cause to be procured through insurance agents employed under him in each calendar year
new business amounting to not less than fifty thousand rupees assured on which at least the
first year's premiums have been paid in full.

150
3. In the event of the special agent failing in any calendar year to comply with the
requirements of clause 2, he shall forfeit to the insurer fifty per cent, of the total remuneration
payable to him by the insurer, or, as the case may be, by the chief agent, for that year.
4. In the event of the special agent failing to comply with the requirements of clause
2 in two successive calendar years, the contract shall, without prejudice to the provisions of
clause 3 of this Part terminate on the 31st day of March immediately following the second
calendar year.
5. In the event of the special agent procuring life insurance business without utilising
the services of an insurance agent, the special agent shall be entitled only to the commission
that is ordinarily payable in respect of business so procured to an insurance agent.
6. The remuneration payable to the special agent in respect of policies of life insurance
procured by him through insurance agents shall only be in the form of an overriding
commission.
 Explanation.— In this Schedule "business in force" means the total sum assured
with bonuses, without taking into account reinsurances, ceded or accepted, by an insurer in
respect of the whole of the life insurance business on the working day of the calendar year
or the period covered by the revenue account furnished by such insurer under clause (b) or
sub-section (2) of section 16, as the case may be, preceding the calendar year in question.
* * * * *
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE
(See section 52J)
P
RINCIPLES OF COMPENSATION
The compensation to be given under section 52J shall be an amount equal to the
value of the assets of the acquired insurer as on the day immediately before the appointed
day, computed in accordance with the provisions of Part I of this Schedule less the total
amount of liabilities thereof as on that day, computed in accordance with the provisions of
Part II of this Schedule.
PART I
A
SSETS
For the purposes of this Part, "value of asset" means the total of the following:—
(a) the market value of any land or buildings;
(b) the market value of any securities, shares, debentures, bonds and other
investments, held by the acquired insurer.
Explanation—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) Securities of the Central Government, such as Post Office certificates
and Treasury Savings Deposit Certificates and any other securities or
certificates issued or to be issued under the Small Saving Scheme of the
Central Government, shall be valued at their encashable value as on the
appointed day;
(ii) Where the market value of any Government security such as the zamindari
abolition bonds or other similar security, in respect of which the principal
is payable in instalments, is not ascertainable or is, for any reason, not
considered as reflecting the  fair value thereof or as otherwise appropriate,

151
the security shall be valued at such an amount as is considered reasonable,
having regard to the instalments of principal and interest remaining to be
paid, the period during which such instalments are payable, the yield of
any security, issued by the Government to which the security pertains
and having the same or approximately the same maturity, and other
relevant factors;
(iii) Where the market value of any security, share, debenture, bond of other
investment is not considered reasonable by reason of its having been
affected by abnormal factors, the investment may be valued on the basis
of its  average market value over any reasonable period;
(iv) Where the market value of any security, share, debenture, bond or other
investment is not ascertainable, only such value, if any, shall be taken
into account as is considered reasonable, having regard to the financial
position of the issuing concern, the dividend paid by it during the preceding
five years and other relevant factors;
(c) the total amount of the premiums paid by the acquired insurer in respect of all
leasehold properties, reduced in the case of each such premium by an amount
which bears to such premium the same proportion as the expired term of the
lease in respect of which such premium shall have been paid bears to the total
term of the lease;
(d) the written down value as per  books, or the realisable value, as may be
considered reasonable, of all furniture, fixtures and fittings;
(e) the amount of debts due to the insurer, whether secured or unsecured, to the
extent to which they are reasonably considered to be recoverable;
(f) the amount of cash held by the insurer whether in deposit with a bank or
otherwise;
(g) the market or realisable value, as may be appropriate, of other assets appearing
on the books of the insurer, no value being allowed for capitalised expenses,
such as share selling commission, organizational expenses and brokerage,
losses incurred and similar other items.
PART II
L
IABILITIES
The total amount of the liabilities of the insurer shall include—
(i) reserves for unexpired risks being in respect of each policy, such portion of
the last premium paid as is proportionate to the unexpired portion of the policy
in respect of which the premium was paid;
(ii) the total amount of all other liabilities of the insurer existing on the appointed
day, including all contingent liabilities which the Central Government of the
acquiring insurer may reasonably be expected to be required to meet out of its
own resources on or after the appointed day.
CERTAIN DIVIDENDS NOT TO BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT
No separate compensation shall be payable for any profits or any dividend in respect
of any period immediately preceding the appointed day, for which, in the ordinary course,
profits would have been transferred or dividend declared after the appointed day.

152
EXTRACT FROM THE GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS NATIONALISATION ACT, 1972
(57 OF 1972)
* * * * *
25.  (1) No person shall take out or renew any policy of insurance in respect of any
property in India or any ship or other vessel or aircraft registered in India with an insurer
whose principal place of business is outside India save with the prior permission of the
Central Government.
(2) If any person contravenes any provision of sub-section (1), he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend
to one thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 1999
(41 OF 1999)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(b) “Authority” means the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
established under sub-section (1) of section 3;
* * * * *
(f) “intermediary or insurance intermediary” includes insurance brokers, reinsurance
brokers, insurance consultants, surveyors and loss assessors;
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
I
NSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Cent ral Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be called
“the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority”.
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
D
UTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY
* * * * *
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law for the time being in
force, the Authority shall have the duty to regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of
the insurance business and re-insurance business.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the powers and functions of the Authority shall include,—
* * * * *
(i) control and regulation of the rates, advantages, terms and conditions that
may be offered by insurers in respect of general insurance business not so controlled
and regulated by the Tariff Advisory Committee under section 64U of the Insurance
Act, 1938;
* * * * *
Properties in
India not to be
with foreign
insurer except
with
permission of
Central
Government.
Definitions.
Duties, powers
and functions of
Authority.
4 of 1938.
Establishment
and
incorporation
of Authority.

153
(n) supervising the functioning of the Tariff Advisory Committee;
* * * * *
16. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called “the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority Fund” and there shall be credited thereto—
* * * * *
(c) the percentage of prescribed premium income received from the insurer.
Constitution
of Fund.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938, the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation)
Act, 1972 and the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999.
————
(Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance and Minister of
State in the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs)
GMGIPMRND—4492RS(S5)—17-12-2008.