AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
BILL No LXXI of 2024 
THE RIGHT TO FREE  PUBLIC HEALTH CARE BILL, 2024 
   A 
BILL 
to provide for the right to free public health care to all 
citizens in the country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
 India as follows: — 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Free Public Health Care Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State, in the case of a Union Territory having its 
own legislature, the Government of that Union Territory, and in all other 
cases, the Central Government;
(b) “citizen” means any person living within the territory of India with 
Indian citizenship according to the laws in this regard for the time being 
in force;
(c) “free public health care” means all types of medical services 
including consultation, diagnosis and treatment of any medical  
condition as well as rehabilitative services, free of cost to all citizens  
in any hospital;
(d) “hospital” means any recognised institution providing healthcare  
facilities and services and includes—
(i) a hospital established, owned or controlled by the appropriate  
Government or a local authority;
(ii)an aided hospital receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part 
of its expenses from the appropriate Government or the local  
authority;
(iii) a hospital belonging to a specified category; and
(iv) an unaided hospital not receiving any kind of aid or grants 
to meet its expenses from the appropriate Government or the 
local authority. 
Explanation:   For the purposes of this clause, “specified category” 
means category of hospitals specified in the Clinical Establishments 
(Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010. 
(e) “local authority” means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal
Council of Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat, by whatever name called,
and includes such other authority or body having administrative control
or empowered by, or under any law for the time being in force to
function as a local authority in any city, town or village;
(f) “ prescribed” means prescribed by rules under this Act; and
(g) “senior citizen” means any citizen above the age of sixty-five years.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
23 of 2010. 
Right to free 
public health 
care. 
3. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to free public health care.
(2) No citizen shall be denied free public health care on account of
their lack of income or any other circumstances.
35 
Special 
provisions for 
senior 
citizens, 
differently-
abled citizens 
and those 
affected by 
rare genetic 
conditions. 
4. The appropriate Government shall, while ensuring universal access to
free public health care to  all citizens, take special measures to address
the special needs of and provide special facilities to the senior citizens,
differently-abled citizens and those who are affected by rare genetic
conditions.
40 
Universal 
access to free 
public health 
care. 
5. The access to free public health care shall be designed by the appropriate
Government in such a way that no citizen is left out of the ambit of its
benefit due to income inequality, social inequity or information asymmetry.

3 
5 
10 
6. (1) The Central Government shall have concurrent responsibility for
providing funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and
recurring expenditure for the implementation of the provisions of the
Act.
(3) The Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments,
as grants-in-aid of revenues, to meet such percentage of expenditure
referred to in sub -section (2), as it may determine, from time to time,
in consultation with the State Governments, to enable them to carry out
the purposes of this Act.
(4) The State Governments shall, after taking into consideration, the
sums provided by the Central Government and its other resources, be
responsible to provide funds for implementation of the provisions of
this Act.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
15 
20 
25 
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government or local authority, as
the case may be, to—
(a) ensure access to and availability of free public health care
facilities and services to every citizen and especially to every
senior citizen;
(b) ensure that no citizen is discriminated against  and/or
prevented from accessing free public health care on any
grounds;
(c) notify or establish, where it is not so established, well-
equipped hospitals, for the purpose of providing free public
health care as guaranteed under this Act, within such area
or limits of neighbourhood, as may be prescribed; and
(d) provide necessary infrastructure for the hospitals including
building, equipment and well-trained staff conforming to the
standards and norms, as may be prescribed.
Duties of the 
appropriate 
Government or 
local 
authority. 
30 8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 
35 
40 
45 
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or mor e successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule  shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule mad e by the State Government under this section shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature
consists of one House, before that House.
Power to make 
rules. 

4 
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS 
 Health care is one of the most important requirements for achieving a 
complete and fulfilling life.  A significant portion of the health expenditure 
in India is borne by the citizens directly from  their out-of-pocket 
expenditure. Hence, there is an urgent need to address this situation.  
         Proper steps need to be taken urgently to ensure that the   problem is 
addressed adequately.  
 Through this Bill, the Central Government shall take it up as its statutory 
social welfare responsibility to ensure right to free public healthcare to all 
citizens of India. 
    The Bill seeks to achieve this objective. 
V. SIVADASAN

5 
   FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
        Clause 3 of the Bill guarantees the right of free public health care to 
every citizen and provides that no citizen shall be denied the right  on 
account of their lack of income or any other circumstances. Clause 4 
provides that the appr opriate Government shall take special measures to 
address the special needs of and provide special facilities to senior citizens, 
differently-abled citizens  and those who are affected by rare genetic 
conditions. 
 Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central and State Governments 
shall have concurrent responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the 
purposes of the Bill and that the Central Government  shall provide funds 
to the State Governments, to meet such percentage of expenditure, as m ay 
be determined, from time to time, in consultation with the State 
Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the 
purposes of this Bill. 
  Clause 7 of the Bill lays down the  duties of the appropriate 
Government or the local authority, as the case may be, to ensure access to 
or availability of free public health care facilities and services to all citizens, 
particularly senior citizens and that no one is discriminated against.  It also 
stipulates that the appropriate Government shall notify or establish, well-
equipped hospitals, within such area or limits of neighbourhood, as may be 
prescribed, where it is not already established  and also provide necessary 
infrastructure for the hospit als including building, equipment and well -
trained staff. 
  The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure , both of 
recurring and non -recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India.   
It is, however, not possible at this stage to e stimate the exact expenditure 
likely to be involved. 

6 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
  Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to 
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the right to free public health care to all 
citizens in the country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)—053–10.02.2025.