5

AS INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXXII of 2001

THE MAINTENANCE OF FOOD, POTABLE WATER AND
FODDER SUPPLIES IN DROUGHT AFFECTED AREAS
BILL, 2001

A
BILL

to provide for the compulsory maintenance of food and potable water supplies for human
consumption and fodder for the livestock of the farmers in drought affected areas by
the Union Government with the co-operation of the Government of the concerned
State and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

* 1. (/) This Act may be called the Maintenance of Food, Potable Water and Fodder
Supplies in Drought Affected Areas Act, 2001.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) Itshall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—

(a) “drought affected area” means any area situated in any part of the country
which has got below normal rainfall in any season of a calender year and which in the

Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.

Definitions.


Compulsory
maintenance
of food
supphes in
drought

affected areas.

Government
to maintain
supply of
potable water
in drought

affected areas.

Compulsory
maintenance
of fodder
supply in
drought

affected areas.

Funds to be

provided by
, the Central

Government.

Savings.

Power to
make rules.

2

opinion of the Central Government has been affected by drought and declared, by
notification in the official gazette, to be a drought affected area for such period as may
be specified in the notification;

(6) “food” includes cereals such as wheat, maize, barley etc. rice, pulses and
edible oils and fuel for cooking;

(c) “fodder” includes the dry and green fodder generally fed to the livestock by
the farmers and others;

(d) “Government” includes both the Central and State Government.
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. The Central Government shall, with the assistance of the State Government in
whose jurisdiction the drought affected area falls, maintain uninterrupted food supplies in
such area for the inhabitants in such manner and for such time as may be prescribed.

4, The Government shall maintain adequate supply of potable water through tankers
or through other means as it may consider appropriate in the drought affected area for such
period as may be prescribed.

5, The Government shall maintain adequate supplies of fodder in a drought affected
area by procuring fodder from other States in such manner and for such period as may be

prescribed,

6. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law, adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

Large number of areas in various parts of the country particularly in the States of
Jharkhand, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh etc. are frequently affected by
unprecedented drought and play havoc in such areas. The Palamu division in Bihar and
Kalahandi in Orissa have become synonymous with drought. It has been observed that
during the drought period the inhabitants do not have food to eat and water to drink for their
survival resulting in their exodus. In many areas starvation deaths also occur. The worst
sufferers in such time are the mute livestock. People leave them stray to fend for themselves
and without fodder and water they ultimately die. The Governments at the Centre and State
provide some sort of relief to the people of such areas but the mute animals remain uncared
for. It is, therefore, necessary that the supply of food and potable water and also the fodder
be maintained on priority and it should remain uninterrupted so that the people do not leave
such places and the livestock too get its fodder and water for its survival.

Hence this Bill.

$. 5. AHLUWALIA.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM:

Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds
for the implementation of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. But at this stage it is not possible to
estimate the exact amount likely to be involved. However, it is estimated that a sum of rupees
ten crores is likely to be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.

It may also involve a non recurring expenditure of rupees fifty lakhs from the
Consolidated Fund of India.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only,

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the compulsory maintenance of food and potable water supplies for human
consumption and fodder for the livestock of the farmers in drought affected areas by
the Union Government with the co-operation of the Government of the concerned
State and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri S. S. Ahluwalia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND-—3222RS—7-11-2001.


As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA.

THE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (PREVENTION) BILL, 2001

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLauses

1, Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definition.

CHAPTER II

RIGHT OF AN AGGRIEVED PERSON

3. Right to reside in a shared household and the right to protection against violence.
4, Duty to inform person aggrieved of right.

19.

21.

CHAPTER Ill
ORDERS ETC.
. Protection order,
Monetary Relief.
. Residence order.
Petition.
. Particulars of the petition.

Petition by next friend or a protection officer.

. Orders during court recess.

Relief in other suits and legal proceedings.
Power to grant interim and exparte orders.
Single acts or condo nation.

. Custody of children.
. Notice to show cause.
. Confirmation, variation or revocation of order.
Appeal.
CHAPTER IV
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Breach ofa order.

). Cognisance and Proof.

Powers of the court in relation to offence.
Offences by police officer.


RRB

8 280७४ ७३

33.

6)

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OFFICERS

. Appointment of Protection Officers.
. Powers of Protection Officers.
. Duties and Functions of Protection Officers.

CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

. Jurisdiction.
27.
. Other reliefnot barred.

. None obstante clause.

. Counseling.

. Protection of actions taken in good faith.
. Procedure.

Duty of Government to ensure effective implementation of the Act.
. Power to make Rules.

In camera proceedings.