1
Bill No. LXXI of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 84 of the Constitution, for clause (b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(b) is not less than twenty-one years of age;"
3. In article 173 of the Constitution, for clause ( b), the following clasuse shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(b) is not less than twenty-one years of age;"
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON 9 TH D ECEMBER, 2022
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 84.
Amendment of
article 173.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 84 and article 173 of the Constitution lay down the provisions of the Constitution
relating to the qualification of membership of Parliament and State Legislatures, respectively.
The articles stipulate the age for candidature for the representation of an individual in the
House of the People, Council of States, Legislative Councils, and Legislative Assemblies of
the States. The current qualification for membership of Parliament and State Legislature
stipulates the age for candidates i.e. twenty-five years for the House of People and the
Legislative Assemblies; and thirty years for the Council of States and the Legislative Council.
2. It is proposed in this Bill that the age for candidature shall be changed to twenty-one
years for the House of People and Legislative Assemblies; and Council of States and
Legislative Councils.
3. Youth of our country has been serving as public servants and contributing actively
to the executive part of Indian Democracy. India has one of the youngest population in the
world. More than fifty per cent of its population is estimated to be under twenty-five years.
Young men and women actively engage in our electoral processes by exercising their franchise.
A large number of youth from the age of twenty-one are also contributing to nation building
and strengthening our democratic values at the grassroots through candidature at the
Panchayat level. It is natural that those youth will lead our country by becoming public
representatives at the Central and State level. This amendment to the Constitution of India
will give an opportunity to the youth of this nation to contribute to legislation, by becoming
a part of the Legislature of India.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
JAYANT CHAUDHARY
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
84. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he—
(a)* * * * *
(b) is, in the case of a seat in Council of States, not less than thirty years of age and, in
the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty-five years of age; and
* * * * *
173. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislature of a
State unless he—
(a)* * * * *
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty-five years
of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than thirty years of age;
and
* * * * *
3
Qualification
for
membership
of Parliament.
Qualification
for
membership
of the State
Legislature.

MGIPMRND—1819RS(S3)—12-12-2022.
RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Jayant Chaudhary , M.P .)