AS INTRODUCED INTHE RAJYA SABHA.

Bill No. LXXV of 2001

THE PASSPORTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
JSurther to amend the Passports Act, 1967.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Passports (Amendment) Act, 2001. Short title and
(2) Itshall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd day of October, 2001. ment ence:
5 2. After section 10 of the Passports Act (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), Insertion of
15 of 1967. 1967, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:— Ton बी

‘10A. (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in Suspension of
section 10, if the Central Government or any designated officer is satisfied that the passports or
passport or travel document is likely to be impounded or caused to be impounded or iments aon
10 revoked under clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 10 and it is necessary in the certain cases.

public interest so to do, it or he may, —
(a) by order, suspend, with immediate effect, any passport or travel
document;
15 (6) pass such other appropriate order which may have the effect of
rendering any passport or travel document invalid,

for a period not exceeding four weeks:


Provided that the Central Government or the designated officer may, if it or he
considers appropriate, extend, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the
said period of four weeks till the proceedings relating to variation, impounding or
revocation of passport or travel document under section 10 are concluded:

है Provided further that no order under this sub-section shall be passed unless a 5
notice in writing to show cause has been issued to the holder of the passport or travel
document:

Provide 4 also that the Central Government or the designated officer may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing and in the public interest, waive the requirement of
issue of notice referred to in the second proviso:

Provided also that every holder of the passport or travel document, in respect
of whom an order under this sub-section had'been passed without giving him a prior
notice, shall subsequently be given an opportunity of being heard and thereupon the
Central Government may, if necessary, by order in writing, modify or revoke the order
passed under this sub-section, 1s

(2) The designated officer, shall immediately communicate the orders passed
under sub-section (7), to the concerned authority at an airport or any other point of
embarkation or immigration, and to the passport authority.

(3) Every authority referred to in sub-section (2) shall, immediately on receipt of 20
the order passed under sub-section (1), give effect to such order.

10B. Every intimation, given by the Central Government or the designated
officer, before the commencement of the Passports (Amendment) Act, 2001, to any
immigration authority at an airport or any other point of embarkation or immigration,
restricting or in any manner prohibiting the departure from India of any holder of the
passport or travel document under sub-section (3) of section 10, shall be deemed to be 25
an order under sub-section (1) of section 10A and such order shall continue to be in
force for a period of three months from the date of commencement of the Passports
(Amendment) Act, 2001 or the date of giving such intimation, whichever is later.

Explanation.—For the purposes of sections 10A and 108, the expression

“designated officer” means such officer or authority designated, by order in writing, 30
as such by the Central Government or the State Government.’.
Repeal and 3. (1) The Passports (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 is hereby repealed. Ord. 8 of
i 2001.
sn (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal
Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under as

the principal Act, as amended by this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Section 10 of the Passports Act, 1967, inter alia, contains provisions for variation,
impounding and revocation of passports and travel documents. There was no statutory
provision in the said Act to prevent a person indulging in criminal or anti-national activities
from leaving the country during the period when action to revoke or impound his passport
was initiated. For some time past, the concerned authorities were issuing Look Out Circulars
to prevent such person from leaving the country.

2. In view of the above, it was decided to amend the Passports Act, 1967 conferring
powers upon the concerned authorities to suspend the passports or travel documents in
appropriate cases and to validate the intimations issued by way of Look Out Circulars.
Accordingly, the Passports (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 (Ord. 8 of 2001) was promulgated
on the 23rd day of October, 2001, so as to—

(a) insert new section 10A in the Passports Act, 1967 conferring power upon
the Central Government or the designated officer to suspend the passport or travel
document for a period not exceeding four weeks if it or he is satisfied that the passport
or travel document is likely to be impounded or caused to be impounded or revoked
under clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 10 of the said Act;

(b) confer power upon the Central Government or the designated officer to
extend the said period of four weeks till the proceedings relating to variation, impounding
or revocation of passport or travel document under section 10 of the Passports Act,
1967 are concluded;

(c) insert new section 10B in the Passports Act, 1967, validating the intimations
given, before the commencement of the Passports (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001, by
the Central Government or the designated officer to any immigration authority restricting

~ or in any manner prohibiting the departure from India of any holder of the passport or
travel document under sub-section (3) of section 10 of the Passports Act, 1967.

3.The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance.

New Dewi;

The 17th November, 2001.
JASWANT SINGH.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Passports Act, 1967.

(Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister of External Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3508RS—20- 11-2001.