|
Bill No. LXXVI of 1994
33-3० ००००७५५०५०3म3+++» न.

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE HANDICAPPED
: BILL, 1994

B25) 2०28 १५३7३ a Diag cs हे चर é
eae BLL 8 apna),

to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the rehabilitation and
welfare of the handicapped including the mentally and visually handi-
capped persons and for matters connected therewith

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows: ri

1, (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for the Sbort

title,
Handicapped Act, 1994 me io le, _
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India. ) iced oi
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect. . ment.
2, In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,— Defini-

tions.
(a) “appropriate Government means,—

Gi) the Central Government,—

d, controlled
ae 1) in relation to any establishment owne
or manged by the Central or 8 department of the Central

Government; or eae ae

10

ot



Constitu-
tion of
the “ij
National
Commis-
sion for
Handi-
capped.

Ww a कि «2 v™

(2) any company in which not less than fifty percent,
of the shares are held by the Central Government or partly
by Central Government and. partly by any one or more State
Govenments or one or more Central or State Govenment
undertakings; or

nae (3) any corporation including a cooperative society
established by or under a Central Act or owned, controlled
or managed by the Central Government.

(ii) in relation to any other establishment the Government
of the State in which that establishment is situated; 10

(b) “Commission” means the Nation} Commission for the Handi-
capped. established under section 3.

(०) “Employer” means any person who employs fifty or more
persons to do any work in an establishment for remuneration;

(d) “employment” includes self-employment with or without the 15
aid of the Commission;

(e) “establishment” means any office or any place where any
industry, trade, business or occupation is carried;

(f) “handicapped person” means any person having physical,
mental visual or any other disability leading to a substantial handicap 20
to his normal daily activities and to employment and hindering his
normal life; {

- (8) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

# (A) “registering “authority” means the authority appointed under
section 5 ofthis Act. -
. a «
3, (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a National Commission for the Handicapped with its
headquarter at New Delhi.

(2) The National Commission shall.consist of the following members
namely:— Ley bem इतर ३७२०० ott « हि :
(i) The Union.Ministers..of Health. & Family. Welfare, Labour,
_,. Financd and the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission;

(ii) The Chaitman or a representative of the Central Social

Welfare Board; i

. (iii) A representative:of each’of the State’ Governments and Union 35
a Territory Administrations;

(iv) A representative each of ‘the blind and ‘the:physically handi-
capped and one expert in mental diseases, to be nominated by, Central

Government; wed

(v) A representative each representing:the ‘associations arid: volun-
tary organisations enagaged in welfare of the blind, the, physically
handicapped and the mentally handicapped; : :

(vi) Three members of Parliament, two from. thé Lok Sabha and
one from the Rajya’ Sabha ‘to be nominated '-by the'Speaker and the
Chairman respectively. ‘ ! Set |

wae eh



_ 3
(3) The Union

Commission , Minister oy Wellare

shall be the Chairman of the
(4) The Commi

mmission teh

the headquarter and jt Shall meet at teas onee in « है
५ country (० monitor हे Sub-committees shall vi in every six months at
down by it. he working of | visit various parts of the
है the policy and programmes ले
he

4. It shall b
( '० the duty of the Commission {
a) evolve a i :
a nationg icy fi
onal policy for the rchabilitation of the handi-

capped persons;
10 (b) lay dow
¥ Nn progra © er,
fo the rehabilitation of the hay Operate services and pilot projects
instructions and directions to cam oa persone ly ay ot कि पमड
for implementation thereof: entral and State Government agencies
(c) lay-down guide-lin .
1s providing them vit ee for rehabilitation of the handicapped
-emplo: servati of 5 in Gov
ernment establishments: ployment and reservation of jobs in Gov-
(d) to create and over: F
slitati erate a Fund financing benevolent and reha-
bilitation scheme for the handicapped. :
(०) review the facilities available to the handicapped persons
20 from. time to time.

5. Every employer shall, from the commencement of this Act, reserve
not Jess than six percent of'the vacancies in any calendar ‘year in any estab-
lishment, category-wise, to be filled in by suitable persons from amongst
the handicapped persons registered under section 6 of this Act, in the

25 prescribed! ratic. e BEE

Provided that efforts shall also be made to identify jobs for the mentally
handicapped persons and employ such persons in consultation with Psycho-
logical consultants . : :

6. The appropriate Gevernment:mry- by notification in, the Official
30 Gazette, appoitit as many authorities :as.it deems. appropriate 3s Re-

gistration Authorities for the purpose:-of registration of handicapped
persons and may also define the area within which each of such autho-
rity shall exercise its jurisdiction.

7 (1) Any handicapped person, if he possesses the prescribed quali-
fications and desires to get himself registered under this Act, राशी make an
application in such form containing such particulars as may be prescribed,
to the registration authority within whose jurisdiction he resides and such
authority shall register his name in a register and issuevhim 3 cettificate of

registration: .

Provided 018 :
éapped shall be determine

the purpose .

६ suitability and desirability of jobs for: mentally handi-
d in consultation with, the ex d

(2) The Registering Authority shall maintaih

: form and in such manner as may be prescribed.

Func
tion of
the Com-

mission.

Reser-
vation of
vacancies
for
Handi-
capped.



Notifica-
tion of
vacancies
to Regis-
tering
Autho-
rity.

Employer
to main-
tain
records

of

handi-
capped
em- }
ployees.

Finan-
cial As-
sistance
to
unem-
ployed
handi-
capped.

Penalty.

Offences

by
Establish-
ment.

Right to
free of
cost
treat-
ment
and
&pplian-
ces for
the "a
handi.
capped .

Govern-
ment to
ensure
opper-
tunities
for the
handi- |
capri d.

4

8. (1) Every employer shall notify every vacancy to the Registering
Authority within whose jurisdiction his establishment is situated.

(2) As soon as may be, after the notification under sub-section (1),
the Registration Authority shall furnish a list of the handicapped persons re-
gistered with it to the employer notifying the vacancies who shall fill up the 5
percentage of vacancies reserved for the handicapped persons from the list
furnished to him.

9. (1) Every employer shall maintain such records giving such parti-
culars of the handicapped persons in such manner as may be prescribed .

(2) The records so maintained by the employer shall be open to inspec- 10
tion at all reasonable hours by such persons as may be prescribed by the

appropriate Government. vite Oh

.10. The appropriate Government shall give financial assistance of rupees
five hundered per month to every unemployed handicapped person whose name
appeared in the register maintained under section 6 of this Act till such fime 15
he is given employment or resettlement subsidy. a

11. Any employer who contravenes the provision of this Act shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.

12, Where a person committing an offence under this Act is an establish- 20
ment or any body corporate or any Government department the person head-
ing the establishment or department at the time offence was committed shall
be held guilty and shall be liable to be proceeded against.

13, Every handicapped person shall have the right and be eligible to
receive free of cost medical, surgical and all kinds of treatment, aids, 25
‘appliances and equipments and other. treatments which may be helpful
in reducing the adverse effect of disablement and restore the functional
abilities bf thie handicapped persons. 1

14, For providing due opportunities to the handicapped 30
persons the appropriate Government shall~
(a) reserve five percent, of all housing units constructed by it;

‘(Ut provide training and other facilities to enable them to parti-
cipate in sports, social and cultural activities; ae

(c) provide training for gainful employment in the institutions
to be set up for the purpose; a > &० 35



<

(ढ a
te 2 फ 7शंवर free PASsARS for travel hy Toad, inland, navigation

ee tote all aids, appliances equipments and other articles
used in the treatment trainin their economic re-
5 settlement., 7 '8 employment or in thei
(0) pro

Vide interesy free loang and other financial assistance for
self employment;

@) undertake measure for the Prevention of disability as may be found
Necessary,
F ficial Gazette,
er «40 15. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gaze
Poe sho make rules for carrying out the Purposes of this Act,
10
1०१६


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Disabled and handicapped persons are as much integral, to the nation as
any other able-bodied citizen. Millions of persons suffer from, one handicap
or the other, and yet most of them are well talented and capable of sanding
on their own feet, serving the country in their own way, provided suitable
opportunity and support is afforded to them. Even the mentally retarded
deserve the nation’s sympathy and support to help them develop their
ability and contribute their mite for the nation.

While some effort on the part of the Government and. the society is seeni
for providing Qpportunitics, though inadequate, for physically handicapped, the
mentally handicapped are simply consigned to their lot. Experts in psychia-
try and medicine maintain that a large percentage of the mentally retarded
and handicapped persons too can welj be rehabilitated enabling them a
life with dignity, if suitable aid is given to them, which includes a large
measure of support from the society, which is not only indifferent to
their fate, but aggravates their malady, refusing to accept and provide

treatment for their ailment, making fun of and teasing the patients of
mental diseases.

The nation owes a responsibility to provide for opportunities to these
Gisabled and handicapped people, to lead a life with. dignity, as useful cjti-
zens of the motherland, There is a pressing need for constituting a natio-
nal commission to evolve and implement a natjonal policy and programme
for the resettlement of the handicapped and to co-ordinate and. oversee
the activities of different agencies functioning in tHis field. As a part of
such policy it is also necessary to provide them with adequate job oppor-
tunities by reservation of jobs in Government departments and public
enterprises and providing suitable self employment opportunities to them,
Arrangements also need to be made for unemployment security and train-
ing for these victims of nature and afflictions. Necessary treatment for

thir ailments and equipments and para-medical support should

be assu-
red to them.

/

Hence this Bill



VINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

(१७७७ 3 of the Bi हि

mission for the tandenee nee for the establishment of a National Com
Fund for benevolent and कर व गे AQ) also contemplates creation of ai
pointment of Registration 7 Havin schemes, Clause 6 provides for ap-
assistance to the handic: uthorities, Clause 10 provides for financial
sW& 14 provides for sca persons in case of unemployment. Clau-
other welfare enon nas facilities to the blind and the disabled and
expenditure from the C or ॥ hem. The Bill, if enacted, would involve
annual recurring ne amie Fund of India, It is estimated that an
1७ to be सा कर fe iture of about rupees one hundred crores js like-
गे m the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non reeurting expenditure of about rupecs

: one crore is also likely to
be involved. ; t


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 15 of the Bill gives the power to the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters
of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


RAIYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for the Constitution of a Commission for the rebabilitation and
Welfare of the handicapped including the mentally and visually handicap-
ped persons and for matters connected therewith.