AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill_No. LXXVIII of 2000

THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
(ESTABLISHMENT OF A PERMANENT BENCH
AT DHARWAR) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent bench of the High Court of Karnataka
at Dharwar.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the High Court of Karnataka (Establishment of a Short title, and
Permanent Bench at Dharwar) Act, 2000. ‘Commence-

(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. There shall be established a permanent bench of the High Court of Karnataka at Establishment
Dharwar and such Judges of the High Court of Karnataka, being not less than three in of a Perma-
number, as the Chief Justice of that High Court may from time to time nominate, shall sit at the Heh Court
Dharwar in order to exercise the jurisdiction and powers for the time being vested in that of Karnataka
High Court in respect of cases arising in Dharwar district and adjoining areas. at Dharwar.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

*Recently Karnataka witnessed violent protests demanding establishment of High
Court Bench at Dharwar District of North Karnataka. The agitation escalated to the extent
that there was a demand to split the State into two States. The people of the area are
agitated on this vital issue.

*There is an urgent need for setting up of a High Court Bench in North Karnataka.
In March 1992, both the Houses of the Karnataka Legislature had unanimously passed a
resolution urging Government of India to establish a permanent Bench of the High Court in
North Karnataka area.

*In Maharashtra, M.P., Tamil Nadu and U.P, Benches of respective High Courts have
been set up away from their principal seats and no perceptible deterioration in judicial
standards have been noticed as the same judges and lawyers are dispensing Justice.

*Establishing new benches of High Courts needs to be stressed and not viwed in
context of narrow demographic or any other such criteria but with a view to dispensing
Justice by considering the size of population and number of cases pending in different
High Courts.

*Today with an increase in population we have started carving out new States within
the States for the convenience of the people and administration and on the same principle
High Court Benches, wherever, necessary for the litigants and in the interest of justice,
should be established.

*Recently, the Chief Minister of Karnataka led a delegation of all party leaders and
presented a Memorandum to the Prime Minister regarding establishing a High Court Bench
at Dharwar. Now the. Government should reciprocate and establish a permanent bench of
Karnataka High Court at Dharwar.

Hence, this Bill.

K.B, KRISHNA MURTHY


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for the establishment of a permanefit bench of the
High Court of Karnataka at Dharwar

(Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—289RS—01-12-2000.