THE DISTRESSED FARMERS (SPECIAL FACILITIES, PROTECTION
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the special facilities and protection of distressed farmers who are affected
by various natural calamities, and victims of indebtedness, physical infirmities,
diseases, old age, exploitation, etc. by giving adequate compensation, extending
relief measures, removal of indebtedness, prevention of exploitation by moneylenders
and other unscrupulous elements, extending easy and hassle free bank loans, giving
remunerative prices for their produce, improving farming practices through scientific
means, extending compulsory market intervention in case of bumper crop, compulsory
insurance of crops and livestock, old age allowance, medicare and other welfare
measures to ensure that they do not commit suicide and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Distressed Farmers (Special Facilities, Protection and
Welfare) Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011
Bill No. LXXVII of 2010
5
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural produce" include wheat, paddy, coarse cereals like maize, jowar,
bajra, millet, barley, madwa, soyabean etc., pulses including gram and all types of
beans and peas, cotton, sugarcane, oilseeds, tobacco, vegetables, jute, all types of
spices, coconut, all fruits including areca nuts, chillies and such other crops grown by
farmers and produces which may be notified by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette, from time to time and also include seeds as defined in the Seeds Act, 1966;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "bumper crop" means the excess yield of any agricultural produce of a farmer
which does not give reasonable return to the farmer after selling the yield as compared
to its cost of production;
(d) "crop insurance" means insuring the crops in the event of loss of crop due to
any natural calamity and include losses suffered by farmer on account of bumper crop;
(e) "farmer" means a person who owns land and cultivates or causes it to be
cultivated for agricultural purposes or for horticulture purposes and includes all farmers
big, middle, small and marginal farmers as idenified by the Planning Commission of the
Central Government;
(f) "Fund" means the Farmers Natural Calamity Assistance Fund established
under section 4;
(g) "natural calamity" include drought, flood, excessive rains, cloudbursts,
cyclone, super cyclone, tsunami, storm, hailstorm, winds, frost, winterkill, lightening,
fire, excessive snowfall, earthquake, wild life, insect infection, plant disease and such
other natural causes as may be prescribed;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for the time being
in force, the Central Government shall as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, formulate and publish in the Official Gazette, a long term action
plan for the overall welfare of the farmers and more so for the distressed farmers of the desert,
drought prone, hilly, flood prone, coastal and other natural calamity prone areas and regions
of the Country as may be necessary, incidental or conducive for such plan and shall take
appropriate measures for the uniform implementation of such action plan.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
sub-section (1) of section 3 such action plan may include,—
(a) provision of immediate interim relief or ex-gratia payment to distressed farmers
affected by natural calamity;
(b) comprehensive crop and livestock insurance scheme in which insurance
premium of small and marginal farmers shall be borne by the Central Government to
provide relief to the farmers in distress affected by natural calamity or who suffer
losses on account of bumper crop;
(c) ensuring remunerative prices for the agricultural produce of the farmers
through Minimum Support Price mechanism or other appropriate measures;
(d) compulsory market intervention scheme in case of bumper crop of any
agricultural produce without the formalities of making requests etc., by the concerned
State authorities so as to procure or arrange to procure the excess yield of the farmers;
(e) institutional mechanism for efficient marketing and export of agricultural
produce of the farmers;
Definitions.
54 of 1966
Long-term
National
Action Plan
for Welfare of
Farmers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(f) making easy availability of fertilizers, pesticides and quality seeds to farmers
at affordable prices;
(g) ensuring timely completion of irrigation projects to provide requisite irrigation
facilities to the farmers to save them from the vagaries of nature;
(h) comprehensive measures for the removal of indebtedness of the distressed
farmers by way of writing-off loans and interest accrued thereon if crops are lost by
natural calamity, providing easy loans with nominal interest from banks and financial
institutions by removing the hurdles of complicated procedures, technicalities and
collaterals, and saving the distressed farmers from the clutches of greedy moneylenders
so that they may be saved from resorting to extreme step of committing suicide; and
(i) welfare scheme including old age allowance for all farmers and their spouses,
free medical care, shelter to the needy ones and for such other provisions as may be
deemed necessary.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of the
commencement of this Act, establish a Fund to be called the Farmers Natural Calamity
Assistance Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus of the Fund established under sub-section (1) of Section 4 shall
be fifty thousand crore rupee to be provided by the Central Government after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
(3) After the initial constitution of the Fund, moneys shall be provided to the Fund by
the Central and State Governments in such proportion and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(4) The fund shall also comprise moneys received from the general public, body
corporates, domestic and foreign financial institutions as donations, gifts, etc.
(5) The fund shall be utilized for providing immediate financial assistance, ex-gratia,
compensation to the distressed farmers affected by any natural calamity or disaster in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The fund shall also be utilized for providing special assistance or package as may
be formulated by the appropriate Government for the children, women, physically challenged
farmers, old farmers and such other persons vulnerable to the aftermath of natural calamity
in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to,—
(a) make sure that every distressed farmer affected by natural calamity who has
lost his crop, livestock, movable or immovable property or life of kith or kin gets timely
adequate compensation;
(b) publicise the weather forcasts during the sowing seasons in different parts
of the country through the print and electronic media and in particular through All
India Radio and Doordarshan in such manner as the appropriate Government may
deem fit and necessary;
(c) to consistently monitor the sowing and production trends of crops of
agricultural produce right from the beginning of every sowing season so as to make
correct estimates of likely yields, local consumption needs, purchases by Government
agencies under Minimum Support Price (MSP) mechanism, surplus and such other
eventualities to ensure that farmers are not affected in any manner therefrom.
(d) ensure that when there is bumper crop of any agricultural produce the farmers
do not resort to distress sale of that produce and to prevent such sale shall extend the
compulsory market intervention scheme in such area and provide subsidised
Establishment
of Farmers
Natural
Calamity
Assistance
Fund.
Certain
facilities and
miscellaneous
provisions for
farmers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
transportation facility to carry the surplus produce to the identified areas of the State
or of the neighbouring States where such produce is likely to be in demand or consumed
and make necessary marketing and yard facilities for such bumper crop;
(e) remove the middlemen, moneylenders and unscrupulous traders who exploit
the farmers in case of bumper crop in such manner as it may deem fit necessary to do
so;
(f) establish agricultural farms in every block of the Country which shall ensure
timely and adequate supply of quality seeds and saplings at affordable rates to the
farmers;
(g) establish Agricultural universities and Krishi Vigyan Kendras at conspicuous
places for promotion of agricultural as a whole;
(h) establish modern veterinary hospitals and clinics in every block to assist
farmers in animal husbandry;
(i) promote agro based industries such as food processing, dairy, poultry, rearing
of animals, piggery, bee keeping, bakery, etc. in order to enhance the farm income of the
farmers;
(j) promote co-operative farming and contract farming to promote better farm
management and farm techniques with a view to making agriculture economically
viable and sustainable;
(k) promote cultivation of vegetable, floriculture, horticulture, spices, pisciculture,
sericulture, herbals and plants of medicinal values, bamboo and cane, along with
handloom and handicrafts and other village arts in the suitable areas to supplement
the income of the farmers;
(l) promote organic farming, use of natural manure, use of biomass for energy
production, rain water harvesting tehcniques, use of solar and wind energy for the
benefit of farmers;
(m) promote traditional water bodies such as wells, ponds etc., and provide
sprinkler and other irrigation facilities and regular power supply to the farmers; and
(n) provide such other facilities as may be necessary, incidental and expedient as
may be prescribed.
6. It shall be duty of the appropriate Government to provide every farmer,—
(a) medical facilities including medicines and hospitalisation wherever
necessary free of cost;
(b) educational facilities including technical medical, vocational, information
technology and higher education at the college and University level free of cost to the
children of farmers;
(c) adequate old age allowance which is sufficient to lead a dignified life;
(d) disability pension in case he is physically challenged;
(e) recreational and entertainment facilities through individual or Community
Centres; and
(f) such other welfare and protective measures as may be deemed necessary and
appropriate or as may be prescribed.
7. (1) Nothwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, it shall be obligatory for all the public, private and cooperative sector Banks and
Financial Institutions to provide hasslefree credit facilities with nominal interest or without
any interest thereon to the distressed farmers affected by any natural calamity or to face the
aftermath of any natural calamity in his agricultural operations.
Certain
welfare
measures for
farmers.
Special credit
facilities for
distressed
farmers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(2) The Banks and Financial Institutions referred to in sub-section (1) of section 7 shall
also waive the recovery of any outstanding loan against any distressed farmer affected by
any natural calamity for at least a year after the said natural calamity and shall not refuse a
fresh loan to such farmer on this ground so as to enable him to carry out his agricultural
operations.
8. ( 1) The Central Government shall provide after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, necessary requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) It shall be the duty of every State Government in implementing the provisions of
this Act and the Central Government shall place necessary funds at the disposal of every
State Government for this purpose.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the
Commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) of section 9 shall be laid, as soon as may
be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of
this Act.
11. The Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is rightly said that our Country resides in villages because majority of our population
is in the rural areas and agriculture is the main occupation. The Farmers are the backbone of
our economy and they mainly depends on good harvests during the sowing seasons. Inflation
and price rise are also decided by the yield of the farmers. Agriculture extensively contributes
to our Gross Domestic Product (GDP). This sector generates maximum number of employment
opportunities, ensures food security to the nation and provides largest share of raw materials
to our industries. But unfortunately, the lot of most of the farmers has not improved even
after more than six decades of independence and implementation of eleven Five Year Plans.
They are still poverty stricken, indebted and being exploited. The farmers are on the mercy of
vagaries of nature for their yields in the absence of irrigation facilities in abundance. At the
same time natural calamities do occur very frequently in one part or the other, of the country
round the year. Drought affects various parts of the country at regular intervals and so is the
case of floods which devastate many parts of the country regularly year after year. The
coastal areas face the brunt of cyclones very frequently and some times they are affected by
super cyclone and even Tsunami. Similarly, many other parts of our vast nation are adversely
affected by earthquake, excess rains, cloudbursts, hailstorm, frost, winterkill, lightening, fire,
excess snow, wild life insect infection, plant diseases and other vagaries of nature. The
farmers who lose their crops and other belongings have to bear the brunt of these natural
calamities and with that their hopes too are dashed. They become indebeted in order to
survive and restart their agricultural operations and fall in the unending trap of greedy
moneylenders and many of them also take the extreme step of committing suicide. Such
suicides are very rampant in Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, etc.
Similarly, when the farmer grows a bumper crop there are no buyers of his yield. He is forced
to go for distress sale of his produce at throwaway prices and sometimes resorts to burning
his crop. The indebted farmers do not get any support to live a dignified life in their old age.
There is no social security for them. In some States, they are given a meagre old age pension
which can not fetch even two square meals for them. They do not get the medical facilities.
The plight of infirm and physically challenged farmers is more precarious.
In a welfare State like ours it is the sacred duty of the State to protect the farmers who
have remained neglected and exploited. They should be given sufficient protection by the
State by implementing comprehensive crop and livestock insurance, extending soft loans by
Banks and Financial institutions, by giving adequate and timely compensation when affected
by natural calamity. It should be ensured that they get remunerative prices for their yield and
the State must implement welfare measures for the farmers so that they too reap the fruits of
progress made by our nation.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Farmers Natural Calamity
Assistance Fund with initial Corpus of rupees fifty thousand crores and thereafter Central
Government has to provide requisite funds every year. Clause 5 provides for certain facilities
for farmers. Clause 6 provides for certain welfare measures to farmers. Clause 8 makes it
obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. The Bill if enacted will therefore involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. Apart from the initial amount of fifty thousand crore, it is estimated that a sum of
rupees sixty thousand crore rupees may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty thousand crore may also
involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
8

GMGIPMRND—6684RS(S3)—28-02-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the special facilities and protection of distressed farmers who are affected
by various natural calamities and victims of indebtedness, physical infirmities, diseases,
old age, exploitation, etc. by giving adequate compensation, extending relief measures,
removal of indebtedness, prevention of exploitation by moneylenders and other
unscrupulous elements, extending easy and hassle free bank loans, giving remunerative
prices for their produce, improving farming practices through scientific means, extending
compulsory market intervention in case of bumper crop, compulsory insurance of
crops and livestock, old age allowance, medicare and other welfare measures to ensure
that they do not commit suicide and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)