AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXXV of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force on such a datesas the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

5 2. After article 21 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—

“21(1) The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all
children upto the age of fourteen years.

(2) The right to free and compulsory education referred to in clause (1)
10 shall be in such manner as the State may from time to time, by law, determine.”

3. Article 45 of the Constitution shall be omitted.

Short ttle,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Right to free
and
Compulsory
education.

Omission of
article 45.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present there is no law in the country to ensure compulsory education amongst
the school going children. Article 45 of the Constitution enjoins upon the Government to
provide for free and compulsory education for all children upto the age of fourteen years,
but being a part of the Directive Principles of State Policy, this article is not judicially
enforceable in the Courts of Law. Of course, the Government both at the Centre and in
the State have taken some steps to enforce the provisions of this article and encourage
the school going children to attend the schools and other primary institutions for increasing
the mass literacy. However, in actual practice not much has been achieved and ignorance
and illiteracy still continue to be the major problems of our society. The National Policy
on Education, 1986 as modified in 1992 declares in unequivocal terms that free and
compulsory education shall be provided to all children upto the age of fourteen years
before we enter into 21st Century. This has also remained just a paper declaration and it
is time that we should take up the matter with greater seriousness. In 1998 the Supreme
Court, in a far reaching judgement has held that children of this country must have
fundamental right to free and compulsory education upto the age of fourteen years. In
the context of this judgement it is considered essential that educational rights of the
citizens should be more appropriately included in the Part III of the Constitution which
guarantees some basic fundamental rights to all the citizens of India.

Hence this Bill.

KARNENDU BHATTACHARJEE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 21A in the Constitution of India to
provide that the State shall provide free and compulsory education to ali citizens upto the
age fourteen years.

2. The estimated financial expenditure to implement the aforesaid obligation 1s
forty thousand crore rupees during the next five years. The estimated annual expenditure
will be eight thousand crore rupees. The said expenditure shall be shared by the Union
and the States on the basis of sharing arrangements to be determined by a group of
experts constituted for the purpose by the Ministry of Human Resource Development.

3. No other recurring or non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

Provision for
free and

oe ; compulsory
45. The State shall endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the education for

commencement of this Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all children children
until they complete the age of fourteen years.

* * * * *

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5227RS—30-1 1-2000