Short title
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE  GYMNASIUMS AND FITNESS CENTRES (REGULATION)
BILL,  2007
A
BILL
to provide for regulation and control of gymnasiums and fitness centres which are
engaged in activities, such as, giving training on weight lifting and body building
and conduct courses for weight reduction and proper nutrition in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Gymnasiums and Fitness Centres (Regulation)  Act,
2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. LXXVIII  of   2007
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context othewise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government
and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "competent authority" means any office or officer notified by the appropriate
Government under section 4 to perform functions assigned under this Act;
(c) "gymnasium or fitness centre" means any establishment by whatever name
called engaged in giving training on weight lifting, body building and giving nutritional
advice on fitness and weight reduction;
(d) "instructor" means any person engaged for giving training on weights, body
building and nutritional advice to members enrolled in any gymnasium or fitness
centre;
(e) "member" means any person enrolled with any gymnasium or fitness centre;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette appoint, no person or establishment shall run a gymnasium or a fitness
centre without prior registration with the competent authority.
(2) Any person or establishment running a gymnasium and fitness centre before the
commencement of this Act shall apply for registration to the competent authority within a
period of forty-five days from the date of commencement of this Act in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
a competent authority for the purposes of registration of gymnasiums and fitness centres
within its jurisdiction.
(2) On receipt of an application for registration of gymnasium or the fitness centres,
the competent authority shall scrutinize the application and may call for such other information
or documents from the applicant as may be prescribed.
(3) The competent authority shall, before registering any gymnasium or the fitness
centre, inspect the site to have the first hand information of the infrastructure available with
the gymnasium or the fitness centre and the compliance of the norms and standards fixed by
the appropriate Government in this regard.
(4) The competent authority shall, after being satisfied with the various requirements
under this Act, grant a registration certificate to the applicant in such manner and form as
may be prescribed which shall be valid for two years.
(5) The competent authority shall renew the registration only after re-inspecting the
gymnasium or the fitness centres and on fulfilment of requirements fixed in this behalf by the
appropriate Government under this Act.
(6) The competent authority may refuse to register a gymnasium or fitness centre or
renew its registration if fails to comply with the norms and standards fixed by the appropriate
Government:
Provided that in case of non-registration or non-renewal of registration of a gymnasium
or a fitness centre, the competent authority shall record reasons in writing and communicate
the same to the applicant.
(7) The competent authority shall take a decision on the application filed under sub-
section (2) within a period of thirty days.
5. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) fix the fee to be charged by the gymnasium and fitness centres from members
for various activities;
Definitions.
Compulsory
registration of
Gymnasium
and fitness
centres.
Procedure for
registration.
Appropriate
Government
to prescribe
norms for
gymnasium
and fitness
centres.

3
(b) prescribe minimum qualification for instructor in the gymnasium and fitness
centre;
(c) fix the instructor-member ratio for gymnasium and fitness centres;
(d) lay down norms for minimum infrastructure for starting and running
gymnasium and fitness centres;
(e) prescribe such other norms as may be necessary for the purpose.
6. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also
with fine which may extend to five lakhs rupees.
7. (1) Where a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule, direction
or order made thereunder has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for
the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention was committed without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.:—For the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means any body corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm,
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject and save
aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other law
for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty.
Offences by a
Company.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the increase in the awareness among the public to have good health and physique,
gymnasium and fitness centres are mushrooming in every nook and corner of big cities.
Some big fitness centres have branches in many parts of the country, including small towns.
These gymnasiums and fitness centres charge a hefty fee from their members who with a
view to have better looks and physique spend the money. Many of these gymnasiums and
fitness centres are not having adequate infrastructure to run their activities and are operating
from small room, garage, terrace etc. The activities of body building and weight lifting is
closely linked with the diet of a person and if the person is not advised about the proper diet,
it may have an adverse effect on the health of a person. This is a highly specialised job which
must be carried out by professionals under strict supervision and hygienic environment.
Many of the so-called gymnasiums are not having qualified instructors and are running
without any nutritionist or dietician. These gymnasiums are just fleecing their members
besides playing with the health of lakhs of people. As of now, there is no effective law to
regulate the operations of gymnasiums and fitness centres. Therefore, it is high time to
regulate the activities of these gymnasiums to protect the interest of public at large.
Hence this Bill.
VIJAY J. DARDA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint competent
authority for the purposes of registration of gymnasium and fitness centres. The expenditure
for appointing competent authorities in respect of Union Territories shall be borne by the
Central Government. It is expected that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees twenty
crore may be involved.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers is
of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation and control of gymnasiums and fitness centres which are
engaged in activities, such as giving training on weight lifting and body building
and conduct courses for weight reduction and proper nutrition in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 ————
(Shri Vijay J. Darda, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4734RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.