1
Bill No. LXXVI of 2022
THE WAQF REPEAL BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to repeal the Waqf Act, 1995.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Waqf (Repeal)  Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. This Waqf Act, 1995 is hereby repealed.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON
 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Short title and
commencement.
Repeal of Act
43 of 1995.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The Waqf Act, 1954 was predicated on the management of waqf; i.e. holding certain 
property and preserving it for the confined benefit of certain philanthropy and prohibiting 
any use or disposition of it outside that specific objective and had sought itself to be a 
measure towards public welfare and as a benevolent institution. Subsequently, some infirmities 
pertaining to the manag ement of the waqf was f elt and the Wakf  Act, 1954 was later  
repealed and the new Waqf Act was passed in 1995 (hereinafter referr ed to as "the Act") 
giving more powers to waqf boards. Amendments were later introduced in the year 2013, 
thereby arming the waqf with limitless and absolute autonomy in the matters relating to it.
Due to these powers, the Waqf Boards is now the third largest owner of land after the 
Indian Armed Forces and the Railways and their share of land has doubled since 2009. The 
enabling provisions enshrined in section 40 of the Waqf Act, 1995 gives powers to the Board 
to acquire, issue notices or hold an enquiry into the ownership of the property that it has 
reasons to believe belo ngs to the Waqf. The board is allowed to conduct an independent 
enquiry into the matter and arrive at a conclusion regarding the ownership of the contended 
property. The decision of the board is final unless revoked by a specific order of the Tribunal 
and the only remedy available to the aggrieved is to approach the Tribunal with a suit which 
is barred by a limitation of only one month. There appears to be no cogent reason as to why 
the Act itself should make an exceptio n from the established principles o f the Limitation 
 Act, 1963.  Appeals to the orders of the Tribunal are not maintainable in other Court of Law. 
Further, the burden of proof regarding the ownership of a land contended to be a property of 
Waqf falls on the person holding the possession of th at land. Should the incumbent fail to  
prove his title to the satisfaction of the Board, such land or property shall have to be vacated. 
Such provisions invariably amount to depriving the citizens of th eir rights to seek 
constitutional remedies and are gross violation of natural justice. As such, it has been felt 
that there is a dearth of adequate safeguard to other communities and especially poor people 
for protection of their properties from its inclusion in Waqf.
Waqf Board has simu ltaneously been af forded with unbridled power in terms of 
registering any property, no other trust, mutths, akharas or a society is conferred with even 
remotely parallel autonomy in their affairs. Registration of property is an important corner 
stone of personal rights guaranteed in the Indian Constitution. The Waqf Act is discriminatory 
both in intent and application while retaining a charitable optics and is in stark violation of 
article 13(2) of the Indian Constitution that prohibits the State from making laws that abridge 
the rights conferred to the citizens by Part III of the Indian Constitution.
The Act as amended from time to time is also against  the autonomy of the State in 
matters falling within its domain. Sections 28 and 29 of the Act provides overriding powers to 
the Waqf Board and its CEO to compel the State machinery to act in a manner consistent with 
the interest of the Board. Section 14 of the Act provides that the Board shall consist o f a 
Chairperson, a member amongst the Muslims who has p rofessional experience in town 
planning, finance, agriculture, etc., a recognized scholar in Shia and Sunni Theology nominated 
by the State Government, one person amongst the Muslims nominated by the State 
Government who is an officer of the State Government (but not belo w the rank of Joint 
Secretary) and not more than two members will be elected by the electoral college constituting; 
Muslim Members of the Parliament from the particular state, Muslim Members of the State 
Legislature, Muslim Members of the Bar Council of the concerned state and mutawallis 
having an annual income of one lakh rupees and above. The provisions of the Act makes it 
mandatory that the appointment of members of the Board is restricted to Muslim community 
only even when the members of the Board are entitled to the status of public servants which
2

3
arguably is in contravention of the spirit of equality in employment. Such pro visions are 
intended to further the interest of the Muslim community and have successfully served in 
unconstrained amassment of property in the name of Muslim charity.
Further, many provisions of the Act are repugnant or constitutionally infirm. In so far 
as the other entities such as mutths, akhara and other trusts are concerned which may also 
bear a religious undertone, the Act fails to establish any reasonable classification that may 
corroborate the conferment of such special status to the waqf. It is an established fact that 
the Constitution is the supreme law of the land and therefore it cannot be undermined by the 
Waqf Act, 1995.
In the light of above and for the purpose of achieving a more equitable arrangement 
and treatment of bodies such as waqf  and other recognised religious en tities established 
under similar intent, and to curb arbitrary amassment of properties by the waqf in the name of 
Muslim charity, the aforesaid Wakf Act, 1995 as amended till date is proposed to be repealed.
Hence this Bill.
HARNA TH  SINGH  Y ADA V .

RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—008—11-12-2023.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to repeal the Waqf Act, 1995.
————
(Shri Harnath Singh Yadav,  M.P.)