THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2010
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent  and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
A
ADHAAR NUMBERS
3. Aadhaar number.
4. Properties of aadhaar number.
5. Authentication of aadhaar number.
6. Aadhaar number not evidence of citizenship or domicile, etc.
7. Central Identities Data Repository.
8. Updation of certain information.
9. Prohibition on requiring certain information.
10. Special measures for issuance of aadhaar number to certain categories of persons.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA
11. Establishment of Authority.
12. Composition of Authority.
13. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Authority.
14. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
15. Removal of Chairperson and Members.
16. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on employment after cessation of office.
17. Functions of Chairperson.
18. Meetings.
19. V acancies, etc. not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
20. Officers and other employees of Authority.
21. Functions of chief executive officer of  Authority.
22. Transfer of assets, liabilities of Authority.
23. Powers and functions of Authority.
CHAPTER IV
G
RANTS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT
24. Grants by Central Government.
25. Other fees and revenue.
26. Accounts and audit.
27. Returns and annual report, etc.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. LXXV of 2010

CHAPTER V
IDENTITY REVIEW COMMITTEE
CLAUSES
28. Review Committee.
29. Functions of Review Committee.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROTECTION OF INFORMATION
30. Security and confidentiality of information.
31. Alteration of demographic information or biometric information.
32. Access to own information and records of requests for authentication.
33. Disclosure of information in certain cases.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
34. Penalty for impersonation at time of enrolment.
35. Penalty for impersonation of aadhaar number holder by changing demographic
information or biometric information.
36. Penalty for impersonation.
37. Penalty for disclosing identity information.
38. Penalty for unauthorised access to the Central Identities Data Repository.
39. Penalty for tampering with data in Central Identities Data Repository.
40. Penalty for manipulating biometric information.
41. General penalty.
42. Offences by companies.
43. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.
44. Power to investigate offences.
45. Penalties not to interfere with other punishments.
46. Cognizance of offences.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
47. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.
48. Members, officers, etc., to be public servants.
49. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
50. Delegation.
51. Protection of action taken in good faith.
52. Power of Central Government to make rules.
53. Power of Authority to make regulations.
54. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.
55. Application of other laws not barred.
56. Power to remove difficulties.
57. Savings.
(ii)

1
THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AUTHORITY OF  INDIA
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the National Identification Authority of India for the
purpose of issuing identification numbers to individuals residing in India and to
certain other classes of individuals and manner of authentication of such individuals
to facilitate access to benefits and services to such individuals to which they are
entitled and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Identification Authority of India Act, 2010.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and
save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to any offence or contravention
thereunder committed outside India by any person.
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. LXXV of 2010
5

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the commencement of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aadhaar number” means the identification number issued to an individual
under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(b) “aadhaar number holder” means an individual who has been issued an
aadhaar number under this Act;
(c) “authentication” means the process wherein, aadhaar number along with
other attributes (including biometrics) are submitted to the Central Identities Data
Repository for its verification and such Repository verifies the correctness thereof
on the basis of information or data or documents available with it;
(d) “Authority” means the National Identification Authority of India established
under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(e) “biometric information” means a set of such biological attributes of an
individual as may be specified by regulations;
(f) “Central Identities Data Repository” means a centralised database in one or
more locations containing all aadhaar numbers issued to aadhaar number holders
along with the corresponding demographic information and biometric information of
such individuals and other information related thereto;
(g) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under
section 12;
(h) “demographic information” includes information relating to the name, age,
gender and address of an individual (other than race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity,
language, income or health), and such other information as may be specified in the
regulations for the purpose of issuing an aadhaar number;
(i) “enrolling agency” means an agency appointed by the Authority or by the
Registrars, as the case may be, for collecting information under this Act;
(j) “enrolment” means such process, as may be specified by regulations, to
collect demographic information and biometric information from individuals by the
enrolling agencies for the purpose of issuing of aadhaar number to such individuals
under this Act;
(k) “identity information” in respect of an individual means biometric information,
demographic information and aadhaar number of such individuals;
(l) “Member” includes the Chairperson and a part-time Member of the Authority
appointed under section 12;
(m) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notified” with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be
construed accordingly;
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(o) “Registrar” means any entity authorised or recognised by the Authority for
the purpose of enrolling the individuals under this Act;
(p) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Authority under this Act;
(q) “resident” means an individual usually residing in a village or rural area or
town or ward or demarcated area (demarcated by the Registrar General of Citizen
Registration) within a ward in a town or urban area in India;
(r) “Review Committee” means the Identification Review Committee constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 28.
Definitions. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
CHAPTER II
AADHAAR NUMBERS
3. (1) Every resident shall be entitled to obtain an aadhaar number on providing of his
demographic information and biometric information to the Authority in such manner as may
be specified by regulations:
Provided that the Central Government may, from time to time, notify such other category
of individuals who may be entitled to obtain an aadhaar number.
(2) On receipt of the demographic information and biometric information under sub-
section (1), the Authority shall, after verifying the information, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations, issue an aadhaar number to such resident.
4. (1) An aadhaar number, issued to an individual shall not be re-assigned to any
other individual.
(2) An aadhaar number shall be a random number and bear no attributes or identity
data or part thereof, relating to the aadhaar number holder.
(3) An aadhaar number shall, subject to authentication, be accepted as proof of
identity of the aadhaar number holder.
5. (1) The Authority shall perform authentication of the aadhaar number of a aadhaar
number holder in relation to his biometric information and demographic information subject
to such conditions and on payment of such fees and in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
(2) The Authority shall respond to an authentication query with a positive or negative
response or with any other appropriate response excluding any demographic information
and biometric information.
6. The aadhaar number or the authentication thereof shall not, by itself, confer any
right of or be proof of citizenship or domicile in respect of an aadhaar number holder.
7. The Authority may engage one or more entities to establish and maintain the
Central Identities Data Repository and to perform any other functions as may be specified
by regulations.
8. The Authority may require the aadhaar number holders to update their demographic
information and biometric information, from time to time, in such manner as may be specified
by regulations so as to ensure continued accuracy of their information in the Central Identities
Data Repository.
9. The Authority shall not require any individual to give information pertaining to his
race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, income or health.
10. The Authority shall take special measures to issue aadhaar number to women,
children, senior citizens, persons with disability, migrant unskilled and unorganised workers,
nomadic tribes or to such other persons who do not have any permanent dwelling house
and such other categories of individuals as may be specified by regulations.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA
11. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Authority to be
known as the National Identification Authority of India to exercise the powers conferred
on it and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
Aadhaar
number.
Properties of
aadhaar
number.
Authentication
of aadhaar
number.
Aadhaar
number not
evidence of
citizenship or
domicile, etc.
Central
Identities Data
Repository.
Updation of
certain
information.
Prohibition
on requiring
certain
information.
Special measures
for issuance of
aadhaar number
to certain
categories of
persons.
Establishment
of Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the
said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be in the National Capital Region referred
to in clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.
(4) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish
its offices at other places in India.
12. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and two part-time Members to be
appointed by the Central Government.
13. The Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall be persons of ability, integrity
and outstanding calibre having experience and knowledge in the matters relating to
technology, governance, law, development, economics, finance, management, public affairs
or administration.
14. (1) The Chairperson and the Members appointed under this Act shall hold office
for a term of three years from the date on which they assume office and shall be eligible for
reappointment:
Provided that no person shall hold office as a Chairperson or Member after he has
attained the age of sixty-five years:
Provided further that the Chairperson of the Unique Identification Authority of India
appointed before the commencement of this Act by notification A-43011/02/2009-Admn.I
(V ol.II) dated the 2nd July, 2009 shall continue as a Chairperson of the Authority under this
Act for the term for which he had been appointed.
(2) The Chairperson and every Member shall, before entering upon their office, make
and subscribe to, an oath of office and of secrecy, in such form and in such manner and
before such Authority as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Chairperson or Member
may—
(a) relinquish his office, by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice
of not less than thirty days; or
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 15.
(4) The Chairperson shall not hold any other office during the period of holding his
office in the Authority as such.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and allowances or remuneration payable to part-time Members
shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that the salary, allowances and the other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
15. (1) The Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson, or a Member,
who—
(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged as an insolvent;
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson
or, as the case may be, a Member;
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as the Chairperson or, as the case may be, a Member; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest.
Composition
of Authority.
Qualifications
for appoint-
ment of Chair-
person and
Members of
Authority.
Term of office
and other
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
2 of 1985.
Removal of
Chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(2) The Chairperson, or a Member shall not be removed under clause (d) or clause (e)
of sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the
matter.
16. The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such, shall not, without
previous approval of the Central Government,—
(a) accept any employment in, or connected with the management or
administration of, any person which has been associated with any work under the
Act, for a period of three years from the date on which they cease to hold office:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any employment
under the Central Government or a State Government or local authority or in any
statutory authority or any corporation established by or under any Central, State or
provincial Act or a Government Company, as defined in section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956;
(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any
specific proceeding or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is
a party and with respect to which the Chairperson or such Member had, before
cessation of office, acted for or provided advice to, the Authority;
(c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained in his
capacity as the Chairperson or a Member and being unavailable to or not being able
to be made available to the public;
(d) enter, for a period of three years from his last day in office, into a contract of
service with, accept an appointment to a board of directors of, or accept an offer of
employment with, an entity with which he had direct and significant official dealings
during his term of office as such.
17.  The Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence, direction in the
conduct of the affairs of the Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over the
meetings of the Authority, and without prejudice to any of the provisions of this Act,
exercise and discharge such other powers and functions of the Authority as may be
prescribed.
18. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at
such meetings) as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the
Authority, the senior most Member shall preside over the meetings of the Authority.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided
by a majority of votes by the Members present and voting and in the event of an equality
of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence the Member presiding over shall have a second
or casting vote.
(4) All decisions of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the
Chairperson or any other Member authorised by the Authority in this behalf.
(5) If any Member, who is a director of a company and who as such director, has any
direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting
of the Authority, he shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be
recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and the Member shall not take part in any
deliberation or decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.
19. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Authority; or
Restrictions on
Chairperson or
Members on
employment
after cessation
of office.
Functions of
Chairperson.
Meetings.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Authority.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of
the case.
20. (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Authority, not below the rank of
the Additional Secretary to the Government of India, who shall be the Member-Secretary of
the Authority, to be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, determine the
number, nature and categories of other officers and employees required to the Authority in
the discharge of its functions.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the chief executive officer and other officers and other employees of the Authority
shall be such as may be specified by regulations with the approval of the Central Government.
21. (1) The chief executive officer shall be the legal representative of the Authority
and shall be responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day administration of the Authority;
(b) implementing the work programmes and decisions adopted by the Authority;
(c) drawing up of proposal for the Authority’s work programmes;
(d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution
of the budget of the Authority.
(2) Every year, the chief executive officer shall submit to the Authority for approval—
(a) a general report covering all the activities of the Authority in the previous
year;
(b) programmes of work;
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and
(d) the budget for the coming year.
(3) The chief executive officer shall have administrative control over the officers and
other employees of the Authority.
22. On and from the establishment of the Authority —
(1) all the assets and liabilities of the Unique Identification Authority of India,
established vide notification of the Government of India in the Planning Commission
number A-43011/02/2009-Admin.I, dated the 28th January, 2009, shall stand transferred
to, and vested in, the Authority.
Explanation.— The assets of such Unique Identification Authority of India
shall be deemed to include all rights and powers, and all properties, whether movable
or immovable, including, in particular, cash balances, deposits and all other interests
and rights in, or arising out of, such properties as may be in the possession of such
Unique Identification Authority of India and all books of account and other documents
relating to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and
obligations of whatever kind;
(2) without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), all data and information
collected during enrolment, all details of authentication performed, debts, obligations
and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged
to be done by, with or for such Unique Identification Authority of India immediately
before that day, for or in connection with the purpose of the said Unique Identification
Authority of India, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to
be done by, with or for, the Authority;
(3) all sums of money due to the Unique Identification Authority of India
immediately before that day shall be deemed to be due to the Authority; and
Officers and
other
employees of
Authority.
Functions of
chief executive
officer of
Authority.
Transfer
of assets,
liabilities of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(4) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been
instituted by or against such Unique Identification Authority of India immediately
before that day may be continued or may be instituted by or against the Authority.
23. (1) The Authority shall develop the policy, procedure and systems for issuing
aadhaar numbers to residents and perform authentication thereof under this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the powers and
functions of the Authority may, inter alia , include all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) specifying, by regulation, demographic information and biometric information
for enrolment for an aadhaar number and the processes for collection and verification
thereof;
(b) collecting demographic information and biometric information from any
individual seeking an aadhaar number in such manner as may be specified by
regulations;
(c) appointing of one or more entities to operate the Central Identities Data
Repository;
(d) generating and assigning aadhaar numbers to individuals;
(e) performing authentication of the aadhaar numbers;
(f) maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the Central Identities
Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations;
(g) omitting and deactivating of an aadhaar number and information relating
thereto in such manner as may be specified by regulations;
(h) specify the usage and applicability of the aadhaar number for delivery of
various benefits and services as may be provided by regulations;
(i) specifying, by regulation, the terms and conditions for appointment of
Registrars, enrolling agencies and service providers and revocation of appointments
thereof;
(j) establishing, operating and maintaining of the Central Identities Data
Repository;
(k) sharing, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, the information
of aadhaar number holders, with their written consent, with such agencies engaged in
delivery of public benefits and public services as the Authority may by order direct;
(l) calling for information and records, conducting inspections, inquiries and
audit of the operations for the purposes of this Act of the Central Identities Data
Repository, Registrars, enrolling agencies and other agencies appointed under this
Act;
(m) specifying, by regulation, various processes relating to data management,
security protocols and other technology safeguards under this Act;
(n) specifying, by regulation, the conditions and procedures for issuance of
new aadhaar number to existing aadhaar number holder;
(o) levy and collect the fees or authorise the Registrars, enrolling agencies or
other service providers to collect such fees for the services provided by them under
this Act in such manner as may be specified by regulations;
(p) appoint such committees as may be necessary to assist the Authority in
discharge of its functions for the purposes of this Act;
(q) promote research and development for advancement in biometrics and related
areas, including usage and applications of aadhaar numbers through appropriate
mechanisms;
(r) specifying, by regulation, the policies and practices for Registrars, enrolling
agencies and other service providers;
Powers and
functions of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

8
(s) setting up facilitation centres and grievance redressal mechanisms for redressal
of grievances of residents, Registrars, enrolling agencies and other service providers;
(t) such other powers and functions as may be prescribed.
(3) The Authority may,—
(a) enter into a Memorandum of Understanding or agreement, as the case may
be, with Central Government or State Governments or Union territories or other
agencies for the purpose of performing any of the functions in relation to collecting,
storing, securing or processing of information or performing authentication;
(b) by notification, appoint such number of Registrars, engage and authorise
such agencies to collect, store, secure, process information or do authentication or
perform such other functions in relation thereto,
as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Authority may engage such consultants, advisors and other persons as may
be required for efficient discharge of its functions under this Act on such allowances or
remuneration and terms and conditions as may be specified by regulations.
CHAPTER IV
G
RANTS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT
24. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Authority, grants of such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
25. The fees or revenue collected by the Authority shall be credited to the Consolidated
Fund of India and the entire amount so credited be transferred to the Authority.
26. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller
and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the
same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller
and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts,
and in particular, shall have the right to demand production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon
shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Authority and the Central
Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
27. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such
form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such
returns and statements and particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the
Authority, as the Central Government may from time to time require.
(2) The Authority shall prepare, once in every year, and in such form and manner and
at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving—
(a) a description of all the activities of the Authority for the previous years;
(b) the annual accounts for the previous year; and
(c) the programmes of work for coming year.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Other fees and
revenue.
Accounts and
audit.
Returns and
annual report,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section ( 2) shall be laid by the Central
Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
IDENTITY REVIEW COMMITTEE
28. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute the Identity Review
Committee to discharge functions specified under sub-section ( 1) of section 29 in respect
of any matter connected with the usage of the aadhaar numbers.
(2) The Review Committee shall consist of three members (one of whom shall be
chairperson designated as such by the Central Government) who are persons of eminence,
ability, integrity and standing in public life having knowledge and experience in the fields of
technology, law, administration and governance, social service, journalism, management or
social sciences.
(3) The members of the Review Committee shall be appointed by the Central
Government on the recommendations of a committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the committee;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha; and
(c) a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where the Leader
of the Opposition in the House of the People has not been recognised as such, the Leader
of the single largest group in Opposition of the Government in the House of the People shall
be deemed to be the Leader of the Opposition.
(4) The member of the Review Committee shall not be a Member of Parliament or
Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, or a member
of any political party.
(5) The members of the Review Committee shall hold office for a term of three years
from the date on which they enter upon office and shall not be eligible for reappointment.
(6) The Central Government may by order remove from office any member of the
Review Committee, who —
(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged as an insolvent;
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member;
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a member; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest:
Provided that a Member shall not be removed under clause (d) or clause (e) unless he
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
29. (1) The Review Committee shall ascertain the extent and pattern of usage of the
aadhaar numbers across the country and prepare a report annually in relation to the extent
and pattern of usage of the aadhaar numbers along with its recommendations thereon and
submit the same to the Central Government.
(2) The manner of preparation of the report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be such
as may be determined by the Review Committee.
(3) A copy of the report along with the recommendations of the Review Committee
shall be laid by the Central Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each
House of Parliament.
Review
Committee.
Functions of
Review
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
CHAPTER VI
PROTECTION OF INFORMATION
30. ( 1) The Authority shall ensure the security and confidentiality of identity
information and anthentication records of individuals.
(2) The Authority shall take measures (including security safeguards) to ensure that
the information in the possession or control of the Authority (including information stored
in the Central Identities Data Repository) is secured and protected against any loss or
unauthorised access or use or unauthorised disclosure thereof.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law and save as otherwise
provided in this Act, the Authority or any of its officer or other employee or any agency
who maintains the Central Identities Data Repository shall not, whether during his service
as such or thereafter, reveal any information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository
to any person:
Provided that an aadhaar number holder may request the Authority to provide access
to his identity information in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
31. (1) In case any demographic information relating to an aadhaar number holder is
found incorrect or changes subsequently, the aadhaar number holder shall request the
Authority to alter such demographic information in his record in the Central Identities Data
Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) In case any biometric information of aadhaar number holder is lost or changes
subsequently for any reason, the aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to
make necessary alteration in his record in the Central Identities Data Repository in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
(3) On receipt of any request under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the Authority
may, if it is satisfied, make such alteration as may be required in the record relating to such
aadhaar number holder and intimate such alteration to the concerned aadhaar number
holder.
32. (1) The Authority shall maintain details of every request for authentication of the
identity of every aadhaar number holder and the response provided thereon by it in such
manner and for such time as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Every aadhaar number holder shall be entitled to obtain details of request for
authentication of his aadhaar number and the response provided thereon by the Authority
in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
33. Nothing contained in sub-section (3) of section 30 shall apply in respect of—
(a) any disclosure of information (including identity information or details of
authentication) made pursuant to an order of a competent court; or
(b) any disclosure of information (including identity information) made in the
interests of national security in pursuance of a direction to that effect issued by an
officer or officers  not below the rank of Joint Secretary or equivalent in the Central
Government specifically authorised in this behalf by an order of the Central Government.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
34. Whoever impersonates or attempts to impersonate another person, whether dead
or alive, real or imaginary, by providing any false demographic information or biometric
information shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Security and
confidentiality
of
information.
Alteration of
demographic
information
or biometric
information.
Access to own
information
and records of
requests for
authentication.
Disclosure of
information in
certain cases.
Penalty for
impersonation
at time of
enrolment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
35. Whoever, with the intention of causing harm or mischief to a aadhaar number
holder, or with the intention of appropriating the identity of a aadhaar number holder
changes or attempts to change any demographic information or biometric information of a
aadhaar number holder by impersonating or attempting to impersonate another person,
dead or alive, real or imaginary, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shall be liable to a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
36. Whoever, not being authorised to collect identity information under the provisions
of this Act, by words, conduct or demeanour pretends that he is authorised to do so, shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with a fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
37. Whoever, intentionally discloses, transmits, copies or otherwise disseminates
any identity information collected in the course of enrolment or authentication to any
person not authorised under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or,
in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
38. Whoever, not being authorised by the Authority, intentionally,—
(a) accesses or secures access to the Central Identities Data Repository; or
(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data from the Central Identities Data
Repository or stored in any removable storage medium; or
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any virus or other computer
contaminant in the Central Identities Data Repository; or
(d) damages or causes to be damaged the data in the Central Identities Data
Repository; or
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of the access to the Central Identities Data
Repository; or
(f) denies or causes a denial of access to any person who is authorised to
access the Central Identities Data Repository; or
(g) provides any assistance to any person to do any of the acts aforementioned;
or
(h) destroys, deletes or alters any information stored in any removable storage
media or in the Central Identities Data Repository or diminishes its value or utility or
effects it injuriously by any means; or
(i) steals, conceals, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, conceal,
destroy or alter any computer source code used by the Authority with an intention to
cause damage,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall
be liable to a fine which shall not be less than one crore rupees.
Explanation.—  For the purposes of this section, the expressions “computer
contaminant”, “computer virus” and “damage” shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the Explanation to section 43 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
39. Whoever, not being authorised by the Authority, uses or tampers with the data in
the Central Identities Data Repository or in any removable storage medium with the intent
of modifying information relating to aadhaar number holder or discovering any information
thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years
and shall be liable to a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
40. Whoever gives or attempts to give any biometric information which does not
pertain to him for the purpose of getting an aadhaar number or authentication or updating
his information, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
Penalty for
impersonation.
Penalty for
disclosing
identity
information.
Penalty for
unauthorised
access to the
Central
Identities Data
Repository.
Penalty for
tampering with
data in Central
Identities Data
Repository.
21 of 2000.
Penalty for
impersonation
of aadhaar
number holder
by changing
demographic
information
or biometric
information.
Penalty for
manipulating
biometric
information.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

12
41. Whoever, commits an of fence under this Act for which no penalty is provided
elsewhere than in this section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years or with a fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees or, in
the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
42. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part
of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
43. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the provisions of this Act shall
apply also to any offence or contravention committed outside India by any person,
irrespective of his nationality.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the provisions of this Act shall apply to any
offence or contravention committed outside India by any person, if the act or conduct
constituting the offence or contravention involves the Central Identities Data Repository.
44. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
a police officer not below the rank of Inspector of Police shall investigate any offence under
this Act.
45. No penalty imposed under this Act shall prevent the imposition of any other
penalty or punishment under any other law for the time being in force.
46. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, save
on a complaint made by the Authority or any officer or person authorised by it.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial
Magistrate shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
47.  (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion,—
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is
unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
General
penalty.
Offences by
companies.
Act to apply
for offence or
contravention
committed
outside India.
Power to
investigate
offences.
Penalties not
to interfere
with other
punishments.
Cognizance of
offences.
2 of 1974.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

13
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction
given by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions
or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and
as a result of such default the financial position of the Authority or the administration
of the Authority has suffered; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so
to do,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Authority for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or
persons as the President may direct to exercise powers and discharge functions under this
Act:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give
a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed
supersession and shall consider the representations, if any, of the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and other members shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the
Authority is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by the
person or persons referred to in sub-section ( 1); and
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority
is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the
notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the
Authority by a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and other members and in such case
any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be
deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-
section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
48. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Authority shall
be deemed, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this
Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
49. Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in
exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act be bound by such
directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to technical and administrative
matters, as the Central Government may give, in writing to it, from time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or
not, shall be final.
50. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any Member,
officer of the Authority or any other person, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be
specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power
under section 53) as it may deem necessary.
Members,
officers, etc.,
to be public
servants.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
45 of 1860.
Delegation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
51. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or the Authority or the Chairperson or any Member or any officer, or other
employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act or the rule or regulation made thereunder.
52. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which and the Authority before whom the oath of
office and of secrecy is to be subscribed by the Chairperson and Members under sub-
section (2) of section 14;
(b) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and the allowances or remuneration payable to Members
of the Authority under sub-section ( 5) of section 14;
(c) the other powers and functions of the Chairperson of the Authority under
section 17;
(d) the other powers and functions of the Authority under clause ( t) of sub-
section (2) of section 23;
(e) the form of annual statement of accounts to be prepared by the Authority
under sub-section (1) of section 26;
(f) the form and the manner in which and the time within which returns and
statements and particulars are to be furnished under sub-section ( 1) of section 27;
(g) the form and the manner and the time at which the Authority shall furnish
annual report under sub-section ( 2) of section 27;
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect
of which provision is to be or may be made by rules.
53. (1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act
and the rules made thereunder, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the biometric information under clause (e) and the demographic information
under clause (h) of section 2;
(b) the process of collecting demographic information and biometric information
from the individuals by enrolling agencies under clause (j) of section 2;
(c) the manner of furnishing the demographic information and biometric
information by the resident under sub-section ( 1) of section 3;
(d) the manner of verifying the demographic information and biometric
information for issue of aadhaar number under sub-section ( 2) of section 3;
(e) the conditions, fees and manner of authentication of the aadhaar number
under sub-section (
1) of section 5;
(f) the other functions to be performed by Central Identities Data Repository
under section 7;
(g) the manner of updating biometric information and demographic information
under section 8;
(h) the other categories of individuals under section 10 for whom the Authority
shall take special measures for issue of aadhaar number;
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Power of
Authority to
make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(i) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure for
transaction of business to be followed by it (including the quorum) under sub-section
(1) of section 18;
(j) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the chief executive officer, officers and other employees of the Authority
under sub-section (3) of section 20;
(k) the demographic information and biometric information and process for
their collection and verification under clause ( a) and the manner of their collection
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(l) the manner of maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the
Central Identities Data Repository under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(m) the manner of omitting and deactivating an aadhaar number and information
relating thereto under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(n) the usage and applicability of the aadhaar number for delivery of various
benefits and services under clause ( h) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(o) the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, enrolling agencies
and other service providers and the revocation of appointments thereof under clause
(i) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(p) the manner of sharing information of aadhaar number holder under clause
(k) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(q) various processes relating to data management, security protocol and other
technology safeguards under clause ( m) of sub-section ( 2) of section 23;
(r) the procedure for issuance of new aadhaar number to existing aadhaar number
holder under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(s) manner of authorising Registrars, enrolling agencies or other services
providers to collect such fees for services provided by them under clause (o) of sub-
section (2) of section 23;
(t) policies and practices to be followed by the Registrar, enrolling agencies and
other service providers under clause (r) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(u) the allowances or remuneration and terms and conditions of consultants,
advisors and other persons under sub-section (
4) of section 23;
(v) the manner in which an aadhaar number holder can access his identity
information under sub-section (3) of section 30;
(w) the manner of alteration of demographic information under sub-section (1)
and biometric information under sub-section (2) of section 31;
(x) the manner of and the time for maintaining the details of request for
authentication and the response thereon under sub-section ( 1) of section 32;
(y) the manner of obtaining, by the aadhaar number holder, the records of
request for authentication of his aadhaar number and response thereon under
sub-section (2) of section 32;
(z) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified, or in respect of
which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
54. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation,
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Laying of
rules and
regulations
before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

16
55. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force.
56. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
57. Anything done or any action taken by the Central Government under the Resolution
of the Government of India, Planning Commission bearing notification number A-43011/02/
2009-Admin.I, dated the 28th January, 2009, shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Savings.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Central Government had decided to issue unique identification numbers to all residents in
India and to certain other persons. The scheme of unique identification involves collection of
demographic information and biometric information from individuals for the purpose of issuing of
unique identification numbers to such individuals. The biometric information would involve taking
of a set of biological attributes of such individuals.
2. The Central Government, for the purposes of issue of the unique identification numbers,
constituted, vide its notification dated the 28th January, 2009 being of executive in nature, the
Unique Identification Authority of India, which is at present functioning under the Planning
Commission.
3. It has been observed and assessed that the issue of unique identification numbers may
involve certain issues, such as (a) security and confidentiality of information, imposition of obligation
of disclosure of information so collected in certain cases, (b) impersonation by certain individuals at
the time of enrolment for issue of unique identification numbers, (c) unauthorised access to the
Central Identities Data Repository, (d) mainpulation of biometric information, (e) investigation of
certain acts constituting offence, and (f) unauthorised disclosure of the information collected for the
purposes of issue of the unique identification numbers which should be addressed by law and attract
penalties.
4. In view of the foregoing paragraph, it has been felt necessary to make the said Authority as
a statutory authority for carrying out the functions of issuing identification numbers to the residents
in India in an effective manner. It is, therefore, proposed to enact the National Identification Authority
of India Bill,  2010 to provide for the establishment of the National Identification Authority of India
for the prupose of issuing identification numbers (which has been referred to as aadhaar number) to
individuals residing in India and to certain other classes of individuals and manner of authentication
of such individuals to facilitate access to benefits and services to such individuals to which they are
entitled and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
5. The National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010, inter alia, seeks to provide—
(a) for issue of aadhaar numbers to every resident by the Authority on providing his
demographic information and biometric information to it in such manner as may be specified
by regulations;
(b) for authentication of the aadhaar number of an aadhaar number holder in relation to
his biometric information and demographic information subject to such conditions and on
payment of such fees as may be specified by regulations;
(c) for establishment of the National Identification Authority of India consisting of a
Chairperson and two part-time Members;
(d) that the Authority to exercise powers and discharge functions which, inter alia,
include—
(i) specifying the demographic information and biometric information for
enrolment for an aadhaar number and the processes for collection and verification
thereof;
(ii) collecting demographic information and biometric information from
any individual seeking an aadhaar number in such manner as may be specified
by regulations;
(iii) appointing of one or more entities to operate the Central Identities
Data Repository;
(iv) maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the Central
Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations;
(v) specify the usage and applicability of the aadhaar number for delivery
of various benefits and services as may be provided by regulations;
17

18
(e) that the Authority shall not require any individual to give information
pertaining to his race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, income or health;
(f) that the Authority may engage one or more entities to establish and
maintain the Central Identities Data Repository and to perform any other functions
as may be specified by regulations;
(g) for constitution of the Identity Review Committee consisting of three
members (one of whom shall be the chairperson) to ascertain the extent and
pattern of usage of the aadhaar numbers across the country and prepare a report
annually in relation to the extent and pattern of usage of the aadhaar numbers
along with its recommendations thereon and submit the same to the Central
Government;
(h) that the Authority shall take measures (including security safeguards)
to ensure that the information in the possession or control of the Authority
(including information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository) is secured
and protected against any loss or unauthorised access or use or unauthorised
disclosure thereof;
(i) for offences and penalties for contravention of the provisions of the
proposed legislation.
6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; MANMOHAN SINGH
The 8th November, 2010.

Notes on clauses
Clause 2.— This clause contains definitions of certain words and expressions used in
the proposed legislation.  These definitions, inter alia,  include the definitions of “aadhaar
number”, “authentication”, “Central Identities Data Repository”, “demographic informa-
tion”, Identity information”, “resident”, “Review Committee”, etc.
Clause 3.— This clause provides for entitlement to obtain an aadhaar number by every
resident. It proposes that every resident shall be entitled to obtain an aadhaar number after
providing his demographic information and biometric information to the Authority in such
manner as specified by regulations. It further provides that the Central Government may from
time to time notify the other category of individuals who may be entitled to obtain an aadhaar
number. It also provides that the Authority after verifying the demographic information and
biometric information provided by the resident, issue an aadhaar number to such resident.
Clause 4.— This clause deals with the properties of aadhaar number. It provides that
any aadhaar number issued to an individual shall not be re-assigned to any other individual;
it shall be a random number and bear no attributes or identity data relating to the aadhaar
number holder. It further provides that the aadhaar number can be accepted as proof of
identity of its holder but subject to authentication.
Clause 5.—This clause empowers the Authority to perform authentication of the aadhaar
number of a aadhaar number holder in relation to his biometric information and demographic
information subject to such conditions and on payment of such fees and in such manner as
specified by regulations.  It further empowers the Authority to respond to an authentication
query with a positive or negative response or with any other appropriate response excluding
any demographic information and biometric information.
Clause 6.—This clause lays down that the aadhaar number or the authentication
thereof shall not, by itself, confer any right of or be proof of citizenship or domicile in respect
of an aadhaar number holder.
Clause 7.—This clause empowers the Authority to engage one or more entities to
establish and maintain the Central Identities Data Repository and to perform any other
functions as provided under regulations.
Clause 8.— This clause deals with the updating of  the demographic information and
biometric information of the aadhaar number holders, from time to time, in such manner as
specified by regulations so as to ensure continued accuracy of their information in the
Central Identities Data Repository.
Clause 9.— This clause prohibits the Authority from requiring any individual to give
information pertaining to his race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, income or health.
Clause 10.—This clause empowers the Authority to take special measures to issue
aadhaar number to women, children, senior citizens, persons with disability, migrant un-
skilled and unorganised workers, nomadic tribes or to such other persons who do not have
any permanent dwelling house  and  such other categories of individuals which are  specified
by regulations.
Clause 11.— This clause provides for establishment of the National Identification
Authority of India, by the Central Government, to exercise the powers conferred on it and to
perform the functions assigned to it under the proposed legislation. The said Authority shall
be a body corporate, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to
the provisions of the proposed legislation,  to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. It
further provides for the location of the head office of the Authority in the National Capital
Region and with the prior approval of the Central Government, to establish its offices at other
places in India.
Clause12.—This clause lays down the composition of the Authority consisting of a
Chairperson and two part-time Members to be appointed by the Central Government.
19

20
Clause 13.—This clause provides for qualifications for appointment of Chairperson
and Members of the Authority. It provides that persons of ability, integrity and outstanding
calibre having experience and knowledge in the matters relating to technology, governance,
law, development, economics, finance, management, public affairs or administration shall be
qualified as Chairperson and Members of the Authority.
Clause 14.— This clause provides for term of office and other conditions of service of
Chairperson and Members. It provides that the Chairperson and the Members shall hold
office for a term of three years from the date on which they  assume  office and shall be
eligible for reappointment. It also provides that the Chairperson or Member of the Authority
shall not hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
It also provides that the Chairperson of the Unique Identification Authority of India
appointed before the commencement of the proposed legislation by notification A-43011/02/
2009-Admn.I (Vol.II) dated the 2nd July, 2009 shall continue as a Chairperson of the Author-
ity under the proposed legislation for the term for which he had been appointed.
It also provides that the Chairperson and every Member shall, before entering upon
their office, make and subscribe to, an oath of office and of secrecy, in such form and in such
manner and before such Authority as may be prescribed.
It also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (1), the Chair-
person or Member may relinquish his office, by giving in writing to the Central Government,
a notice of not less than thirty days; or be removed from his office in accordance with the
provisions of clause 15. It also provides that the Chairperson shall not hold any other office
during the period of holding their office in the Authority as such.
It also provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and allowances or remuneration payable to part-
time Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government but neither the
salary, allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson shall be
varied to his disadvantages after his appointment.
Clause 15.— This clause provides for removal of Chairperson and Members of the
Authority. It provides that the Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson
or a Member of the Authority on any of the grounds enumerated in this clause.
It further provides that the Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from his
office on the grounds specified in item (d) or (e) of sub-clause (1) unless he has been given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
Clause 16.— This clause prohibition as to holding of offices by the Chairperson or a
Member on ceasing to be such Chairperson or a Member of the Authority. It provides that on
ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or Member of the Authority, as the case may be, shall
subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation, be ineligible, for further employment in,
or, connected with the management or administration of, any person which has been associ-
ated with any work under the Act, for a period of three years. It also provides that the clause
shall not apply to any employment under the Central Government or a State Government or
local authority or in any statutory authority or any corporation established by or under any
Central, State or provincial Act or a Government Company, as defined in section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956.
It also provides prohibition to act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in
connection with any specific proceeding or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the
Authority is a party and with respect to which the Chairperson or such Member had, before
cessation of office, acted for or provided advice to, the Authority; to give advice to any
person using information which was obtained in his capacity as the Chairperson or a Mem-
ber and being unavailable to or not being able to be made available to the public; to enter, for
a period of three years from his last day in office, into a contract of service with, accept an
appointment to a board of directors of, or accept an offer of employment with, an entity with
which he had direct and significant official dealings during his term of office as such.

21
Clause 17.— This clause lays down the functions of the Chairperson. It provides that
the Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence, direction in the conduct of
the affairs of the Authority in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Authority and
without prejudice to any of the provisions of the proposed legislation, to exercise and
discharge such powers and functions of the Authority as may be prescribed.
Clause 18.— This clause empowers the Authority to determine the procedure for the
transaction of business in its meetings including times and places of such meetings. It
provides that the Chairperson, or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the
Authority, the senior most Member shall preside over the meetings of the Authority.
It further provides that all questions which come up before any meeting of the Author-
ity shall be decided by a majority of votes by the Members present and voting and in case of
an  equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence the Member presiding over shall
have a second or casting vote and all such decisions of the Authority shall be authenticated
by the signature of the Chairperson or any other Member authorised by the Authority in this
behalf.
It also provides that any Member, who is a director of a company and who as such
director, has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up for consider-
ation at a meeting of the Authority, he shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances
have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such
disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and the Member shall not
take part in any deliberation or decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.
Clause 19.—This clause enumerates the circumstances under which the acts or pro-
ceedings of the Authority shall not be invalidated.  It provides that no act or proceeding of
the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of, any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the Authority;  any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the
Authority; or  any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of
the case.
Clause 20.—This clause makes provision for appointment of officers and other
employees of Authority. It provides for the appointment of a chief executive officer of the
Authority by the Central Government, who shall act as the Member-Secretary of the Authority.
It also provides for determining the number, nature and categories of other officers and
employees required to the Authority in the discharge of its functions.
It also provides for the determination of the salaries and allowances and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the chief executive officer and other officers and other
employees of the Authority lay regulation with the approval of the Central Government.
Clause 21.—This clause lays down functions of the chief executive officer. The func-
tions of the chief executive officer, who shall be the legal representative of the Authority,
inter alia, shall be the day-to-day administration and implementing the work programmes
and decisions adopted by the Authority; drawing up of proposal for the Authority’s work
programmes; the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution
of the budget of the Authority; submitting, every year a general report covering all the
activities of the Authority in the previous year and  programmes of work; and the annual
accounts for the previous year and the budget for the coming year.
It further lays down that the chief executive officer shall have administrative control
over the officers and other employees of the Authority.
Clause 22.—This clause makes provision for   transfer of assets, liabilities of the
Authority. It provides that on and from the establishment of the Authority, all the assets and
liabilities of the Unique Identification Authority of India, established vide notification of the
Government of India in the Planning Commission number A-43011/02/2009-Admin.I, dated
the 28th January, 2009, shall stand transferred to and vested in the Authority to be estab-
lished under the proposed legislation.

22
It further provides that all data and information collected during enrolment, all details
of authentication performed, debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered
into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for such Unique Identification
Authority of India for or in connection with the purpose of the said Unique Identification
Authority of India, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be
done by, with or for, the Authority and all sums of money due shall be deemed to be due to
the Authority and all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been
instituted by or against such Unique Identification Authority of India may be continued or
may be instituted by or against the Authority.
Clause 23.— This clause lays down the powers and functions of Authority. It provides
that the Authority shall develop the policy, procedure and systems for issuing aadhaar
numbers to residents and perform authentication thereof under this Act. If further specifies
the powers and functions of the Authority which, inter alia, include; specifying, by regula-
tion, demographic information and biometric information for enrolment for an aadhaar num-
ber and the processes for collection and verification thereof; collecting demographic infor-
mation and biometric information from any individual seeking an aadhaar number in such
manner as may be specified by regulations; appointing of one or more entities to operate the
Central Identities Data Repository; generating and assigning aadhaar numbers to individu-
als; performing authentication of the aadhaar numbers; maintaining and  updating the infor-
mation of individuals in the Central Identities Data Repository in such  manner as may be
specified by regulations; specify the usage and applicability of the aadhaar number for
delivery of various benefits and services as may be provided by regulations; specifying, by
regulation, the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, enrolling agencies and
service providers and revocation of appointments thereof; establishing, operating and main-
taining of the Central Identities Data Repository; calling for information and records, con-
ducting inspections, inquiries and audit of the operations for the purposes of the proposed
legislation of the Central Identities Data Repository, Registrars, enrolling agencies and other
agencies appointed under this Act; specifying, by regulation, the conditions and  proce-
dures for issuance of new aadhaar number to existing aadhaar number holder; levy and
collect the fees or authorise the Registrars, enrolling agencies or other service providers to
collect such fees for the services provided by them under the proposed legislation in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
It also empowers the Authority to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding or
agreement, as the case may be,  with the Central Government or  State Governments or Union
territories or other agencies for the purpose of performing any of the functions in relation to
collecting, storing, securing or processing of information or performing  authentication; and
appoint by notification, such number of Registrars, engage and authorise such agencies to
collect, store, secure, process information or do authentication or perform such other func-
tions in relation thereto, as may be necessary for the purposes of the proposed legislation or
to engage such consultants, advisors and other persons as may be required for efficient
discharge of its functions under this Act on such allowances or remuneration and terms and
conditions as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 24.—This clause makes provision for grants by the Central Government. It
provides that after due appropriation made by Parliament by law the Central Government
may make grants of such sums of money as it may think fit to the Authority for being utilised
for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for other fees and revenue. It provides that fees or
revenue collected by the Authority shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and
entire amount so credited shall be transferred to the Authority.
Clause 26.—This clause makes provision for accounts and audit. It provides that the
Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual
statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

23
It further provides that the accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually  by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and
any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to
the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
It also provides that the accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit
report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Authority and
the Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for returns and annual report, etc. It provides that
the Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such form and
manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and
statements and particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the Authority, as
the Central Government may from time to time require.
It further provides that the Authority shall prepare, once in every year, and in such
form and manner and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a description
of all the activities of the Authority for the previous years; the annual accounts for the
previous year; and the programmes of work for coming year. A copy of such report shall be
laid by the Central Government before each House of Parliament.
Clause 28.— This clause provides for the Review Committee. It provides that the
Central Government may, by notification, constitute the Identity Review Committee, consist-
ing of three members (one of whom shall be the chairperson as such designated by the
Central Government) who are persons of eminence, ability, integrity and standing in public
life having knowledge and experience in the fields of technology, law, administration and
governance, social service, journalism, management or social sciences, to discharge func-
tions specified under sub-clause (1) of clause 29 in respect of any matter connected with the
usage of the aadhaar numbers.
It further provides that the members of the Review Committee shall be appointed by
the Central Government on the recommendations of a committee consisting of the Prime
Minister, who shall be the chairperson of the committee; the Leader of Opposition in the Lok
Sabha; and a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister.
It also provides that the member of the Review Committee shall not be a Member of
Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be,
or  a member of  any political party. A member of the Review Committee shall hold office for
a term of three years from the date on which they enter upon office and shall not be eligible
for reappointment and may be removed by the Central Government on the grounds specified
under sub-clause (6).
Clause 29.—This clause makes provision for functions of the Review Committee. It
provides that the Review Committee shall ascertain the extent and pattern of usage of the
aadhaar numbers across the country and prepare a report annually in relation to the extent
and pattern of usage of the aadhaar numbers along with its recommendations thereon and
submit the same to the Central Government. This clause further empowers the Review Com-
mittee to determine the manner of preparation of the report. It also provides that a copy of the
report along with the recommendations of the Review Committee shall be laid by the Central
Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for security and confidentiality of information. It
provides that the Authority shall ensure the security and confidentiality of identity informa-
tion and authentication records of individuals and take measures (including security safe-
guards) to ensure that the information in the possession or control of the Authority (includ-
ing information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository) is secured and protected
against any loss or unauthorised access or use or unauthorised disclosure thereto.

24
It further provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force and save as otherwise provided in the proposed legislation, the Authority
or any of its officer or other employee or any agency who maintains the Central Identities
Data Repository shall not reveal any information stored in the Central Identities Data Re-
pository to any person but an aadhaar number holder may request the Authority to provide
access to his identity information in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 31.—This clause makes provision relating to alteration of demographic infor-
mation or biometric information. It provides that in case any demographic information relat-
ing to an aadhaar number holder is found incorrect or it changes subsequently, and in case
any biometric information of aadhaar number holder is lost or changes subsequently for any
reason, then the aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to alter such demo-
graphic information or biometric information in his record in the Central Identities Data
Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
It further provides that on receipt of any request for alteration of demographic informa-
tion or biometric information, the Authority may, if it is satisfied, make such alteration as may
be required in the record relating to such aadhaar number holder and intimate such alteration
to the concerned aadhaar number holder.
Clause 32.—This clause makes provision for  access to own information and records
of requests for authentication. It provides that the Authority shall maintain details of every
request for authentication of the identity of every aadhaar number holder and the response
provided thereon by it in such manner and for such time as may be specified by regulations.
It further provides that every aadhaar number holder shall be entitled to obtain details of
request for authentication of his aadhaar number and the response provided thereon by the
Authority in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for disclosure of information in certain cases. It
provides that provisions of sub-clause (3) of clause 30 which impose restrictions on provid-
ing information shall not apply in respect of any disclosure of information (including identity
information or details of authentication) made pursuant to an order of a competent court; or
any disclosure of information (including identity information) made in the interests of na-
tional security in pursuance of a direction to that effect issued by an officer or officers not
below the rank of Joint Secretary or equivalent in the Central Government specifically
authorised in this behalf by an order of the Central Government.
Clause 34.—This clause provides for penalty for impersonation at time of enrolment. It
provides that whoever impersonates or attempts to impersonate another person, whether
dead or alive, real or imaginary, by providing any false demographic information or biometric
information shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Clause 35.—This clause provides for penalty for impersonation of Aadhaar number
holder by changing demographic information or biometric information. It provides that who-
ever, with the intention of causing harm or mischief to a aadhaar number holder, or with the
intention of appropriating the identity of a aadhaar number holder changes or attempts to
change any demographic information or biometric information of a aadhaar number holder
by impersonating or attempting to impersonate another person, dead or alive, real or imagi-
nary, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and
shall be liable to a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Clause 36.—This clause provides for penalty for impersonation. It provides that who-
ever, not being authorised to collect identity information under the provisions of this Act, by
words, conduct or demeanour pretends that he is authorised to do so, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with a fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees or with both.

25
Clause 37.—This clause provides for penalty for disclosing identity information. It
provides that whoever, intentionally discloses, transmits, copies or otherwise disseminates
any identity information collected in the course of enrolment or authentication to any person
not authorised under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case
of a company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 38.— This clause provides for penalty for unauthorised access to the Central
Identities Data Repository. It provides that whoever, not being authorised by the Authority,
intentionally, (a) accesses or secures access to the Central Identities Data Repository or
(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data from the Central Identities Data Repository; or
stored in any removable medium; or  (c) introduces or causes to be introduced any virus or
other computer contaminant; in the Central Identities Data Repository; or (d) damages or
causes to be damaged the data in the Central Identities Data Repository;
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of the access to the Central Identities Data Repository; or
(f) denies or causes a denial of access to any person who is authorised to access the Central
Identities Data Repository; or (g) provides any assistance to any person to do any of the
acts aforementioned; (h) destroys, deletes or alters any information stored in any removable
storage media or in the Central Identities Data Repository or diminishes its value or utility or
effects it injuriously by any means; (i) steals, conceals, destroys or alters or causes any
person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any computer source code used by the Authority
with an intention to cause damage, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years and shall be liable to a fine which shall not be less than one crore
rupees.
It further defines the expressions “computer contaminant”, “computer virus” and
“damage” to have the same meanings for the purposes of this clause as are respectively
assigned to them in the Explanation to section 43 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
Clause 39.—This clause provides for penalty for tampering with data in Central Iden-
tities Data Repository. It provides that whoever, not being authorised by the Authority, uses
or tampers with the data in the Central Identities Data Repository or in any removable
storage medium with the intent of modifying information relating to aadhaar number holder
or discovering any information thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years and shall be liable to a fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees.
Clause 40.— This clause provides for penalty for manipulating biometric information.
It provides that whoever gives or attempts to give any biometric information which does not
pertain to him for the purpose of getting an aadhaar number or authentication or updating his
information, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
Clause 41.— This clause provides for general penalty. It provides that whoever, com-
mits an offence under the proposed legislation for which no penalty is provided elsewhere
than in this clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years or with a fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees or, in the case of
a company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 42.— This clause deals with the offences by companies. It provides that where
an offence under the proposed legislation has been committed by a company then every
person who at the time when the alleged offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
It further provides that if any such person proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence, then he shall not be liable for the said punishment.

26
It also provides that where any offence under the proposed legislation has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Clause 43.— This clause makes provision for application of the proposed legislation in
relation to offence or contravention committed outside India. It provides that the provisions
of the proposed legislation shall apply also to any offence or contravention committed
outside India by any person, irrespective of his nationality, if the act or conduct constituting
the offence or contravention involves the Central Identities Data Repository.
Clause 44.— This clause provides for power to investigate offences. It provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a police officer
not below the rank of Inspector of Police shall investigate any offence under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 45.— This clause relates to penalties not to interfere with other punishments. It
provides that no penalty imposed under the proposed legislation shall prevent the imposi-
tion of any other penalty or punishment under any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 46.— This clause provides for cognizance of offences. It provides that any
court shall not take cognizance of any offence punishable under the proposed legislation,
save on a complaint made by the Authority or any officer or person authorised by it.
It further provides that any court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or
a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall not try any offence punishable under the proposed legisla-
tion.
Clause 47.— This clause empowers the Central Government to supersede Authority. It
provides that the Central Government may after satisfying on the grounds mentioned under
this clause supersede the Authority by issuing a notification for such period not exceeding
six months and appoint a person or persons as the President may direct to exercise powers
and discharge functions under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that  before  issuing  any such  notification,  the  Central Govern-
ment  shall  give a reasonable opportunity to the  Authority  to make  representations  against
the proposed  supersession  and  shall consider the representations, if any, of the Authority.
It also provides that upon  the  publication of a notification  superseding the Authority,
(a)  the  Chairperson  and other members shall, as from  the  date  of supersession, vacate their
offices as such; (b)  all  the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under  the
provisions  of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the  Authority  shall,
until  the Authority  is  reconstituted  be exercised and discharged by the person or persons
referred to in sub-clause (1);  and (c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority
shall,  until the  Authority  is  reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest  in  the Central
Government.
It also provides that the Central  Government  shall  reconstitute  the  Authority, before
the expiration of the period of supersession,  by  a  fresh appointment  of its Chairperson and
other members and in such case any person  who had vacated his office due to supersession
of the Authority shall not be deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.
It also provides that the Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification and
a full report of any action taken under this clause and the circumstances leading to such
action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
Clause 48.— This clause provides that Members, officers, etc., to be public servants.
It providers that the Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Authority

27
shall be deemed, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of
the proposed legislation, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
Clause 49.—This clause empowers the Central Government to issue directions. It
provides that without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of the proposed legislation, the
Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or  the performance of its functions, be bound by
such directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to technical and administra-
tive matters, as the Central Government may give, in writing to it, from time to time.
It further provides that the Authority shall, as for as practicable, be given an opportu-
nity to express its views before any direction is given under this clause. It also provides that
the decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be
final.
Clause 50.— This clause provides for delegation. It provides that the Authority may,
by general or special order in writing, delegate to any Member, officer of the Authority or any
other person, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its
powers and functions under this Act (except the power under clause 53 relating to making of
regulations) as it may deem necessary.
Clause 51.— This clause provides for protection of action taken in good faith. It
provides that any suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall not lie against the Central
Government or the Authority or the Chairperson or any Member or any officer, or other
employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
Clause 52.— This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules. It provides
that the Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of
the proposed legislation. It further specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may
be made.
Clause 53.— This clause empowers the Authority to make regulations. It provides that
the Authority may, by notification, make regulations for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation consistent with the proposed legislation and the rules made thereun-
der. It further specifies the matters in respect of which such regulations may be made.
Clause 54.— This clause provides for laying of rules and regulations before Parlia-
ment. It provides that every rule and every regulation made under the proposed legislation
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 55.— This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation shall
be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 56.— This clause makes provision for removal of difficulties. It provides that  if
any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation then the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation as may appear to be neces-
sary for removing the difficulty.
It further provides that any such order for removal of difficulty shall be made under
this section within a period of two years from the commencement of the proposed legislation.
It also provides that every order made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 57.— This clause provides for savings. It provides that anything done or
any action taken by the Central Government under the Resolution of the Government of
India, Planning Commission bearing notification number A-43011/02/2009-Admin.I, dated
the 28th January, 2009, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the correspond-
ing provisions of the proposed legislation.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 11 provides for establishment of the National Identification Authority of India
which shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power
to acquire, hold and dispose of property and sue or be sued with the head office in the
National Capital Region and may establish its offices at other places in India. Clause 12
provides that Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and two part-time Members. Sub-
clause (5) of clause 14 makes provision for salaries and allowances payable to the Chairper-
son and allowances or remuneration payable to part-time Members. Sub-clause (3) of clause
20 makes provision for salaries and allowances payable to the chief executive officer and
other officers and other employees of the Authority.
2. Item (j) of sub-clause (2) of clause 23 provides for establishment, operation and
maintenance of the Central Identity Data Repository.
3. Clause 24 provides that the Central Government may after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority, grants of such sums of money as
the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the proposed
legislation.
4.  Clause 25 of the Bill provides that the fees or revenue collected by the Authority
shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the entire amount so credited will be
transferred to the Authority.
5. It is estimated that there would be an expenditure of approximately Rs. 3023.01 crore
in phase two of the scheme. Out of this, an amount of Rs. 477.11 crore would be towards
recurring establishment expenditure and Rs. 2,545.90 crore would be towards non-recurring
project related expenditure. The estimated cost for the first phase of the scheme was
Rs. 147.31 crore towards the setting up necessary infrastructure for offices at headquarters
and regional headquarters, creating testing facilities for running the pilots and proof of
concept studies, initital work of creating standards in various areas of operations, and
setting up of a project management unit and hiring of consultants.
6. The Bill does not envisage any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring
nature.
28

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 52 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by
notification, rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2)
specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia,
include: (a) the form and manner in which and the authority before whom the oath of office
and of secrecy is to be subscribed by the Chairperson and Members under sub-clause (2) of
clause 14; (b) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and the allowances or remuneration payable to Members of the
Authority under sub-clause (5) of clause 14; (c) the other powers and functions of the
Chairperson of the Authority under clause 17; (d) the other powers and
functions of the Authority under item(t)  of sub-clause (2) of clause 23; (e) the form of annual
statement of accounts to be prepared by Authority under sub-clause (1) of clause 26; (f) the
form and the manner in which and the time within which returns and statements and particulars
are to be furnished under sub-clause (1) of clause 27; (g) the form and the manner and the
time at which the Authority shall furnish annual report under sub- clause (2) of clause 27;
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be or may be made by rules.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 53 of the Bill empowers the National Identification Authority
of India to make, by notification, regulations to carry out the provisions of the proposed
legislation consistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules made
thereunder. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such regulations may be
made. These matters, inter alia, include: (i) the biometric information under sub-clause
(e); the demographic information under sub-clause (h); the process of collecting demographic
information and biometric information from the individuals by enrolling agencies under sub-
clause (j) of clause 2; (ii) the manner of furnishing the demographic information and biometric
information by the resident under sub-clause (1) of clause 3; and the manner of verifying the
demographic information and biometric information for issue of aadhaar number under sub-
clause (2) of clause 3; (iii) the procedure for authentication of the aadhaar number under sub-
clause (1) of clause 5; (iv) the other functions to be performed by Central Identities Data
Repository under clause 7; (v) the manner of updating biometric information and demographic
information under clause 8; (vi) the other categories of individuals under clause 10 for whom
the Authority shall take special measures for allotment of aadhaar number; (vii) the time and
places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure for transaction of business to be
followed by it (including the quorum) under sub-clause (1) of clause 18; (viii) the salary and
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the chief executive
officer, officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 20;
(ix) various matters specified under clause 23; (x) the manner of accessing the identity
information by the aadhaar number holder under sub-clause (3) of clause 30; (xi) the manner
of alteration of demographic information under sub-clause (1) and biometric information
under sub-clause (2) of clause 31; (xii) the manner of and the time for maintaining the request
for authentication and the response thereon under sub-section (1) and the manner of
obtaining, by the aadhaar number holder, the  records of request for authentication and
response thereon under sub-clause (2) of clause 32 (xiii) any other matter which is required to
be, or may be, specified, or in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by
regulations.
3. Clause 54 provides that every rule and every regulation made under the proposed
legislation shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matter of
procedure or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is therefore of a normal character.
29

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the National Identification Authority of India for the
purpose of issuing identification numbers to individuals residing in India and to certain
other classes of individuals and manner of authentication of such individuals to facilitate
access to benefits and services to such individuals to which they are entitled and for
matter connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Planning and
Parliamentary Affairs)
GMGIPMRND—5148RS—11.11.2010