Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH AUGUST, 2006
Bill No. LXXVIII of 2006
THE  CINEMA  ARTISTS'  WELFARE  BILL,  2006
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of cinema artists and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cinema Artists' Welfare Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
SERVER4 \ BILL2004 \ RAJYA SABHA\ 2590RS

SERVER4 \ BILL2004 \ RAJYA SABHA\ 2590RS
2
(a) "artist" means any person engaged in cinema industry who performs any
activity including dancing, singing, production and distribution of films and includes
any person who does perform any work connected with production, editing and
distribution of films and also includes casual workers employed from time to time;
(b) "cinema" includes a feature film or a documentary or a short film;
(c) "fund" means Cinema Artist Welfare Fund;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as Cinema Artist
Welfare Fund.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contribution made by the Central Government, film
producers, and artists connected with cinema industry and donations received from
individuals or organizations.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board consisting of—
(i) The Minister of Information and Broadcasting as ex-officio Chairman;
(ii) representatives of film producer, as members;
(iii) representatives of cinema artists as members;
4. The terms and conditions of service of members of the Board and their member shall
be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Board shall, at the end of every financial year, prepare an annual statement
showing its receipts and expenditure along with the activities executed during that year and
a copy thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
6. The Fund shall be utilized for giving the financial assistance to artists for following
purposes:
(i) compensation in case of death or accident while performing the job;
(ii) the premium for Life insurance;
(iii) old age pension;
(iv) disability assistance;
(v) free health care including for their family members;
(vi) subsidized housing facilities.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Establishment
of Cinema
Artist Welfare
Fund.
Annual
Report.
Utilization of
fund.
Power to
make rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Film industry employs large number of cine artists for performing various activities
such as, dancing, singing, stunts, production, etc. Artists engaged in film industry are
unorganized lot. They entertain people with great risk involved in their work. Accidents of
artists during shootings are common and leave them with either permanent or partial disability.
Many artists even have to loose their lives during their performance. In the name of
rehabilitation, they get a meager amount as compensation. Moreover, they do not have
proper facilities like health care, education, etc. for their children.
It is an irony that today, the entertainment industry generates considerable revenue
for the country but nothing substantial is being done for the persons who are responsible for
running this industry successfully.
Therefore, keeping this in view, it is proposed to set up a Fund for the welfare of
persons engaged in cinema industry.
Hence this Bill.
C. PERUMAL
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3, of the Bill provides for setting up a Fund for the welfare of artists engaged in
cinema industry. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred
crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

SERVER4 \ BILL2004 \ RAJYA SABHA\ 2590RS
6
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of cinema artists and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri C. Perumal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2590RS(S-4)—25-08-2006.