Short title
and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH AUGUST, 2006
Bill No. LXXV of 2006
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After article 371(I) of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted namely:—
“371J. (1) The President may by order made with respect to the Hyderabad
Karnataka area of the State of Karnataka provide, having regard to the requirements of
that area as a whole, for equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging
to different parts of the State, in the matter of public employment and in the matter of
education, and different provisions may be made for various parts of the State.
(2) An order made under Clause (1) may, in particular:—
(a) require the State Government to organize any class or classes of posts
in a civil service of, any class or classes of civil posts under, the State into
different local cadres for different parts of the State and allot in accordance with
such principles and procedure as may be specified in the order the persons
holding such posts to the local cadres so organized;
SERVER 4 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA \2594RS
Insertion of new
article 371J.
Special
provisions with
respect to the
Hyderabad
Karnataka
area
consisting of
Gulbarga,
Bidar,
Raichur ,
Koppal and
Bellary
Districts of the
State of
Karnataka.

2
(b) specify the Hyderabad Karnataka area of the State which shall be
regarded as the local area—
(i) for direct recruitment to posts in any local cadre (whether
organized in pursuance of an order under this article or constituted
otherwise) under the State Government;
(ii) for direct recruitment to posts in any cadre under any local
authority within the State; and
(iii) for the purposes of admission to any University within the
State or to any other educational institution which is subject to the control
of the State Government;
(c) specify the extent to which, the manner in which and the conditions subject
to  which preference or reservations shall be given or made—
(i) in the matter of direct recruitment to posts in any such cadre
referred to in sub-clause (b) as may be specified in this behalf in the order
(ii) in the matter of admission to any such university or other
educational institutions referred to in sub-clause (b) as may be specified
in this behalf in the orders to or in favour of candidates who have resided
or studied for any period specified in the order in the local area in respect
of such cadre, University or other educational institutions, as the case
may be.
(d) and to provide for required infrastructure for overall development of
the Hyderabad Karnataka area (e.g. industries, education, roads, hospitals,
employment, irrigation etc.)”
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/ 2002RS/EV

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In order to overcome the imbalances prevailling in the field of employment and education
among various regions of the State, the Government of Karnataka have proposed for regional
reservation with a view to make available equitable opportunities and facilities to the people
of different parts of the State by amending article 371 of the Constitution. Hyderabad
Karnataka area consisting of Gulbarga, Bidar, Raichur, Koppal, a new district and Bellary
have been included in Hyderabad Karnataka region. Gulbarga has been considered as
divisional Headquarters since last 50 years. Development of these districts has been for
behind old Mysore and Bombay Karnataka region. This Hyderabad Karnataka region is the
most backward area in State of Karnataka, as for as development of industries, education,
roads, hospitals, employment, irrigation etc. is concerned.
The matter was raised on many occasions in both the Houses of Karnataka Legislature
and the members have unanimously demanded that the Central Government may have to be
persuaded to bring the proposed amendment to the Constitution.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
K.B. SHANAPPA
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 371J in the Constitution of India to
provide for special provisions with respect to Hyderabad Karnataka area.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 2 provides for equitable opportunities and facilities for the
people belonging to different parts of the State in the matter of public employment and
education. Para (d) of sub-clause 2 of clause (2) provides for required infrastructure for
overall development of Hyderabad Karnataka area.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve an estimated annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees one thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India shall also be involved.
4

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 ————
(Shri K.B. Shanappa, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2594RS—25.08.2006.
SERVER 4 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA \2594RS