AS INTRODUCED IN EHE RAD ५ $ ABHA

But No. LXXVI oF 2001

THE COAST GUARD (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
further to amend the Coast Guard Act, 1978.

छा, it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

1. Thiy Act may be called the Coast Guard (Amendment) Act, 2001.

30 of 1978. 2. In section 2 of the Coast Guard Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
5. Act), inclause (sv), for the words “or a Sahayak Engineer”, the words “, a Sahayak Engineer
or a Pradhan Yantrik” shall be substituted.

3. In section 25 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
>(2) Every person who deserts or attempts to desert the Coast Guard shall, on
10 conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned and in
every such case he shall forefeit—

Short title,

Amendment
of section 2,

Amendment
of section 23.


Amendment
of section 51

Amendment

of section 52

2

(a) all pay, salvage, pnze money and allowances that have been earned
by him;

(b) pension and gratuity, medals and decorations that have been granted
to him; and

(0 all clothes and effects which he may have left on board the ship or the
place from which he deserted,

unless the Tribunal by which he 1s tried or the Central Government or the Director-
General otherwise directs.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, all pay, salvage, prize money
and allowances shall be deemed to have been earned by a person when such pay,
salvage, prize money and allowances have become due but have not been paid to
him.”,

4. In section 51 of the principal Act,—

(i) 1m sub-section (1), for the words “within three years from the commission of
such offence” occurring at the end, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“within a period of three years from the commission of such offence and such
period shall commence,—

(a) on the date of the offence; or

(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the
person aggrieved by the offence or to the authority competent to initiate
action, the first day on which such offence comes to the knowledge of
such person or authority; or

(c) where it s not known by whom the offence was committed, on
the first day on which the identity of the offender becomes known to the
person aggrieved by the offence or to the authority competent to mitiate
action,

whichever 15 earlier.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, in the computation
of the period of time mentioned ॥ this sub-section, any ume spent by such
person, as a prisoner of war in the enemy territory, or in evading arrest, after the
commission of the offence, shall be excluded”;

(u) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely-—

“(1A) Where a proceeding in respect of an offence has been stayed by an
injunction or an order of a court, then, in computing the pertod of limtation
under this section, the period of the continuance of the injunction or order, the
day on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn shall
be excluded.”.

5. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “within six

months after he has ceased to be subject of this Act”, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—

“within a period of two years after he has ceased to be subject to this Act, and in
computing such period, the ume during which such person has avoided arrest by
absconding or concealing himself or where a proceeding in respect of an offence has
been stayed by an injunction or order, the period of the contmuance of the injunction
or order, the day on which it was issued or made and the day on which it was withdrawn,
shall be excluded”.

20

25

35

40

45


wa

20

25

30

35

40

3

6. In section 56 of the principal Act, after the words and figures “manner stated in
section 57”, the words, figures and letter “or section 57A” shall be inserted.

7. After section 57 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:-—

“57A. (1) The Director-General or an officer not below the rank of Deputy
Inspector-General who is appointed as Commander of a region or such other officer as
is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director-General, may
in the prescribed manner proceed against an officer below the rank of Commandant,
who is charged with an offence under this Act and award such person one or more of
the following punishments, that is to say,—

(a) forfeiture of seniority of rank or in the case of any of them whose
promotion depends upon length of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose
of promotion, for a period not exceeding twelve months, but subject to the right
of the accused, previous to the award, to elect to be tried by a Coast Guard
Court;

(8) forfeiture of seniority of rank, or in the case of any of them whose
promotion depends upon length of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose
of promotion for a period not exceeding six months, bur suuycer w ure ragut ur
the accused, previous to the award, to elect to be tried by a Coast Guard Court;

(c) mulcts of pay and allowances;
(व) severe reprimand:

Provided that no punishment specified in clause (a) shall be inflicted by an
officer other than the Director-General:

Provided further that no punishment specified in clause (5) shall be inflicted by
an officer below the rank of Deputy Inspector-General who is appointed as the
Commander ofa region.”.

8. In section 58 of the principal Act, after sub-section (7), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(8) Where mulcts of pay and allowances are awarded for absence without
leave, the absence shall be treated as regularised for all purposes.”.

9. In section 86 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), after the words “Assistant
Chemical Examiner to Government”, the words “or any of the Government scientific experts,
namely, the Chief Inspector of the Explosives, the Director of the Fingerprint Bureau, the
Director, Haffkeine Institute, Mumbai, the Director ofa Central Forensic Science Laboratory
or a State Forensic Science Laboratory and the Serologist to the Government” shall be
inserted.

10. In section 87 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), after the words and figures
“award of punishment under section 57”, the words, figures and letter “or section 57A”
shall be inserted.

11. In section 123 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (/), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—-

“(fa) the manner in which proceedings may be initiated under section 57A;”

Amendment
of section 56,

Insertion of
new section
STA

Punishment
for officers
below the
rank of
Commandant

Amendment
of section 58.

Amendment
of section

Amendment
of section 87

Amendment
of section
123


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Coast Guard Act, 1978 came into force on the 19th August, 1978. This Act is an
amalgam of certain provisions from the Border Security Force Act, 1968, the Army Act,
1950 and the Navy Act, 1957.

2. With a view to bring the provisions of the Coast Guard Act, 1978 in conformity
with the provisions of the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 and the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, it is proposed to amend the Act to provide. inter alia, the following,
namely:—

(a) inclusion of the rank of Pradhan Yantrik in the definition of the expression
“subordinate officer";

(6) making the punishment for the offence of desertion more deterrent;

(c) increasing the time-limit within which the trial of the offender should begin
where more time is spent in investigation of an offence or the commission of an
offence comes to light after a long gap of its occurrence;

(बी increasing the existing time-limit during which trial of personnel ceasing to
be subject to the Act shall commence;

(९) providing for punishment of officers below the rank of Commandant by the
Director-General, Coast Guard and other authorities for expeditious trial of such
officers for the offences which are of less serious nature;

(f) regularization of absence of personnel punished with mulcts of pay and
allowances;

(g) admissibility of reports of certain scientific experts as evidence in a trial
proceedings.

3. Earlier a Bill, namely, the Coast Guard (Amendment) Bill, 1996 was introduced in
the Rajya Sabha on 26th November, 1996 which was referred to the Standing Committee
on Defence and thereafter to the Select Committee. The Select Committee made certain
recommendations, some of which have also been incorporated in the proposed Bill. These
include the forfeiture of all pay, salvage, prize money and allowances which have become
due but have not been paid, in addition to certain other punishments which were proposed
in the previous Bill. The proposed Bill also increases the existing time-limit from six
months to two years during which trial of personnel ceasing to be subject to the Act shall
commence.

4. This Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New Deut, GEORGE FERNANDES.
The \6th November, 2001.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (fa) in section 123 of the Coast
Guard Act, 1978, so as to provide for the manner in which proceedings may be initiated
under section 57A.

2. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made under the said provision
relate to procedure. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


Definitions.

Desertion and
aiding
desertion.

Period of
limitation for
trial of
offences
under the Act.

Trial, etc., of
@ person who
ceases to be
subject to the
Act.

Punishments
otherwise
than by Coast
Guard Courts.

Presumption
as to certain
documents

Evidence of
previous
convictions
and general
character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE Coast 0000 ACT, 1978
(30 oF 1978)

* * * * *

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

* * * * *

(w) “subordinate officer” means a person appointed or in pay as a Pradhan
Adhikari, a Pradhan Sahayak Engineer, an Uttam Adhikari, an Uttam Sahayak
Engineer, an Adhikari or a Sahayak Engineer of the Coast Guard;

* * * न न
25. (7) * * * ‘ .

(2) Every person who deserts or attempts to desert the Coast Guard shall, on conviction
by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

* * * * *

51. (/) No person unless he is an offender who has avoided apprehension or escaped
arrest or committed the offence of desertion or of giving false entry on enrolment or the
offence of mutiny shall be tried or punished in pursuance of this Act for any offence committed
by him unless such trial commences within three years from the commission of such offence.

* * * * *

52. (1) * * * * *

(2) No such person shall be tried for an offence, unless his trial commences within six
months after he has ceased to be subject to this Act:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the trial of any such
person for an offence of mutiny or desertion.

* * * * *

56. Punishments may also be inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons
subject to this Act without the intervention of a Coast Guard Court in the manner stated in
section 57.

* . * * *

86. (/) * * * * *

(7) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of a Chemical Examiner or
Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government upon and matter or thing duly submitted to
him for examination or analysis and report, may be used as evidence in any proceeding
under this Act.

Explanation.—In this section, the term “books of a ship” shall include any official
book, document or list purporting to contain the name or names of persons appointed to the
ship.

87. (7) When aay person subject to this Act has been convicted by a Coast Guard
Court of any offence, such court may inquire into, and receive, and record evidence of any
previous convictions of such person, either by a Coast Guard Court or by a criminal court,
or any previous award of punishment under section 57, and may further inquire into and

6


7

record the general character of such person and such other matters as may be prescribed.
* * * * *

123. (/) * , . . . Power to

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such make rules.

tules may provide for,—

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

nN
Bull
further to amend the Coast Guard Act, 1978.

(Shri George Fernandes, Minister of Defence)

MGIP(PLU)MRND— Tot 1RS— 23.11.2001.