AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LXXV of 2024 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WORKERS BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Workers 
 and for matters connected therewith or 
 incidental thereto. 
       BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1)  This   Act  may  be  called  the  National Commission for Workers
Act, 2024.
(2) It shall c ome  into force on such date as the Central  Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions.      2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b) “Chairperson” means Chairperson of the National 
Commission for Workers; 
(c)  “Commission” means the National Commission for 
Workers constituted under section 3; 
(d)  “member” means a Member of the Commission and 
includes the Member-Secretary; 
(e)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; and 
(f)  “worker” refers to all types of workers including permanent 
and contractual workers who work in organized or unorganized 
sectors, agriculture, industry or service sector.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
   CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WORKERS  
  
Constitution 
of the 
National 
Commission 
for Workers. 
     3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a body, to be known as the National 
Commission for Workers, to exercise the powers conferred on, 
and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said 
name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi. 
(4) The Commission may, in consultation with the Central 
Government, establish office(s) at any other place in the country, as it 
may deem fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(5) The Commission shall consist of the following persons, namely— 
(a) a Chairperson, committed to the cause of workers and 
dignity of labour, to be appointed by the Central Government, 
in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) five members to be nominated by the five largest and 
recognized trade unions in the country, in such manner as may 
be prescribed; 
 (c)  five members, one each to be nominated by the State 
Governments, in such manner and for such term as may be 
prescribed, on rotational basis from amongst all States, to 
ensure that all States get due representation:       
          Provided that the five States which get to nominate 
members for a given term shall be determined by draw of lot 
and the States who have been selected through previous draw(s) 
of lot will not be included in the next draw of lot; and 
(d) one Member-Secretary, to be appointed by the Central 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed, who shall 
be— 
(i)  an expert in the field of  trade unionism,   employment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
and labour rights; or 
(ii) an officer, who is a member of the  All-India 
Services or the Central Civil Services or holds an equivalent 
civil post under the Central Government, with such 
experience, as may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
      4. (1)   The salaries and allowances payable to, and other 
terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and 
Members of the Commission shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(2)  The Chairperson and members shall hold office for   a  term, not 
exceeding three years from the date on which they assume office.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Term of 
office and 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson 
and Members. 
      5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 
4, the Chairperson or a member other than the Member-Secretary, 
appointed under sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of sub-section (5) of 
section 3, may, by writing given under his hand to the Central 
Government, resign from his office at any time. 
(2)  The Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the 
Chairperson or any member other than the Member-Secretary, 
appointed under sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of sub-section (5) of 
section 3, if the Chairperson, or as the case may be, such other 
member —  
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an 
offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or  
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent court; or 
(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally 
incapable of acting in his official capacity; or  
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the 
Commission, absent from three consecutive meetings of the 
Commission; or  
(f)  has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused 
his office as to render his continuance in office detrimental 
to the interest of office or the public interest: 
               Provided that no person shall be removed from office 
under this clause,  unless  that person has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(3) A vacancy caused under sub-sections (1) and (2) or otherwise shall 
be filled by fresh appointment or nomination, as the case may be: 
                Provided that the Chairperson or any other member appointed 
or nominated against any casual vacancy in the Commission shall hold 
office only for the remainder of the term of the Chairperson or member 
in whose place he has been appointed or nominated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
Resignation 
and removal. 
      6. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall 
be invalidated merely by reason of: 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
Commission; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson 
 
 
45 Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate the 
proceedings 
of the 
Commission. 

4 
 
or member of the Commission; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not 
affecting the merits of the case. 
Officers and 
staff of the 
Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
    7. (1) The Central Government shall appoint such number of 
officers and staff to the Commission, as may be necessary for the 
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act, in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable 
to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and 
staff, so appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
 . 
Members, 
officers and 
staff of the 
Commission 
to be public 
servants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
    8. All members, officers and staff of the Commission shall be deemed, 
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions 
of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of sub-section 
(2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.  
  
 
 
 
45 of 2023. 
Salaries, 
allowances 
and pensions 
to be paid 
out of grants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
    9. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and 
members of the Commission and the administrative expenses, 
including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the 
officers and staff referred to in section 7, shall be paid out of the 
grants referred to in sub-section (1) of section 16. 
  
Committees 
of the 
Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
  10. (1) The Commission may appoint such Committees as may be 
necessary for dealing with such special issues as may be taken up by 
the Commission from time to time. 
(2) The Commission shall have the power to co-opt as members of 
any Committee appointed under sub-section (1) such number of 
persons, who are not members of the Commission, as it may think fit, 
and the persons so co-opted shall have the right to attend the meetings 
of the Committee and take part in its proceedings, but shall not have 
the right to vote. 
(3) The persons so co-opted shall be entitled to receive such 
allowances for attending the meetings of the Committee, as may 
be prescribed. 
  
Meetings and 
Procedure   of 
the 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
  11. (1) The Commission or a Committee thereof shall meet, as and when 
necessary, and shall meet at such time and place, as the Chairperson 
may think fit. 
(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of theCommittee, 
and without prejudice to any provision of this Act, exercise and 
discharge such other powers and functions of the Commission, 
respectively, as may be prescribed. 
(3) In the absence of the Chairperson from a meeting, the 
Commission may elect any member who is present to preside over 
such meeting. 
(4) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the 
procedure of the Committees thereof. 
(5) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated 
by the Member-Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly 
authorised by the Member-Secretary in this behalf. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

5 
 
   CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
  
    12. The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely:— 
(a) actively work towards ensuring dignity, justice and living 
wages to the workers; 
(b) investigate and examine all matters relating to the 
safeguards provided for workers under the Constitution and 
other laws related to workers’ welfare for the time being in 
force; 
(c) prepare and present to the Central Government, annually in 
such form and manner and also at such other times as the 
Commission may deem fit, reports on the working of the 
safeguards referred to in clause (b) and containing therein 
recommendations to the Centre and the States, as the case 
may be, for the effective implementation of those safeguards 
for improving the conditions of workers; 
(d) review, from time to time, the existing provisions of the 
Constitution and other laws affecting workers and 
recommend amendments thereto pertaining to   remedial 
legislative measures to meet any lacunae, inadequacies or 
shortcomings in the Constitution and such legislations; 
(e)  take up any cases of violation of the provisions of the 
Constitution and of other laws relating to workers, either suo 
moto or brought to its notice, with the appropriate authorities 
for necessary action; 
(f)  look into complaints received and take suo moto notice of 
matters relating to— 
(i) deprivation of workers’ rights; 
(ii) non-implementation of laws enacted to provide 
protection to workers and also to achieve the objective 
of equality and development; and 
(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or 
instructions aimed at mitigating hardships and 
ensuring welfare and providing relief to workers, and 
take up the issues arising out of such matters with the 
appropriate authorities for necessary action; 
(g) evaluate the progress of the development of workers under 
the Centre and the States; 
(h) fund litigation involving issues affecting a large body of 
workers; 
(i) prepare and present periodical reports to the Central 
Government on any matter pertaining to workers and in 
particular various difficulties under which workers toil; and 
(j) any other matter related to workers, which may be referred 
to it by the Central Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
Functions of 
the 
Commission. 
  
 
 
  13. The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in 
clause (b) or clause (f) of section 12, have all the powers of a civil 
court  trying  a  suit  and, in  particular, in  respect   of   the  following  
 
 
 
 
 
Commission 
to have 
powers of a 
Civil Court. 

6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
from any part of India and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from 
any court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses 
and documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
Appropriate 
Government 
to consult the 
Commission. 
   14. The appropriate Government shall consult the Commission on all 
major policy matters affecting workers. 
   
Central 
Government 
to lay 
Reports. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
  15. 
 
 (1) The Central Government shall cause all the reports referred to in 
clause (c) of section 12, to be laid before each House of Parliament 
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to 
be taken on the recommendations relating to the Centre and the 
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such 
recommendation(s). 
 (2) Where any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter 
with which any State Government is concerned, the Commission shall 
forward a copy of such report or part thereof to such State 
Government, who shall cause it to be laid before each House of the 
State Legislature , where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House, along with a 
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on 
the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any  such recommendation(s). 
  
   CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
  
Grants by 
the Central 
Government. 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
  16. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission 
by way of grants such sums of money as it may consider 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Commission may spend such sums, as it thinks fit, for 
performing the functions assigned to it under this Act, and such 
sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants 
referred to in sub-section (1). 
  
Accounts and 
audit.  
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
  17. (1) The Commission shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and 
manner and at such time of each financial year, as may be prescribed.   
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be 
specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with 
such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed 
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 
Commission under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges 
and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and 
other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the 
Commission. 
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
    18. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for 
each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a 
full account of its activities during the previous financial year and 
forward a copy thereof to the Central Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Annual 
report.  
    19. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with  
the audit report, to be laid, as soon as may be after the reports are 
received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
Annual report 
and audit 
report to be 
laid before 
Parliament. 
   CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
  
    20. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
 
20 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
    21. 
 
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation 
of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in 
case of any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have 
overriding effect on the provisions of any such law to the extent of the 
inconsistency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
    22. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary 
or expedient for the purposes of implementing the provisions of this 
Act. 
(3)  Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule or regulation.  
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
Power to 
make rules 
and 
regulations. 
  

8 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
         India has one of the largest workforce in the world and the progress of 
the country depends on their welfare and wellbeing. There are several instances in 
which the workers of the country are subjected to inhuman exploitation. The 
recent incident of the sad demise of   a young chartered accountant of a leading 
accounting firm due to over work, drudgery and work-related stress has revealed 
that even white-collar jobs are not free from exploitation. The workers in the 
public sector too are facing increasing mental stress. The agricultural and 
unorganized workers are also suffering.  
        There is a need to ensure dignity and justice to the workers. The 
workers, who are the real creators of wealth, should be able to live a life of 
dignity and justice. The worker should emerge as a visible category in the social 
and political discourse so that their issues are addressed in the political process.  
       A National Commission is required for the cause of the workers and to 
ensure to them dignity, justice and wages commensurate to their labour and also 
for looking into the complaints and violation of labour rights. The Commission 
will also help to give more attention to the workers’ right in the public sphere and 
policy making.   
       The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives. 
 
 V. SIVADASAN 
 
 
 
  

9 
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
         Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National 
Commission for Workers and for the appointment of the Chairperson and other 
members thereof. Clause 4 inter alia provides for the salaries  and other 
allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of , the Chairperson and 
other members of the Commission . Clause 7  provides for the  appointment of 
officers and staff of the Commission and t he salaries and allowances payable to 
them and Clause 9 stipulates that the salaries and allowances of the Chairperson, 
members, officers and staff of the Commission, the pensions of officers and staff 
of the Commission and its administrative expenses shall be met from the grants 
provided by the Central Gover nment.  Clause 10 (3) of the Bill provides that the 
persons co- opted as members of any Committee appointed by the Commission 
shall be entitled to receive such allowances for attending the meetings of the 
Committee, as may be prescribed.  Sub-clause (h) of clause 1 2 lays down fund 
litigation involving issues affecting a large body of workers as one of the 
functions of the Commission.   Clause 16 provides that the Central Government 
shall make grants of such sums of money to the Commission , as it may consider 
necessary, to enable it to carry out the purposes of the Bill. 
        The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure, both of recurring and 
non-recurring nature,  from the Consolidated Fund of India.   However, it is 
difficult to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved at this juncture.  
 
 
  

10 
 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
       Clause 2 0 of the Bill empowers the Central Government make such 
provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.  Clause 22 of the Bill empowers 
the Central Government to make rules and the National Commission for 
Workers, with the approval of the Central Government, to make regulations, 
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
       As the matters in respect of which rules or regulations or orders may be 
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

RAJ
YA SABHA 
____
___ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Workers 
 and for matters connected therewith or 
 incidental thereto. 
____
___ 
(Dr. V. Siv
adasan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)—055–10.02.2025.