Short title and
commencement.
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ RS \ 1703RS
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act,  1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 28th day of June, 2005.
2. In section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for clause (ee), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(ee) “overseas citizen of India” means a person registered as an overseas
citizen of India by the Central Government under section 7A;’;
(ii) clause (gg) shall be omitted.
TO BE INTRODUCED  IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Amendment of
section 2.
57 of 1955.
Bill No. LXXV of 2005
5
10

2
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ RS \ 1703RS
Amendment
of section 5.
Substitution
of new section
for section
7A.
Omission
of Fourth
Schedule.
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (g), for the words “two
years”, the words “one year” shall  be substituted.
4. For section 7A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
 “7A. The Central Government may, subject to such conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed, on an application made in this behalf, register as an overseas
citizen of India—
(a) any person of full age and capacity,—
 (i) who is citizen of another country, but was a citizen of  India  at
the  time of, or at any time after, the commencement of the Constitution; or
(ii) who is citizen of another country, but was eligible to become a
citizen of India at the time of the commencement of the Constitution; or
(iii) who is citizen of another country, but belonged to a territory
that became part of India after the 15th day of August, 1947; or
(iv) who is a child or a grand-child of such a citizen; or
(b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in clause ( a):
Provided that no person, who is or had been a citizen of Pakistan,
Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify, shall be eligible for registration as an overseas
citizen of India.”.
5. The Fourth Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted.
6. (1) The Citizenship (Amendment) Ordinance,  2005 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal
Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under
the principal Act, as amended by this Act.
Registration
of overseas
citizens of
India.
Repeal and
saving.
Ord. 2 of
2005.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Citizenship Act, 1955 provides for the acquisition of citizenship, at the
commencement of the Constitution by birth, descent, registration, naturalization and
incorporation of territory under certain circumstances, and also provides for the termination
and deprivation of citizenship. High Powered Committee on Indian Diaspora, constituted  by
the Central Government, inter alia, recommended the amendment of the  said Act to provide
for grant of dual citizenship to persons of Indian origin belonging to certain specified countries.
The Central Government has, accordingly, notified the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 (6
of 2004) making provision for acquisition of Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) by the
Persons of  Indian Origin (PIOs) of 16 specified countries other than Pakistan and Bangladesh.
The Prime Minister in the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas, 2005 made a statement on OCI scheme that
the Government has decided to grant OCI to all overseas Indians who migrated from India
after 26th January, 1950 as long as their home countries allow dual citizenship under their
local laws. In  order to implement the Government's decision, an Ordinance called the Citizenship
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2005 was promulgated on 28th June, 2005 to extend the scope of
OCI for PIOs of all countries except Pakistan and Bangladesh as long as their countries allow
dual citizenship. The said Ordinance is proposed to be replaced  by a Bill by  amending the
provisions of the Citizenship Act, 1955 so as to —
(i) expand the scope of grant of Overseas Citizenship of India to Persons of
Indian Origin of all countries except Pakistan and Bangladesh; and
(ii) reduce the period of residence in India from two years to one year for the
persons registered as Overseas Citizens of India to acquire Indian citizenship.
2. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
NEW DELHI ; SHIVRAJ  V.  PATIL
The 21st July, 2005.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CITIZENSHIP  ACT, 1955
(57 OF 1955)
*                     *                             *                               *                         *
2.  (1) In this Act unless the Context otherwise requires,—
*                     *                             *                               *                         *
(ee) “overseas citizen of India” means a person who—
(i) is of Indian origin being a citizen of a specified country, or
(ii) was a citizen of India immediately before becoming a citizen of a specified
country,
and is registered as an overseas citizen of India by the Central Government under sub-
section (1) of section 7A;
*                     *                             *                               *                         *
(gg) “specified country” means a country specified in the Fourth Schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
amend the said Schedule by way of addition or omission of any entry therein:
Provided further that every notification issued under this clause shall, as soon
as may be, after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament;
*                     *                             *                               *                         *
5.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such other conditions and
restrictions as may be prescribed, the Central Government may, on an application made in
this behalf, register as a citizen of India any person not being an illegal migrant who is not
already such citizen by virtue of the Constitution or of any other provision of this Act if he
belongs to any of the following categories, namely:—
(a) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in India for seven years
before making an application for registration;
(b) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in any country or place
outside undivided India;
(c) a person who is married to a citizen of India and is ordinarily resident in India
for seven years before making an application for registration;
(d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India;
(e) a person of full age and capacity whose parents are registered as citizens of
India under clause ( a) of this sub-section or sub-section ( 1) of section 6;
(f) a person of full age and capacity who, or either of his parents, was earlier
citizen of independent India, and has been residing in India for one year immediately
before making an application for registration;
(g) a person of full age and capacity who had been registered as an overseas
citizen of India for five years, and who has been residing in India for two years before
making an application for registration.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of clauses ( a) and (c), an applicant shall be
deemed to be ordinarily resident in India if—
(i) he has resided in India throughout the period of twelve months
immediately before making an application for registration; and
(ii) he has resided in India during the eight years immediately preceding
the said period of twelve months for a period of not less than six years.
Interpretation.
Citizenships
by registration.
4

5
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ RS \ 1703RS
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall be deemed
to be of Indian origin if he, or either of his parents, was born in undivided India or in
such other territory which became part of India after the 15 th day of August, 1947.
*                     *                             *                               *                         *
OVERSEAS  CITIZENSHIP
7A. (1) The Central Government may, subject to such conditions and restrictions
including the condition of reciprocity as may be prescribed, on an application made in this
behalf, register any person as an overseas citizen of India if—
(a) that person is of Indian origin of full age and capacity who is a citizen of  a
specified country; or
(b) that person is of full age and capacity who has obtained the citizenship
of a specified country on or after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment)
Act, 2003 and who was a citizen of India immediately before such commencement; or
(c) that person is a minor of a person mentioned in clause ( a) or clause (b).
(2) The person registered as an overseas citizen of India under sub-section ( 1) shall be
an overseas citizen of India as from the date on which he is so registered.
(3) No person who has been deprived of his Indian citizenship under this Act shall be
registered as an overseas citizen of India under sub-section ( 1) except by an order of the
Central Government.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and sections 7B, 7C, and 7D, the
expression “person of Indian origin” shall mean a citizen of another country who—
(i) was eligible to become a citizen of India at the time of the commencement
of the Constitution;
(ii) belonged to a territory that became part of India after the 15th day of August,
1947; and
(iii) the children and grand-children of a person covered under clauses ( i) and
(ii), but does not include a person who is or had been at any time a citizen of Pakistan,
Bangladesh or such other country  as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify.
*                     *                             *                               *                         *
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[ See section 2 (1)(gg) ]
1.    Australia.
2.    Canada.
3.    Finland.
4.    France.
5.    Greece.
6.    Ireland.
7.    Israel.
8.    Italy.
9.    Netherlands.
10.  New Zealand.
11.  Portugal.
12.  Republic of Cyprus.
13.  Sweden.
14.  Switzerland.
15.  United Kingdom.
16.  United States of America.
Registration
of overseas
citizens.
6 of 2004.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act,  1955.
————
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Home Minister)
MGIPMRND—1703RS—22-7-2005.