RAJYA SABHA

BILL

to repeal the Civil Courts Amins Act, 1856 and certain other enactments.

(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4859RS—22.1 1.2000.

3


As INTRODUCED IN THE २७1४५ Samita

Bill No. LXXVI of 2000

THE INDIAN DIVORCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

A
BILL
Surther to amend the Indian Divorce Act, 1869.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title,
id -
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification mencement,

5 पर the Official Gazette, appoint.

4 of 1869 2. In section 1 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Amendment
Act), the word "Indian" shall be omitted. of section 1.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, clauses (6) and (7) shall be omitted. Amendment

of section 3.


2

Substitution 4. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
of new section namely:—
for section 10.

Grounds for “10. (1) Any marriage solemnized whether before or after the commencement
dissolution of the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act, 2000 may, on a petition presented to the
of age.

District Court either by the husband or the wife, be dissolved on the ground that since
the solemnization of the marriage, the respondent —

(0) has been guilty of adultery;

(é) has changed her or his profession of Christianity for the profession of
some other religion and gone through a form of marriage with another man or
woman, as the case may be;

(iii) bas treated the petitioner with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable
apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that it would be harmful or injurious
for the petitioner to live with the respondent;

(iv) has deserted the petitioner for at least two years immediately preced-
ing the presentation of the petition.

(2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her marriage by a
decree of divorce on the ground that the husband has, since the solemnization of the
marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.”.

Substitution , 5. For section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,

of new section pamely:—

for section 11.

Adulterer or “LL. On a petition for dissolution of marriage presented by a husband or wife

adulteress to on the ground of adultery, the petitioner shall make the alleged adulterer or adulter-

be non dent ess a co-respondent, unless the petitioner is excused by the Court from so doing on
SP हु any of the following grounds, namely:—

(a) that the wife, being the respondent is leading the life of a prostitute or
the husband, being respondent is leading an immoral life and that the peti-
tioner knows of no person with whom the adultery has been committed;

(2) that the name of the alleged adulterer or adulteress is unknown to the
petitioner although the petitioner has made due efforts to discover it;

(c) that the alleged adulterer ur adulteress is dead.”.

Amendment 6. In section 13 of the principal Act, the last paragraph shall be omitted.
of section 13.
Amendment 7. In section 14 of the principal Act, in paragraph 4, the words “in the manner and

of section 14. subject to all the provisions and limitations in sections sixteen and seventeen made and
declared” shall be omitted.

Amendment 8, In section 15 of the principal Act,—

of section 15 (a) the words “without reasonable excuse” shall be omitted;

(b) for the words “her adultery and cruelty”, the words “her adultery, cruelty or
desertion” shall be substituted;

(0) for the words “such cruelty”, the words “such such adultery as cruelty” shall
be substituted.

Amendment 9. In section 16 of the principal Act, the words “not being a confirmation of a decree
of section 16 of a district court” shall be omitted.

20

25

35

40


20

25

30

35

40

10. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“17. During the progress of the suit in the court of the District Judge, any person
suspecting that any party to the suit are or have been acting in collusion for the
purpose of obtaining a divorce, shall be at liberty, in such manner as the High Court
by general or special order from time to time directs, to apply to the High Court to
remove the suit under section 8, and the court shall thereupon, if it think fit, remove
such suit and try and determine the same as a court of original jurisdiction, and the
provisions contained in section 16 shall apply to every suit so removed; or it may
direct the District Judge to take such step in respect of the alleged collusion as may
be necessary, to enable him to make a decree in accordance with the justice of the
case.”

11. Section 17A of the principal Act shall be omitted.

12, In section 18 of the principal Act, the words “or to the High Court” shail be
omitted.

13. In section 19 of the principal Act, in the last paragraph, for the words “jurisdiction
of the High Court”, the words “ jurisdiction of the District Court” shall be substituted.

14. Section 20 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

15. In section 22 of the principal Act, the words “ without reasonable excuse” shall be
omitted.

16. In sections 23, 27 and 32 of the prircipal Act, the words “ or the High court” shall
be omitted.

17. For section 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“34, (1) A husband or wife may, either in a petition for dissolution of marriage
or for judicial separation, or in a petition to the district court, limited to such object
only, claim damages from any person on the ground, of his having committed adul-
tery with the wife of such petitioner; or her having committed adultery with the
husband of such petitioner, as the case may be.

(2) A petition under sub-section (J) shall be served on the alleged adulterer and
the wife or the alleged adulteress and the husband, as the case may be, unless the
Court dispenses with such services or directs some other service to be substituted.

(3) The damages to be recovered on any petition under sub-section (/) shall be
ascertained by the said Court, although the respondent or either of them may not
appear,

(4) After the decision has been given, the Court may direct in what manner
such damages shall be paid or applied.”.

18. For section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“35, (1) Whenever, in any petition presented by a husband or wife, the alleged
adulterer or adulteress, as the case may be, has been made a co-respondent, and the
adultery has been established, the court may order the co-respondent to pay:

Provided that the co-respondent shall not be ordered to pay the petitioners
cost—

Substitution
of new sec-
tion for sec-
tion 17.

Power of High
Court fo re-
move — certan
suits.

Omission of
section 17A.

Amendment
of section 18.

Amendment
of section 19,

Omission of,
section 20.

Amendment
of section 22,

Amendment
of sections 23,
27 and 32.

Substitution
of new section
for section 34,

Damages from
adultes or
adulteress.

Substitution
of new section
for section 35.

Power to order
adulterer = or
adulteress to
pay costs.


Amendment
of section 36.

Amendment
of section 37.

Amendment
‘of section 40.

Amendment of
section 43.

Amendment
of section 44.

Amendment
of section 45.

Amendment
of section 52.

Amendment
of section 55.

Substitution
of new section
for section 57.

Liberty to par-
tes to marry
again.

4

(a) if the respondent was, at the time of adultery, living apart from her
husband and leading the life of a prostitute or from his wife and was leading an
immoral life, as the case may be; or

(6) if the respondent had not, at the time of adultery, reason to believe the
respondent to be a married woman or married man.

(2) Whenever any application is made under section17, the court, if it thinks
that the applicant had no grounds or no sufficient grounds for intervening, may order
him to pay the whole or any part of the costs occasioned by the application.”.

19. In section 36 of the principal Act, in the proviso, the words “or is confirmed, as
the case may be” shall be omitted.

20. In section 37 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words “The
High Court” and ending with the words “the husband shall”, the words “Where a decree of
dissolution of the marriage or a decree of judicial separation is obtained by the wife, the
District Court may order that the husband shal!” shall be substituted.

21. In section 40 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words “The
High Court” and ending with the words “may inquire into”, the words “The District Court
may, before passing a decree for dissolution of the marriage or a decree of nullity of
marriage, inquire into” shall be substituted.

22, In section 43 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words “In
any suit for obtaining” and ending with the words “deems proper”, the words “In any suit
for obtaining a dissolution of marriage or a decree of nullity of marriage instituted in a
District Court, the court may before making its decree from time to time make such interim
orders as it may deem proper” shall be substituted.

23, In section 44 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words “The
High Court” and ending with the words “may upon application”, the words “Where a
decree of dissolution or nullity of marriage has been passed, the District Court may, upon
application” shall be substituted.

24. In section 45 of the principal Act, for the words “Code of Civil Procedure”, the
words and figures “Code of Civil Procedure, 1908” shall be substituted.

25. In section 52 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words “by a
wife” and ending with the words “without reasonable excuse”, the words “by a husband or
a wife, praying that his or her marriage may be dissolved by reason of his wife on her
husband, as the case may be, having been guilty of adultery, cruelty or desertion” shall be
substituted.

26. In section 55 of the principal Act,—
(a) the first proviso shall be omitted;

(b) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided also”, the words “Provided”
shall be substituted. पु

27. For section 57 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:-—

“57, Where a decree for dissolution or nullity of marriage has been passed and
either the time for appeal has expired without an appeal having been presented to
any court including the Supreme Court or an appeal has been presented but has been
dismissed and the decree or dismissal has become final, it shall be lawful for either
party to the marriage to marry again.”.

10

20

25

5 of 1908

30

35

40

45


28. In section 62 of the principal Act, for the words “Code of Civil Procedure”, the Amendment
5 of 1908. words and figures “Code of Civil Procedure,1908” shall be substituted. of section 62.

16 & 17 Geo. 29. The Indian and Colonia Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1926, the Indian and Colonial Repeal.
5.c. 40, 3 and Divorce Jurisdiction Act,1940 and the Indian Divorce Act,1945 are hereby repealed.

4 Geo IV

C.35, 9 Geo

VI C51.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Law Commission of India in its 164th Report on "The Indian Divorce Act (IV of
1869)" presented to the Government in November, 1998 has, inter alia, recommended
that Parliament may enact a comprehensive law governing marriage and diverce and other
allied aspects of the Christians in India. The Commission, relying on the judgments and
observatiuns of certain High Courts, has also urged the Central Government to take
immediate measures—

(7) to amend section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 relating to grounds of
dissolution of marriages so that the female spouses are not discriminated vis a vis
male spouses in obtaining a decree of dissolution of marriage;

(ii) to amend suitably sections 17 and 20 of the Act to do away with the
procedural requirement of obtaining confirmation from the High Court in respect of
a decree of dissolution of marriage or decree of nullity of marriage as such a proce-
dure is long-drawn and strenuous.

2. With a view to ascertaining the views of the Christian community on proposal for
a unified law on marriage and divorce, the Central Government convened a meeting of
leaders of prominent Churches in India and the Members of Parliament belonging to the
Christian community on the 28th April, 2000 but there was no consensus for bringing in a
comprehensive legislation on Christian marriages and matrimonial causes. However, there
is no opposition from any one to amend sections 10, 17 and 20 of the Indian Divorce Act,
1869 suitably to remove the gender inequality as contained in section 10 and to do away
with the procedural delays in obtaining divorce due to the provisions contained in sections
17 and 20 of the Act. The Government, therefore, proposes to make suitable changes in the
Indian Divorce Act, 1869 for removing hardship to all concerned.

3. The Commission on Review of Administrative Laws which was set up by the
Central Government on the 8th May, 1998 has, inter alia, recommended repeal of various
enactments including three British Statutes relating to Christian Personal Law still in force.
It is proposed to repeal these enactments also as they have become obsolete.

4. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New छह; ARUN JAITLEY.
The 17th November, 2000.


Notes on clauses

Clause 1. —This clause prevides for short title and commencement of the Bill.

Clause 2.—This clause seeks to amend the short title of the Indian Divorce Act,1869
(hereafter referred to as the Act) so as to omit the word “Indian” occurring therein. This is in
tune with the recent legislative practice of not using the word “Indian” in the short titles of
Parliamentary legislation.

Clause 3.—1t 1s proposed to remove gender inequality in the matter of grounds of
divorce as available to husband and wife under section 10 of the Act by substituting that
section vide clause 4 of the Bill. As the expressions “incestuous adultery” and “bigamy
with adultery” as occurring in section 10 of the Act will no longer be in the said section,
these expressions have become redundant. This clause, therefore, seeks to omit the defini-
tions of those expressions,

Clause 4,—This clause seeks to provide the grounds of dissolution of marriage.
Existing provisions of section 10 of the Act make a distinction between the husband and
the wife in the matter of grounds on which they could obtain dissolution of marriage. While
adultery, without any other ground, is a ground for seeking dissolution of marriage by the
husband, in the case of the petition by the wife, there is in addition another requirement that
it should be incestuous adultery or bigamy with adultery or adultery coupled with cruelty
or desertion for two years Certam High Courts including the High Court of Kerala have
struck down the words “incestuous” and “adultery coupled with” in section 10 on the
ground of gender inequality. This clause seeks to substitute the said section 10 with a new
section providing same grounds for husband and wife for seeking dissolution of marriage.
However, a wife may also get divorce on the ground that the husband has since the solem-
nization of marnage been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.

At present a petition for dissolution of marriage could be presented either to the
District Court or to the High Court. It is proposed that the petition may henceforth be
presented to the District Court only.

Clause 5.—This clause seeks to substitute existing section 11 with the addition of the
words “or adulteress” to cover cases where the wife sues the husband for divorce on the
ground of adultery. The amendment is consequential to the amendments made in the
grounds of divorce under section 10.

Clause 6.—This clause seeks to amend section 13 of the Act so as to do away with the

enabling provision for presenting a petition for dissolution of marriage to the High Court
after such a petition has been dismissed by the District Court.

Clause 7.—This clause seeks to amend section 14 of the principal Act. The amend-
ment is consequential to the amendments made in sections 16 and 17 of the Act.

Clause 8.—This clause seeks to amend section 15 of the Act. The amendments are
consequential to the changes made in the grounds of divorce under section 10.

Clause 9.—This clause seeks to amend section 16 of the Act. The amendment is
consequential to the amendments made in section 17 of the Act to do away with the
requirement of confirmation of decree of District Court by the High Court.

Clause 10.——This clause seeks to substitute section 17 relating to confirmation of
decree for dissolution of marriages made by a District Judge by the High Court. At present
every decree for a dissolution ot marriage made by a District Judge is subject to confirma-
tion by the High Court. In order to obviate the procedural delay and consequential hardship

7


to the estranged couples, this clause seeks to do away with the requirement of confirma-
tion by the High Court of such decrees. The amendment is on the lines suggested by the
Law Commission of India in its 1640 Report.

Clause 11.—This clause seeks to omit section 17A of the Act relating to appoint-
ment of officers to exercise, duties of King’s Proctor as it has become obsolete.

Clause 12.—This clause seeks to amend section 18 of the Act relating to petition for
decree of nullity. The omission of the words “or to the High Court” as proposed in this
clause in consequential to the amendment proposed in section 10.

Clause 13.—This clause seeks to amend section 19 of the Act as consequential to the
amendment made in section 10 as regards the court in which petition may be presented.

Clause 14,—This clause seeks to omit section 20 of the Act relating to confirmation
of decree of nullity of marriage by a District Judge. At present, every decree of nullity of
marriage made by a District Judge shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court. In
order to simplify the procedure and obviate delay and consequential hardship to estranged
couples, it is proposed to do away with the requirement of confirmation.

Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 22 of the Act. The amendment is
consequential to the changes made in section 10.

Clause 16.—This clause seeks to omit the words “or the High Court” occurring in
sections 23, 27 and 32 of the Act as consequential to changes made in section 10 relating
to the court in which petitions could be made.

Clause 17.—This clause provides for damages from adulterer or adulteress. While
following the existing provisions of section 34 of the Act, it is proposed to allow the wife
also to claim damages from the adulteress. This is consequential to the changes made in
section 10 of the Act.

Clause 18.—This clause seeks to substitute section 35 of the Act so as to make
provision for the adulterer as well as the adulteress to pay costs. The changes are conse-
quential to the changes made in section 10.

Clauses 19 to 23.—The amendments suggested in these clauses are consequential to
the changes made in sections 10 and 17 of the Act.

Clause 24,—This clause seeks to amend section 45 of the Act relating to application
of the Code of Civil Procedure by specifying the particulars of the present Code.

Clause 25.—This clause seeks to amend section 52 of the Act as consequential to the
changes made in section 10. . .

Clause 26.— This clause seeks to amend section 55 of the Act so as to allow on
appeal from a decree of a District Judge for dissolution of marriage or nullity of marriage.

Clause 27.—-This clause seeks to substitute section 57 of the Act specifying the
circumstances under which the parties to a marriage which has been dissolved could marry
again.

Clause 28.—The amendment proposed in this clause is similar to the one proposed
in clause 24,

Clause 29,—This clause seeks to repeal certain British statutes which have become
obsolete and recommended to be repealed by the Commission on Review of Administra-
tive Laws.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN Divorce Act, 1869
(4 oF 1869)
* * * * *
I,—PRELIMINARY

J. This Act may be called the Indian Divorce Act, and shall come into operation on
the first day of April, 1869.

x * * * *

3. In this Act, unless there be something repugnant in the subject or context,—

* * * * *
(6) "incestuous adultery" means adultery committed by a husband with a

women with whom, if his wife were dead, he could not lawfully contract marriage by

reason of her being within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity (whether natural
or legal) or affinity:

(7) “bigamy with adultery" means adultery with the same woman with whom
the bigamy was committed:

* * * * *
JIL—DIsso.ution oF MARRIAGE

10. Any husband may present a petition to the District Court or to the High Court,
praying that his marriage may be dissolved on the ground that his wife has, since the
solemnization thereof, been guilty of adultery.

Any wife may present a petition to the District Court or to the High Court, praying
that her marriage may be dissolved on the ground that, since the solemnization thereof, her
husband has exchanged his profession of Christianity for the profession of some other
religion, and gone through a form of marriage with another woman;

or has been guilty of incestuous adultery,
or of bigamy with adultery,

"or of marriage with another woman with adultery,
or of rape, sodomy or bestiality,

or of adultery coupled with such cruelty as without adultery would have entitled
her to a divorce a mena et toro.

or of adultery coupled with desertion, without reasonable excuse, for two years
or upwards,

Every such petition shall state, as distinctly as the nature of the case permits,
the facts on which the claim to have such marriage dissolved is founded.

11, Upon any such petition presented by a husband, the petitioner shall make the
alleged adulterer a co-respondent to the said petition, unless he is excused from so doing
on one of the following grounds, to be allowed by the Court:—

(7) that the respondent is leading the life of a prostitute, and that the petitioner
knows of no person with whom the adultery has been committed;

9

Short title,
Commence-
ment of Act

Interpreta-
tion clause.

“Incestuous
adultery”

“Bigamy with
adultery”.

When —hus-
band may
petition — for
dissolution,

When wife
may petition
for  dissolu-
tion,

Contents of
petition.

Adulterer to
be cores
spondent.


Dismissal of
petition.

Condonation

Rehef in case
of opposition
on certain
grounds

Decrees for
dissolution to
te nisi,

10

(2) that the name of the alleged adulterer is unknown to the petitioner, although
he has made due efforts to discover it;

(3) that the alleged adulterer is dead.

* * न *

13. In case the Court, on the evidence in relation to any such petition, is satisfied that
the petitioner's case has not been proved, or is not satisfied that the alleged adultery has
been committed,

or finds that the petitioner has, during the marriage, been accessory to, or
conniving at, the going through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery of the
other party to the marriage, or has condoned the adultery complained of,

or that the petition is presented or prosecuted in collusion with either of the
respondents,

then and in any of the said cases the Court shall dismiss the petition.

When a petition is dismissed by a District Court under this section, the petitioner
may, nevertheless, present a similar petition to the High Court.

14. In case the Court is satisf'zd on the evidence that the case of the petitioner has
been proved,

and does not find that the petitioner has been in any manner accessory to, or conniving
at, the going through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery of the other party to the
marriage, or has condoned the adultery complained of,

or that the petition is presented or prosecuted in collusion with either of the
respondents, ‘

the Court shall pronounce a decree declaring such marriage to be dissolved in the
manner and subject to all the provisions and limitations in sections 16 and 17 made and
declared:

Provided that the Court shall not be bound to pronounce such decree if it finds that
the petitioner has, during the marriage, been guilty of adultery,

or if the petitioner has, in the opinion of the Court, been guilty of unreasonable delay
in presenting or prosecuting such petition,

or of cruelty towards the other party to the marriage,

or of having deserted or wilfully separated himself or herself form the other party
before the adultery complained of, and without reasonable excuse,

or of such wilful neglect or misconduct of or towards the other party as has conduced
to the adultery.

No adultery shall be deemed to have been condoned within the meaning of this Act
unless where conjugal co-habitation has been resumed or continued.

15. In any suit instituted for dissolution of marriage, if the respondent opposes the
relief sought on the ground, in case of such a suit instituted by a husband, or his adultery,
cruelty, or desertion without reasonable excuse, or in case of such a suit instituted by a wife, *
on the ground of her adultery and cruelty, the Court may in such suit give to the respondent,
on his or her application, the same relief to which he or she would have been entitled in case
he or she had presented a petition seeking such relief, and the respondent shall be competent
to give evidence of or relating to such cruelty or desertion.

16. Every decree for a dissolution of marriage made by a High Court, not being a
confirmation of a decree of a District Court, shall, in the first instance, be a decree nisi, not
to be made absolute till after the expiration of such time, not less than six months from the
pronouncing thereof, as the High Court by general or special order from time to time
directs.


11

During that period any person shall be at liberty, in such manner as the High Court by
general or special order from time to time directs, to show cause why the said decree should
not be made absolute by reason of the same having been obtained by collusion or by
reason of material facts not being brought before the Court.

On cause being so shown, the Court shall deal with the case by making the decree
absolute, or by reversing the decree nisi, or by requiring further inquiry, or otherwise as
justice may demand.

‘The High Court may order the costs of counsel and witnesses, and otherwise arising
from such cause being shown, to be paid by the parties or such one or more of them as it
thinks fit, including a wife if she have separate property.

Whenever a decree nisi has been made, and the petitioner fails, within a reasonable
time, to move to have such decree made absolute, the High Court may dismiss the suit.

17. Every decree for a dissolution of marriage made by a District Judge shall be
subject to confirmation by the High Court.

Cases for confirmation of a decree for dissolution of marriage shall be heard (where
the number of the Judges of the High Court is three or upwards) by a Court composed of
three such Judges, and in case of difference the opinion of the majority shall prevail, or
(where the number of the Judges of the High Court is two) by a Court composed of such two
Judges, and in case of difference the opinion of the senior Judge shall prevail.

The High Court, if it think further enquiry or additional evidence to be necessary,
may direct such enquiry to be made or such evidence to be taken.

The result of such enquiry and the additional evidence shall be certified to the High
Court by the District Judge, and the High Court shall thereupon make an order confirming
the decree for dissolution of marriage, or such other order as to the Court seems fit:

Provided that no decree shall be confirmed under this section till after the expiration
of such time, not less than six months from the pronouncing thereof, as the High Court by
general or special order from time to time directs.

During the progress of the suit in (16 Court of the District Judge, any person suspecting
that any parties to the suit are or have been acting in collusion for the purpose of obtaining
a divorce, shall be at liberty, jn such manner as the High Court by general or special order
from time to time directs, to apply to the High Court to remove the suit under section 8, and
the High Court shall thereupon, if it think fit, remove such suit and try and determine the
sare as a Court of original jurisdiction, and the provisions contained in section 16 shall
apply to every suit so removed; or it may direct the District Judge to take such steps in
respect of the alleged collusion as may be necessary to enable him to make a decree in
accordance with the justice of the case.

17A. The Government of the State within which any High Court exercises jurisdiction
may appoint an officer who shall, within the jurisdiction of the High Court in that State,
have the like right of showing cause why a decree for the dissolution of a marriage should
not be made absolute or should not be confirmed, as the case may be, as is exercisable in
England by the King's Proctor; and the said Government may make rules regulating the
manner in which the rightshall be exercised and all matters incidental to or consequential
on any exercise of the right.

Collusion,

Confirmation
of decree for
dissolution by
District Judge

Appointment
of officer to ex-
ercise duties of
King’s Proctor.


Petition for
decree of
nullity

Grounds of
decree

Confirma-
tion of
Distriet,
Judge’s
decree

Bar to
decree for
divorce a
mensa et
toro; but
judicial
separation
obtainable
by husband
or wife
Application
for separa-
tion made
by petition.

Deserted
wife may
epply to
ourt for
srotection,

ution for
stitution
conjugal
«ghts.

12

TV.—-NULLITY OF MARRIAGE

18, Any husband or wife may present a petition to the District Court or to the High
Court, praying that his or her marriage may be declared null and void.

19. Such decree may be made on any of the following grounds:—

(1) that the respondent was impotent at the time of the marriage and at the time
of the institution of the suit;

(2) that the parties are within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity (whether
natural or legal) or affinity;

(3) that either party was a lunatic or idiot at the time of the marriage;

(4) that the former husband or wife of either party was living at the time of the
marriage, and the marriage with such former husband or wife was then in force.

Nothing in this section shal] affect the jurisdiction of the High Court to make decrees
of nullity of marriage on the gound that the consent of either party was obtained by force or
fraud.

20. Every decree of nullity of marriage made by a District Judge shall be subject to
confirmation by the High Court, and the provisions of section 17, clauses 1, 2, 3 and 4,
shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to such decrees.

* * * * *

V.—JupiciaL SEPARATION

22. No Gocree shall hereafter be made for a divorce a mensa et toro, but the husband
or wife may obtain a decree of judicial separaticn, on the ground of adultery, or cruelty, or
desertion without reasonable excuse for two years or upwards, and such decree shall have
the effect of a divorce a mensa et toro, under the existing law, and such other legal effect as
hereinafter mentioned.

23. Application for judicial separation on any one of the grounds aforesaid may be
made by either husband or wife by petition to the District Court or the High Court; and the
Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there
is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree judicial separation
accordingly.

* * * * *

VI.-—PROTECTION ORDERS

27. Any wife to whom section 4 of the Indian Succession Act, 1865, does not apply,
may, when deserted by her husband, present a petition to the District Court or the High
Court, at any time after such desertion, for an order to protect any property which she may
have acquired or may acquire, and any property of which she may have become possessed
or may become possessed after such desertion, against her husband or his creditors, or any
person claiming under him.

* * * * *
VIL—REsTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS

32. When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn
from the society of the other, either wife or husband may apply, by petition to the District
Court or the High Court, for restitution of conjugal rights, and the Court, on being satisfied

10 of 1865


13

of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why
the application should not be granted, may decree restitution conjugal rights accordingly.

* * * * *

VIIL—DAMAGES AND 0085

34, Any husband may, either in a pétition for dissolution of marriage or for judicial
separation, or in a petition to the District Court or the High Court limited to such object
only, claim damages from any person on the ground of his having committed adultery
with the wife of such petitioner.

Such petition shall be served on the alleged adulterer and the wife, unless the Court
dispenses with such service, or directs some other service to be substituted.

The damages to be recovered on any such petition shall be ascertained by the said
Court, although the respondents or either of them may not appear.

After the decision has been given, the Court may direct in what manner such damages
shall be paid or applied.

35. Whenever in any peiition presenied by a husband the alieged adulterer has been
nade a co-respondent, and the adultery has been established, the Court may order the co-
respondent to pay the whole or any part of the cost of the proceedings:

Provided that the co-respondent shall not be ordered to pay the petitioner’s costs—

(7) if the respondent was, at the time of the adultery, living apart from her
husband and leading the life of a prostitute, or

(2) if the co-respondent had not, at the time of the adultery, reason to believe
the respondent to be a married woman.

Whenever any application is made under section 17, the Court, if it thinks that the
applicant had no grounds or no sufficient grounds for intervening, may order him to pay
the whole or any part of the costs occasioned by the application.

1X.—ALimony

36. In any suit under this Act, whether it be instituted by a husband or a wife, and
whether or not she has obtained an order of protection, the wife may present a petition for
alimony pending the suit.

Such petition shall be served on the hushand; and the Conrt, on being satisfied of the
truth of the statements therein contained, may make such order on the husband for payment
to the wife of alimony pending the suit as it may deem just:

Provided that alimony pending the suit shall in no case exceed one-fifth of the
husband's average nett income for the three years next preceding the date of the order, and
shall continue, in case of a decree for dissolution of marriage or of nullity of marriage until
the decree is made absolute or is confirmed, as the case may be.

37. The High Court may, if it think fit, on any decree absolute declaring a marriage to
be dissolved, or on any decree of judicial separation obtained by the wife,

and the District Judge may, if he thinks fit, on the confirmation of any decree of his
declaring a marriage to be dissolved, or on any decree of judicial separation obtained by
the wife,

order that the husband shall, to the satisfaction of the Court, secure to the wife such
gross sum of money, or such annual sum of money for any term not exceeding her own life,
as, having regard to her fortune (if any), to the ability of the husband, and to the conduct of
the parties, it thinks reasonable; and for that purpose may cause a proper instrument to be
executed by all necessary parties.

Husband
may claim
damages
from
adulterer,

Power to
order
adulterer to
pay costs.

Power to
order
litigious
intervenor
to pay
costs.

Alimony
pendente
lite.

Power to
order
permanent
alimony.


Power to
order
monthly or
weekly
payments.

Inquiry into
existence of
ante-
nuptial or
post-
nuptial
settlements

Power to
make
orders as to
custody of
children in
suits for
dissolution
or nullity

Power to
make such
orders after
decree or
confirma-
tion.

Code of
Civil
Procedure
to apply

14

In every such case the Court may make an order on the husband for payment to the
wife of such monthly or weekly sums for her maintenance and support as the Court may
think reasonable:

Provided that if the husband afterwards from any cause becomes unable to make
such payments, it shall be lawful for the Court to discharge or modify the order, or temporarily
to suspend the same as to the whole or any part of the money so ordered to be paid, and
again to revive the same order wholly or in part, as to the Court seems fit.

* * * * *

40. The High Court, after a decree absolute for dissolution of marriage, or a decree of
nullity of marriage,

and the District Court, after its decree for dissolution of marriage or of nullity of
marriage has been confirmed,

may inquire into the existence of ante-nuptial or post-nuptial settlements made on
the parties whose marriage is the subject of the decree, and may make such orders, with
reference to the application of the whole or a portion of the property settled, whether for the
benefit of ‘he husband or the wife, or of the children (if any) of the marriage, or of both
children and parents, as to the Court seems fit:

Provided that the Court shall not make any order for the benefit of the parents or
either of them at the expense of the children. :

* * * * *

43. In any suit for obtaining a dissolution of marriage or a decree of nullity of
matriage instituted in, or removed to, a High Court, the Court may from time to time,
before making its decree absolute or its decree (as the case may be), make such interim
orders, and may make such provision in the decree absolute or decree,

and in any such suit instituted in a District Court, the Court may from time to time,
before its decree is confirmed, make such interim orders, and may make such provision on
such confirmation,

as the High Court or District Court (as the case may be) deems proper with respect to
the custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage of whose
parents is the subject of the suit;

and may, if it think fit, direct proceedings to be taken for placing such children under
the protection oi the Court.

44. The High Court, after a decree absolute for dissolution of marriage or a decree of
nullity of marriage,

and the District Court, after a decree for dissolution of marriage or of nullity of
marriage has been confirmed,

may, upon application by petition for the purpose, make from time to time all such
orders and provision, with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of the minor
children, the marriage of whose parents was the subject of the decree, or for placing such
children under the protection of the said Court, as might have been made by such decree
absolute or decree (as the case may be), or by such interim orders as aforesaid.

XII.—PRocepurE

45, Subject to the provisions herein contained, all proceedings under this Act between
party and party shall be regulated by the Code of Civil Procedure.

के * * * *

5 of 1908.


15

52. On any petition presented by a wife, praying that her marriage may be dissolved
by reason of her husband having been guilty of adultery coupled with cruelty, or of adultery
coupled with desertion without reasonable excuse, the husband and wife respectively shall
be competent and compellable to give evidence of or relating to such cruelty or desertion.

* * * * *

55. All decrees and orders made by the Court in any suit or proceeding under this Act
shall be enforced and may be appealed from, in the like manner as the decrees and orders of
the Court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction are enforced and may be
appealed from, under the laws, rules and orders for the time being in force:

Provided that there shall be no appeal from a decree of a District Judge for dissolution
of marriage or of nullity of marriage: nor from the order of the High Court confirming or
refusing to confirm such decree:

Provided also that there shall be no appeal on the subject of costs only.
* * * * *
XU1.—Re-marriaGe

57. When six months after the date of an order of a High Court confirming the decree
for a dissolution of marriage made by a District Judge have expired,

or when six months after the date of any decree of a High Court dissolving a marriage
have expired, and no appeal has been presented against such decree to the High Court in its
appellate jurisdiction,

or when any such appeal has been dismissed,
or when in the result of any such appeal any marriage is declared to be dissolved,

but not sooner, it shall be lawful for the respective parties to the marriage to matry
again, as if the prior marriage had been dissolved by death:

Provided that no appeal to the Supreme Court has been presented against any such
order or decree.

When such appeal has been dismissed, or when in the result thereof the marriage is
declared to be dissolved, but not sooner, it shall be lawful for the respective parties to the
marriage to marry again as if the prior marriage had been dissolved by death.

* * * * *

62. The High Court shall make such rules under this Act as it may from time to time
consider expedient, and may from time to time alter and add to the same:

Provided that such rules, alterations and additions are consistent with the provisions
of this Act and the Code of Civil Procedure.

All such rules, alterations and additions shall be published in the Official Gazette.

के * * * *

Compe-
tence of
husband
and wife to
give
evidence as
to cruelty
or deser-
tion.
Enforce-
ment of and
appeals
from orders
and
decrees.

No appeals
as to costs.

Liberty to
parties to
marry
again.

Power to
make rules.