AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. LXXVIII of 2024 
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
 to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
       BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows: —  
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita ( Amendment)
Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
ma
y, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
        Provided that the Central Government shall  appoint such date 
within three months from the date on which the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita (Amendment) Bill, 2024 receives the assent of the President. 
Amendment of 
section 103. 
2. In the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 103, after sub- section (2), the following new
su
b-section shall be inserted, namely: —
“(
3) Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or 
by visible representations or through electronic communication 
or otherwise, incites a person or a group of persons to commit 
murder of any person on the ground of race, caste, community, 
sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar 
ground, shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for 
life and shall also be liable to fine.” 
5 
10 
45 of 2023. 
Amendment of 
section 196. 
3. In the principal Act, in section 196, in sub -section (1), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely: —
“Provided that if any words or actions, referred to in clauses ( a)
t
o (c) above, of any person causes any person or a group of persons to
commit murder of any other person on the ground of race, caste,
community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other
similar ground, then such person shall be punished with imprisonment
for life and shall also be liable to fine.”
15 
20 
Amendment of 
section 298. 
4. In the principal Act, in section 298, —
(i) the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:⸺
“Provided that if the offence mentioned in sub -section (1) 
is committed by two or more persons with the common intention 
of either insulting the religion of any class of persons or of 
promoting religious animosity between different class of persons 
then each of them shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years and with 
fine: 
        P rovided further that if a person, either individually or as 
a part of any group of two or more persons, is found guilty of 
offence mentioned in sub-section (1) for a second or subsequent 
time, he shall be punished with imprisonment for life or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term not less than ten 
years and with fine.” 
(ii) the existing section shall be numbered as sub-section (1) and
after sub-section (1) so numbered, the following new sub- section
shall be inserted, namely: —
25 
30 
35 
“(2) Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by 
signs or by visible representations or through electronic 
communication or otherwise, incites a person or group of 
persons to commit the offence mentioned under sub -
section (1) shall be deemed to have com mitted the said 
offence and shall be liable for the same punishment, 
irrespective of whether he actually participates in the 
commission of such offence or not.” 
 
40 
45 
Amendment of 
section 299. 
5. In the principal Act, in section 299, the following provisos shall be
inserted, namely: —
“Provided that if the offence mentioned in this section is
committed by two or more persons with the common intention of
50 

3 
5 
outraging the religious feelings of any class of persons or of promoting 
religious animosity between different class of persons then each of 
them shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to seven years and with fine: 
Provided further that if a person, eit her individually or as a part 
of any group of two  or more persons, is found guilty of the offence 
mentioned in this section for a second or subsequent time, he shall be 
punished with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either 
description for a term not less than ten years and with fine.” 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        Protection of communal harmony, social tranquility and 
unswerving camaraderie among citizens are a sine qua non  not only 
for national integrity but also for the overall development of the 
nation. India, as a nation, and its people, as a society, have so far 
achieved the greatest repute all over the world for its record in 
maintaining communal harmony, social tranquility and unswerving 
camaraderie among citizens, despite having unparalleled cultural and 
religious diversity. However, the differences of faith, language, region 
and even diet persisting among our people sometimes lead to conflicts 
and altercations. Some fringe elements take advantage of such 
untoward incidents for their vested interests and make the situation 
worse. These anti-national forces sometimes succeed in leading people 
to commit heinous crimes, including murder of fellow citizens, on the 
basis of such differences. Unfortunately, there is a rise in the number 
of such crimes motivated by intolerance of differences and hate 
towards ‘others’ being reported from various corners of the country 
recently. Most of the advanced legal systems in the world have 
enacted specific laws to prevent such hate crimes. 
        I t is high time for India also to have effective law to prevent all 
types of hate crimes and to thwart any attempt to promote enmity 
between different groups of persons. There are provisions in the 
existing criminal law to deal with persons directly involved in 
commission of such offences. But, more often than not, there ar e 
perpetrators, who hide behind the curtain and abet people to commit 
such crimes and escape prosecution in the absence of law to book 
them. In fact, these facilitators are the real culprits and without 
ensuring proper punishment for them, such crimes cann ot be 
eradicated. Further, there are some offenders repeatedly committing 
such hate crimes due to extreme intolerance and radicalization, and 
such offenders should be dealt with severe punishments. 
        S ection 103 (2 ) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita , 2023 
prescribes punishment for each member of a group who have 
committed murder on the ground of race, caste, community, sex, place 
of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar ground. But it 
lacks provision for punishment of persons who actu ally incites the 
group to commit murder, but not personally involved in commission of 
offence. Similarly, Section 298 prescribes punishment for injuring or 
defiling a place of worship with intent to insult religion of any class. 
Here also there is no provision for punishment of persons who actually 
incites a person or group of persons to commit offence under this 
Section. 
        S ection 196 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 deals with 
the offence of promoting enmity between different groups on grounds 
of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language etc. and doing 
various acts prejudicial to maintenance of ha
rmony. Sometimes, a 
single incident contemplated under this Act may lead to more heinous 
crimes, such as murder of a person or group of persons or even to a 
large-scale riot. In such cases, the law should provide severe 
punishment for person(s) causing the same. 
        The offences mentioned in Sections 298 and 299 of the 
Sanhita become severe in nature and its consequence when it is 
committed by a group of persons with common intention of insulting 

5 
any religion or of spreading religious animosity among citizens. Hence 
members of the group committing such offences deserve severe 
punishments than an individual committing the same offence. 
Similarly, a person committing any of these offences repeatedly with 
the same intention should also be dealt with severe punishment. 
        I t is the need of our time to fill up the above -mentioned lacuna 
in the law in order to protect communal harmony and social tranquility 
effectively. Appropriate legal provision should be incorporated into 
the existing Sections for that purpose. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
HARIS BEERAN 

6 
ANNEXURE 
 EXTRACTS FROM THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023 
 (45 OF 2023) 
 * *   * *   * 
Punishment for 
murder.
103. (1) Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits
murder on the ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth,
language, personal belief or any other similar ground each member of
such group shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine
 * *   * *   * 
Promoting 
enmity between 
different groups 
on grounds of 
religion, race, 
place of birth, 
residence, 
language, etc., 
and doing acts 
prejudicial to 
maintenance of 
harmony.
196. (1) Whoever—
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible
representations or through electronic communication or otherwise,
promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of religion, race, place
of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other groun
d
w
hatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill -will
between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or
castes or communities; or
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of
harmony between  different religious, racial, language or regional
groups or castes or communities, and which disturbs or is likely to
disturb the public tranquillity; or
(c) organises any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity
intending that the part icipants in such activity shall use or be trained
to use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely that the
participants in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal
force or violence, or participates in such activity intending to us e or
be trained to use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely
that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to use
criminal force or violence, against any religious, racial, language or
regional group or caste or community and such activity for any reaso
n
w
hatsoever causes or is likely to cause fear or alarm or a feeling of
insecurity amongst members of such religious, racial, language or
regional group or caste or community, shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
 * *   * *   * 
Injuring or 
defiling place 
of worship 
with intent to 
insult religion 
of any class. 
298. Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object
held sacred by any class of persons with the intention of thereby insulting
the religion of any class of persons or with the knowledge that any class
of persons is likely to consider such destruction, damage or defilement as
an insult to their religion, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

7 
299. Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the
religious feelings of any class of citizens of India, by words, either spoken
or written, or by signs or by visible representations or through electronic
means or otherwise, insults or attempts to insult the religion or  the
r
eligious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.
Deliberate 
and malicious 
acts, intended 
to outrage 
religious 
feelings of 
any class by 
insulting its 
religion or 
religious 
beliefs. 
 * *   * *  *

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
 A 
      BILL 
 to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
____________ 
(Shri Haris Beeran, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB-(E)—031—10.02.2026. 