THE ABOLITION OF CHILD LABOUR BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of child labour and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Abolition of Child Labour Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of the
State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" means a boy or girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years of
age;
(c) "work" means and includes any domestic work for gain, work in a factory or
industrial establishment, whether hazardous or not, agriculture or any other work
which results in physical strain to the child.
3. Child labour in any form of employment is hereby abolished.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXVII of  2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH AUGUST, 2006
Definitions.
10
5
Abolition of
child labour.

2
SERVER 4 \ BILL 2004 \ RS \ \ 2588RS.PM65
4. No person, including a parent or guardian shall employ any child in any employment.
5. No person, including a parent or guardian shall deprive any child from access to
education by employing the child in any work.
6. If any person employs any child for any work,—
(i) if he is the parent or guardian of the child, he shall be punished with a fine of
rupees five thousand; and
(ii) if he is in charge of any factory, establishment or organisation, he shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to seven years and a fine
of rupees fifty thousand.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force relating to child labour.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Child not to
be employed.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
Penalty.
Savings.

STATEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS
Despite prohibition imposed by the Constitution on employment of children below
fourteen years of age in any hazardous employment, millions of children are forced by their
parents to work in different establishments, including as domestic help. They are not sent to
school for education due to stark poverty. Sometimes they are engaged in such work as may
affect their health. There are many legislations in force but nothing has worked to ameliorate
conditions of children engaged in employment. It is also felt that there are no stringent penal
provisions to discourage parents/guardians as well as those who force or engage children in
employment.
It is therefore proposed to bring a deterrent legislation to abolish child labour.
Hence this Bill.
C. PERUMAL
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of child labour and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
—————
(Shri C. Perumal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2588RS(S-4)—25-08-2006.