1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 16 of the Constitution, after clause (6) the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(7) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall
prevent the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of
any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for economically weaker
sections of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, to provide in
their favour reservation of appointments or posts in private sector."
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXV of 2022
Amendment
of article 16.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022

2
3. In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following proviso and Explanation
shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that such number of Judges, as nearly as may be, equal to the
proportion of the population of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Other Backward Classes to the total population of the country, shall be appointed from
amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, and
the Other Backward Classes.
Explanation.— In this article, the expression "population" means the population
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published.
4. In article 216 of the Constitution, the following proviso and Explanations shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that such number of Judges, as nearly as may be, equal to the
proportion of the population of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Other Backward Classes in the State to the total population of the State, shall be
appointed from amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes, and the Other Backward Classes.
Explanation I—In this article, "State" includes all States and Union Territories
that share a common High Court.
Explanation II—In this article, the expression 'population' means the population
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published."
5
10
15
Amendment
of article 124.
Amendment
of article 216.
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Indian Constitution was designed to provide special measures for the social and
economic advancement of the historically oppressed communities in the country. The
constitutional principles of distributive justice and economic upliftment are reflected through
the various Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policies  enshrined in the
Constitution. Even after seven decades of promulgation of the Constitution, the marginalised
groups in India suffer from multiple forms of discrimination in all spheres, especially in terms
of employment opportunities.
With the move towards privatisation and liberalisation in the country, the scope for
public sector entities has shrunk considerably, which has resulted in lesser job opportunities
for the weaker sections who rely heavily on the State for their livelihood. On the other hand, the
Indian private sector, which so far has been outside the purview of a quota system in recruitment,
is pervaded with social exclusion and caste favouritism. The pre-existing income inequalities
and unequal distribution of wealth and property in the country further exclude marginalised
groups from participating in the organised private sector which forces them to engage in
unskilled work. In such a scenario, affirmative action in the private sector is categorically
required to ensure continuous socio-economic development of the marginalised communities.
Upliftment of the weaker sections is a stated objective of our country and thus
reservation in employment opportunities is a social responsibility of the Government as well
as the private sector. Reservation policy in the private sector will not only provide fair and
non-discriminatory access to historically excluded groups, but at the same time would remove
deterrents created by caste discrimination on labour markets, and thereby enhance
competitiveness and economic growth.
Further even after 75 years of affirmative action, the disadvantaged and marginalised
communities in the country are not adequately represented in the higher judiciary. As the
guardian of the Constitution and the last resort to the millions of citizens, the Supreme Court
of India influences the lives of each and every one in the country. Therefore, it is imperative
that judges represent the broadest spectrum of society.
Since independence, a very small number of Judges belonging to marginalised
communities were able to serve as Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. Caste-based
reservation has been an integral part of the Indian principle of equality, therefore, its absence
in the superior judiciary is unconvincing and needs to be rectified. Without a constitutional
provision for reservation, it is highly improbable for persons from these communities to reach
such eminent positions through natural means. Further, the existence of reservation in
subordinate courts is reason enough for its introduction in higher courts as well.
India is a highly diverse country and its diversity should also be reflected in the higher
judiciary. A more inclusive judiciary is also more likely to foster balanced and comprehensive
discussions on matters related to caste, gender, access and equality. The first-hand knowledge
of the issues pertaining to backward classes would also help in developing a more advanced
understanding of the caste-based problems in the country.
In absence of a formal and written framework, representation in the higher judiciary
could not be expanded on its own. A constitutional mandate in this regard would ensure that
the superior courts are never under represented. Previously, Parliamentary Committees and
National Commission for Scheduled Castes have also recommended similar provisions for
the appointment of judges in the Supreme Court and High Courts. It is of utmost importance
that equitable representation and fair play in the higher judiciary is secured through the
channels of the Constitution.
The Bill seeks to achieve above-mentioned objectives.
PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
* * * * *
16. (1)  There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth,
residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any
employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law prescribing, in
regard to a class or classes of employment or appintment to an office under the Government
of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to
residence within that State or Union Territory prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or classes of
posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately  represented in the services
under the State.
(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from considering any unfilled
vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with any
provision for reservation made under clause (4)  or clause (4A) as a separate class of vacancies
to be filled up in any succeeding year or years and such class of vacancies shall not be
considered together with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for
determining the ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on total number of  vacancies of that
year.
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides that the
incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or denominational
institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be a person professing a
particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination.
(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker sections of
citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4), in addition to the existing reservation
and subject to a maximum often per cent. of the posts in each category.
* * * * *
124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven other Judges.
* * * * *
216.  Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other Judges as the
President may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint.
* * * * *
Equality of
opportunity in
matters of
public
employment.
Establishment
and
constitution of
Supreme
Court.
Constitution
of High
Courts.

MGIPMRND—1775RS(S3)—12-12-2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha, M.P.)