AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LXXVI of 2024 
THE RECOGNITION OF LEGAL PERSON STATUS OF 
RIVERS BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to recognise rivers as legal  or juristic or juridical persons and entitle 
them with legal rights similar to the rights of human beings, 
 allowing them to exist, flourish, and be protected  
 from harm and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
         BE it enacted by Parliament in the  Seventy-fifth Year  of   the  Republic 
of  India as follows:— 
  5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Recognition of Legal Person Status of
Rivers Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ―appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
(b) ―Committee‖ means the Rivers Protection Committee
established under section 6 ;
(c) ―legal or juristic or juridical person‖ means entities entitled
with  rights guaranteed under article 21 of the Constitution of
India;
(d) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
and
(e) ―rivers‖ means natural rivers located within the geographical
boundaries  of India with length of forty kilometers and above.
5 
10 
Declaration 
as legal or 
juristic or 
juridical 
person. 
3. (1) A river shall be a legal or juristic or juridical person and shall be
entitled to all the rights, powers, duties, and liabilities of such a person,
as available under the Constitution of India and in other laws, as
applicable, for the time being in force.
(2) The rights, powers, and duties of rivers shall be exercised or
performed, and responsibility for its liabilities shall be taken, by the
Committee, on behalf of, and in the name of rivers, in the manner
provided for in section 4 and section 5 of this Act.
15 
20 
Legal effect 
of declaration 
of rivers as 
legal person 
or juristic 
person or 
juridical 
person. 
4. The provisions of section 3 shall apply to persons exercising or
performing a function, power, or duty provided under this Act and under
the provisions of laws, as applicable in this regard, for the time being in
force, if the exercise or performance of that function, power, or duty
relates to—
(i ) rivers as defined under section 2(a); and 
(ii) an activity within the river catchment that affects it.
25 
Limits to 
effect of this 
Act and deed 
of settlement. 
Establishment 
of the Rivers 
Protection 
Committee. 
   5. 
6. 
Unless expressly provided for by or under this Act, nothing in this Act 
shall— 
(a) limit any existing private property rights in  rivers; or
(b) create, limit, transfer, extinguish, or otherwise affect any rights
to, or interests in, river water; or
(c) create, limit, transfer, extinguish, or otherwise affect any rights
to, or interests in, wildlife, fish, aquatic life, seaweeds, or plants
etc. in the rivers; or
(d) affect the application of any law in this regard for the time
being in force.
(1) The Central Government shall, within six months  from the date
of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Committee, to be known as the Rivers Protection
Committee, to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform
the functions and duties assigned to it, under this Act.
30 
35 
40 

3 
5 
10 
(2) The Committee shall act as the  protector of the rights conferred on
rivers under section 3 of this Act;
(3) The Committee shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name,
sue or be sued.
(4) The headquarters of the Committee shall be at such place in the
National Capital Territory of Delhi, and it may, with the approval of
the Central Government, set up regional and other offices in any
other place in India, as deemed necessary.
(5) The Committee shall have full powers to regulate its own procedure
with respect to transaction of its business and for the discharge of the
functions assigned to it under this Act.
215 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45
7. (1) The Committee shall consist of the following persons: –
(a) Chairperson of the National Green Tribunal – Chairperson
ex-officio;
(b)Secretary, Union Ministry of Jal  Shakti – Member ex-officio;
(c) Secretary, Union Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate
Change – Member ex-officio;
(d) Secretary, Union Ministry of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways–
Member ex-officio;
(e) one person, who is renowned in the field of river
conservation and ecological restoration or environmental
studies, and possesses the requisite qualifications, knowledge,
experience and skills, as may be prescribed, to be nominated by
the President of India – Member;
(f) one person from the Prime Minister‘s Office, who possesses the
requisite qualifications, knowledge, experience and skills, as may
be prescribed, to be nominated by the Prime Minister – Member
ex-officio;
(g) one Member of Parliament from the Council of States (Rajya
Sabha), to be nominated by the Chairman, Rajya  Sabha– Member
ex-officio;
(h) one Member of Parliament from the House of the People (Lok
Sabha), to be nominated by the Speaker, Lok Sabha – Member ex-
officio;
(i) two Members who are experts on river related issues, to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner, as may
be prescribed;
(j) one female Member with expertise in eco-feminism, to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner, as may
be prescribed;
(k) one Member with  expertise in climate change and
environment, to be appointed by the Central Government in
such manner, as may be prescribed;
(l) one Member with an expertise in agriculture related issues,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner, as
may be prescribed; and
Composition  
of the 
Committee. 

4 
(m) one person representing industry associations, to be nominated
by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry–Member ex-officio.
(2) The term of office of, the salaries, remuneration and allowances
payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson, Members and experts of the Committee shall be such
as may be prescribed.
5 
Officers and 
staff of the 
Committee. 
10 
Functions of 
the Committee. 15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
Management 
of activities 
on the surface 
of waters of 
rivers. 
8. (1) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers 
and staff including legal experts, as deemed necessary, to assist the 
Committee in the efficient discharge of its functions and duties.
(2) The method of recruitment, qualifications and experience,  
salaries and allowances or remuneration payable to, and other terms 
and conditions of service of the officers and staff including legal  
experts of the Committee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
9. The  Committee shall perform all or any of the following functions, but 
not limited to be, namely—
(a) act and speak for and on behalf of rivers and protect their status 
as legal  or juristic or juridical persons, as conferred under section 
3 of this Act;
(b) uphold the legal  or juristic  or juridical person status of rivers;
(c) collate and maintain a Register of Rivers detailing the status 
and condition of the rivers, in such form and manner, as may 
be prescribed and publish the same on the website of the 
Committee for information of the general public;
(d) promote and protect the health and well-being of rivers;
(e) administer rivers;
(f) engage with any institution, body or agency concerned to assist 
it in understanding, applying and implementing the legal or juristic 
or juridical status of rivers and collaborate with them in matters  
pertaining to the objectives and functions of the Committee;
(g) make recommendations to the appropriate Government  
regarding the necessary measures including developing or 
reviewing relevant guidelines or policies related to rivers for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act;
(h) receive grievances or complaints, in such form and manner, as 
may be prescribed, from any person or agency(ies), Non-
Governmental Organisations etc. regarding deprivation of the 
rights of rivers or breach or violation of any of the provisions of 
this Act or any other matter related thereto and investigate into the 
complaints so received from them as well as suggest appropriate  
remedial measures or impose penalties on the violators, as the case 
may be;
(i) any other action reasonably necessary to achieve its purpose and 
perform its functions as 
assigned under this Act; and
(j) any other function related to rivers or any other matter, as may 
be referred to it by the appropriate Government from time to time.
10. (1) As soon as may be practicable after the commencement of this Act, 
the Committee shall lay down the process and guidelines for —
(a) review of regulations for the activities carried out on the surface 
of the waters of rivers; 

5 
5 
10 
(b) improvement and coordination of the management of such
activities;
(c) the nature and extent of existing and possible future activities on
the surface of  rivers;
(d) overseeing the relationship between activities on the surface of
the rivers and activities on land(s) adjacent to them;
(e) matters relevant to public health and safety, particularly
connected with people living along river banks;
(f) protection of the health and well-being of rivers; and
(g) any other relevant matters, as may be deemed fit.
(2) The Committee may, in the pursuance of its functions given under
sub-section (1), consult the Ministries/Departments/agencies of the
appropriate Government, as may be necessary, and carry out its functions
under this Act in coordination with them.
15 
20 
25 
11. The Committee shall, while investigating any matter referred to in clause
(h) of section 9, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in
particular in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court
or office;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and
documents; and
(f) any other matter, as may be prescribed.
Committee to 
have   powers  of 
a Civil Court. 
30 
35 
12. (1) If the Committee determines on conclusion of an inquiry that breach
of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder has been
committed and that such breach is of significant or grave nature, it may,
hold such person or organization, as the case may be, guilty and they
shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment which may extend to
one year or with fine which may extend up to one hundred and fifty crore
rupees or  both:
         Provided that the penalty shall not be imposed without giving the 
person or organization a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) All sums realized, by way of penalties, imposed by the Committee
under this Act, shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
Penalties. 
40 
45 
13. (1 ) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
every person who, at the time, the offence was committed was in charge
of, or was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of
the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
         Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section, shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment under this Act if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
Offences by 
companies. 

6 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an
offence under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,— 
(a) ―company‖ means anybody corporate and includes a firm, or
other association of individuals; and
(b) ―director‖ in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
5 
10 
Appropriate 
Government to 
consult the 
Committee. 
14. The appropriate Government shall consult the Committee on all policies
and matters affecting the rights and interests of rivers and any activities
on their waters, catchment areas and lands adjacent thereto. 15 
Central 
Government to 
provide 
adequate funds 
to the 
Committee. 
15. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the
Committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Accounts and 
audit. 
16. (1) The Committee shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and
manner and at such time of each financial year, as may be prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the Committee shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and
any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable
by the Committee to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Committee under
this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General;
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and,
in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other  documents  and papers and to
inspect any of the offices of the Committee.
(4) The accounts of the Committee, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf,
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the
Central Government by the Committee.
20 
25 
30 
35 
Annual 
report. 17. (1) The Committee shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such
time, for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report,
giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year,
containing therein its recommendations to the Centre and the States, as
the case may be, for the effective implementation of the provisions of
this Act and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with
the audit report to be laid, along with a memorandum explaining the
action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to
the Centre and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
40 
45 

7 
5 
10 
recommendations, as soon as may be after the reports are received, 
before each House of Parliament. 
(3) Where any such report, or any part thereof relates to any matter with
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the State Government concerned, who shall in turn, cause
it to be laid before each House of the Legislature of the State, where it
consists of two House, or where suc h Legislature consists of one House,
before that House, along with an explanatory memorandum explaining
the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations related
to the State, and the reasons for the non -acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations.
15 
18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty;
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
20 
19. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of
any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect
on the provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency.
Act not in 
derogation of any 
other law. 
25 
30 
40 
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Committee may, with the approval of the Central Government,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the
purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should  not be
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Power to make 
rules and 
regulations.  

8 
        STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Rivers have always been entitled to a holy connotation in 
ancient Indian texts and have always been worshipped by the Indian 
society. Alongwith entitling ―right to life‖ to citizens, several 
democracies have recognised rivers as legal person/juristic 
person/juridical person and entitled them with ―right to life‖. 
Water has been the basis of life and has been equated with the 
father and rivers have been compared to the mother. This idea of 
recognising rivers as legal person/juristic person/juridical person 
emphasizes that rivers should have legal rights similar to human rights, 
allowing them to exist, flourish, and be protected from harm. 
Countries like New Zealand have already shown the path in the 
legal and legislative domain by granting legal personhood to rivers, 
enabling them to be protected and charging entities against pollution 
and degradation. 
In 2017, rivers Ganga and Yamuna were recognised by the 
Uttarakhand High Court as living entities with the status of legal 
people, together with all the rights, obligations, and liabilities that go 
along with that. The judgment inter alia read, ―Accordingly, while 
exercising the parens patriae jurisdiction, the Rivers Ganga and 
Yamuna, all their tributaries, streams, every natural water flowing 
continuously or intermittently of these rivers, are declared as 
juristic/legal persons/living entities having the status of a legal person, 
with all corresponding rights, duties and liabilities of a living person, in 
order to preserve and conserve river Ganga and Yamuna.‖ They were 
also accorded rights akin to fundamental rights/ legal rights. 
Given the unchecked pollution, recognizing the rights of rivers 
can help address environmental injustices faced by communities that 
rely on these water bodies for their livelihoods and well-being. 
Granting personhood rights to rivers can enhance conservation efforts 
and promote sustainable management of water resources. The 
Bharatiya society has always held rivers as sacred, viewing them as 
vital to their identity and heritage. This recognition can help protect 
these cultural values. 
Hence this Bill. 
SATNAM SINGH SANDHU 

9 
 
       FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
            Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Rivers 
Protection Committee, which shall be a body corporate for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act and shall also act as the protector of the rights of 
legal/juristic/juridical persons conferred on rivers under clause 3 of this 
Bill.  Clause 6 also provides that the headquarters of the Committee 
shall be in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and that the 
Committee may set up offices at other places in India, with the approval 
of the Central Government. Clause 7 of the Bill provides the 
composition of the Committee and for the salaries, remuneration and 
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson, Members and experts of the Committee.  Clause 8 provides 
that the Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and 
staff including legal experts to the Committee to assist it in the discharge 
of its functions and also for the salaries, remuneration and allowances 
payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of such officers 
and staff.  Clause 9 lays down the functions of the Committee inter alia 
including collating and maintaining a ‗Register of Rivers‘.  Clause 15 of 
the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate 
funds to the Committee for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
          The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of 
recurring and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. The Bill, if enacted, is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of 
about rupees three hundred crore per annum. A non-recurring 
expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
       MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
            Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government make 
such provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might 
arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.  Clause 20 of the Bill 
empowers the Central Government to make rules and the Rivers 
Protection Committee, with the approval of the Central Government, to 
make regulations, for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
           As the matters in respect of which rules or regulations or orders 
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail only, 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

11 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
to recognise rivers as legal  or juristic or juridical persons and entitle 
them with legal rights similar to the rights of human beings, 
 allowing them to exist, flourish, and be protected  
 from harm and for matters connected  
      therewith or incidental thereto. 
_______ 
(Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)‒089‒10.02.2025