1
SERVER-5/BILLS-2004/RS/4151RS
THE MOBILE CAMERA PHONE USERS (CODE OF CONDUCT)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for a code of conduct for users of mobile camera phones at certain places
including public places; to regulate their use by children; to assign responsibilities
on the user to respect the privacy of others and matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mobile  Camera Phone Users (Code  of Conduct)
Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “camera phone” means and includes any mobile telephone capable of
recording video as well as the still photographs;
(b) “child” means a person who has not completed eighteen years of age;
(c) “objectionable content” means taking photograph or video of unclothed
body or part of body of a person with or without his knowledge;
Short title
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. LXXXIV of  2006
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.

2
SERVER-5/BILLS-2004/RS/4151RS
Restriction on
use of camera
phones in
public and
other places.
Central
Government
to restrict use
of camera
phones.
Camera phone
user to respect
the privacy of
others.
Penalty.
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “public place” means any place being frequently visited by the public at large
and includes government buildings, hospitals, banks, markets, restaurants, clubs,
hotels, parks, monuments, libraries, museums and other like places but does not include
private residence or gathering;
(f) “public transport” means taxis, buses, trams, rails,  ships including other
vessels of similar kind, aeroplanes run by government or private sector for the use of
general public.
3. (1) No person shall use camera phone to take photograph or record video of any
other person without his knowledge or  consent in any public place or public transport.
(2) No person shall use camera phone,—
(i) where photography is specifically prohibited; and
(ii) while driving a motor vehicle.
4. No person shall carry or use camera phone in high security defence establishments,
and such other establishments as the Central Government may, by notificaiton in the Official
Gazette, declare in order to prevent sensitive information or topography being snapped or
leaked.
5. (1) No child shall be allowed to possess or use a camera phone.
(2) If any child is caught with a camera phone, his parents or any person who, at that
time, is the guardian of the child shall be prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of
this Act.
6. (1) On and from the appointed day, as the Central Government may appoint in this
behalf, no person shall carry or use a camera phone, which does not flash a light or emit
sound of a prescribed decibel on taking photograph/recording video.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of every phone company to manufacture only such
camera phones which comply with the requirements of sub-section (1) and ensure that there
is no provision to disable these features in camera phones.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, restrict the use
of camera phones in such areas, as it may deem necessary in the public interest.
8. It shall be the responsibility of the person using the camera phone to respect the
privacy of other and no person shall use the camera phone for shooting and circulating
objectionable content.
9. It shall be the responsibility of the company manufacturing the camera phones to
educate the retailer to actively apprise the customers about the appropriate and ethical use
of camera phone at the time of purchase.
10. The Central Government shall within six months of the commencement of this Act,
shall frame a mobile camera phone policy.
11. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine which may
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees or with both:
Provided that if the contravention of the provisions of the Act, and the rules is
done by a company, the fine may extend to twenty-five lakhs.
Restrictions
on use of
camera
phones in
defence and
other
establishments.
Prohibition of
use of camera
phone by
children.
Camera
phones to
flash light or
emit sound
while taking
photo or
recording
video.
Manufacturing
companies
educate to
retailers.
Central
Government
to frame
mobile camera
phone policy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
SERVER-5/BILLS-2004/RS/4151RS 3
12. (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act
or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section:—
(i) “company” means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
13. Nothwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, the
offence  under this Act shall be cognizable.
14. All offences under this Act shall be tried summarily in the manner prescribed for
summary trial under the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to mobile camera phones.
17. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Offences by
companies.
Offences to be
cognizable.
Summary trial.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There is a quantum jump in the number of mobile camera phone users in the world. The
sale of camera phones has outnumbered the sale of stand-alone digital cameras. Our country
is no exception to this boom in the users of camera phones. The number of mobile camera
phone users is increasing at a tremendous speed along with its misuse. People are secretly
taking photographs of women without their knowledge and consent. At times, intimate and
private images of women are taken to harass or blackmail them, since photo snapped with
these cameras can be transmitted instantly to other cell phones, to e-mail and even to web.
Digital shoplifiting by these camera phones is another area of concern. In many places
in the world, people are not buying books and magazines as they are snapping them free from
the shops using camera phones. Many bookstores have banned the use of camera phone to
shoot pages from periodicals instead of buying them as it has a devastating effect on their
sales. The corporate espionage has become easy by camera phone as any disgruntled
employee can snap and transmit photo of a product development/specifications of product
or secret ingredients and destroy the business. Camera phones present a number of risks to
intellectual property, trade secrets and other confidential business operations of companies.
Customer information can be easily and surreptitiously caught on a camera phone and
passed on to other interested parties. One camera phone manufacturing company, has itself
banned the use of this phone in their semiconductor and research facilities to stave off
industrial espionage.
Another area of concern is the use of camera phones in places where photography is
prohibited. People smuggle in small camera phones and take the pictures of various artefacts
in museums or in religious places. Use of camera phone can also cause trouble in defence
establishments or high security establishments.
Further, camera phone in the hands of students can also be misused by them. There is
no need for a child to have a camera phone. At the most, he can be given a cell phone.
The need of the hour is that the Government should come forth and frame a national
camera phone policy. In Europe, some gyms and swimming pools have banned camera
phone in changing room. In Japan, Singapore and China also a restriction has been imposed
on use of camera phones in schools and Government buildings.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to have a legislation on the regulation of use of
camera phones in the country.
Hence this Bill.
VIJAY J.  DARDA

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers is
of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a code of conduct for users of mobile camera phones at certain places
including public places; to regulate their use by children; to assign responsibilities
on the user to respect the privacy of others and matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vijay J. Darda, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4151RS(S5)—8-12-2006.