Short title
extent and
com-
mencement.
Bill No. LXXXVI of  2010
AS INTRODUCECD IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MAY, 2012.
THE WHISTLE BLOWERS (PROTECTION IN PUBLIC INTEREST
DISCLOSURES) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for protection from criminal or civil liability, departmental inquiry, demotion,
harassment and discrimination of whistle blowers, i.e., the persons who bring to light
specific instances of illegality, criminality, corruption, miscarriage of justice, any
danger to public health and safety in any Government, public or private
enterprise to an authority designated for the purposes and
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-First Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Whistle Blowers (Protection in Public Interest
Disclosures) Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "designated Authority" means the authority designated by the Central
Government to receive complaints of public interest disclosures under section 6 and
includes any new authority created in this behalf;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "public interest disclosure" means specific disclosure by an individual
involving illegality, criminality, breach of law, miscarriage of justice,danger to public
health and safety and damage to environment and includes attempt to cover up such
malpractices in any governmental establishment, public or private enterprise;
(d) "whistle blower" means any individual making public interest disclosure.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months from the commencement of
this Act, by notification in this behalf, appoint a designated authority for the purpose of
receiving and processing complaints on public interest disclosure under this Act.
(2) The designated authority shall have offices in the capital city of each State and
Union Territory in the country.
4. (1) A whistle blower desirous of making a public interest disclosure shall make it to
the designated authority in writing or in electronic form either in English or Hindi.
(2) The designated authority shall keep the identity of the whistle blower secret:
Provided that the whistle blower shall comply with all the instructions issued by the
designated authority in this regard to keep his identity secret.
5. (1) A whistle blower making public interest disclosure shall be given adequate
protection by the designated authority in such ways and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision in clause (1), protection shall
include protection from departmental enquiry, criminal and civil liability, delay in promotion,
demotion harrassment, discrimination.
6. (1) The designated authority shall not entertain any anonymous complaints received
by it in any manner.
(2) The designated authority may on such verifications as may be necessary in this
regard cause such action to be taken against the complainant on false complaints as may be
prescribed.
7. Any person retaliating against a whistle blower shall be punishable with an
imprisonment which may extend to five years:
Provided that if the public interest disclosure by whistle blower happens to belong to
the Central or State public sector undertakings or corporate sector, the period of imprisonment
for the person so retaliating may extend to ten years.
8. The provisions of the Official Secrets Act, 1923 or any agreement or service conduct
rules shall not be applicable to the whistle blowers in relations to public interest
disclosures.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made there under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in any other law for the time being in
force.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
Definitions.
Appointment
of Designated
Authority.
Public interest
disclosure to
be made in
writing.
Adequate
protection to
whistle
blower.
Action to be
taken on false
complaints.
Punishment.
Non-
applicability
of Official
Secrets Act,
1923 to the
whistle
blowers.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
19 of 1923
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to
make rules.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is no denying the fact that corruption is rampant in our country. Be it Government,
public sector or private sector—everywhere, it has crept into the system. It is so deep rooted
and channelised that when a whistle blower tries to raise his voice against corrupt practices
from within the system, his voice is scuttled and he is made to suffer because of his audacity
for his outburst. The instances of a whistle blower being fired, demoted, harassed or punished
in other ways while the organization denies, ignores or quietly buries a disclosure are in
abundance.
It is true that under normal circumstances, an organization is entitled to total loyalty
and confidentiality from its employees. But when there is serious malpractice or when people's
lives are at stake—as in cheating and corruption; defence deals; destruction of national
wealth; conspiracy against state; encounters of innocent persons; toxic leaks from a chemical
factory; non-adherence of safety standards in factories, mines and other establishments;
false declarations by a company; the public interest demands that such an event be disclosed
and the person showing courage for this should be protected rather than punished. Auditors,
vigilance commissions, regulators, the press, society and courts all play an important role in
checking the malpractices to some extent. But it is difficult to lay hands on the inside information
provided by the whistle blower. Even the recent Right to Information Act, 2005 is not of much
use in this regard.
Further, there is the legal bar in the form of Official Secrets  Act and Conduct Rules in
the public sector or a Non-disclosure Agreement in the corporate sector by which the employees
are gagged from disclosing matters to the public on pain of incurring criminal or civil liability
for any breach. It is unreasonable to expect employees to sacrifice their jobs and future in
order to protect the public interest. A few daredevils may do it but the majority will not
venture out in the area. In trying to protect the whistle blowers, we will not only protect the
society and ourselves but also serve as a deterrent to the Government and other organizations.
In many countries, the laws relating to protection of whistle blowers have been enacted. The
UK's Public Interest Disclosures Act, 1998 is a fine piece of legislation providing protection
to employees in public, private and non-public sectors including those working outside the
UK. Sarbanes—Oxley Act of 2002 enacted by US Congress granted sweeping legal protection
to whistle blowers in publicly traded companies. Under this Act, anyone retaliating against
a corporate whistle blower can be imprisoned for 10 years with remedies available to the
whistle blower include reinstatement, back pay with interest, compensatory damages, special
damages, attorney fee and costs.
The issue of protection to whistle blowers has assumed special significance in the
light of the murder of National Highways Authority of India's Deputy General-Manager,
Shri Satyandra Dubey, who raised his voice against the prevalent corruption in awarding
road building contracts under Golden Quadrilateral  Projects a  few years back. Another
brilliant officer of Indian Oil Corporation, Shri A. Manjunath, had to lay down his life for
highlighting adulteration and mafia operations in the functioning petrol pumps. There are
numerous cases in our country which speak volumes of the need for such legislation. Even
the Law Commission has recommended the need for a Whistle Blower Protection Act which
will ensure transparency in the administration and will also provide a sense of security to the
whistle blower.
Hence this Bill.
VIJAY  JAW AHARLAL  DARDA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint a designated
authority to look into the cases of public interest disclosure from whistle blowers. It also
provides that the designated authority shall have offices in the capital of each State and
Union Territory. The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India to the tune of rupees fifty crore.
Non-recurring expenditure of rupees thirty crore will also be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill and the rules with relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—1016RS(S5)—11-05-2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection from criminal or civil liability, departmental inquiry, demotion,
harassment and discrimination of whistle blowers, i.e., the persons who bring to
light specific instances of illegality, criminality, corruption, miscarriage
of justice, any danger to public health and safety in any Government,
public or private enterprise to an authority designated for the
purposes and matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto
————
(Shri Vijay Jawaharlal  Darda, M.P.)