AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
 ON THE 7TH  FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LXXXVIII of 2024 
THE PREVENTION OF BLACK MAGIC, WITCH-
HUNTING AND SUPERSTITIOUS PRACTICES 
 BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the prohibition, prevention, and eradication of black 
magic, witch-hunting and superstitious practices, and to 
 protect individuals from exploitation and harm caused  
by such practices with harsh penalties and strict  
enforcement mechanisms and for matters 
 connected therewith or 
 incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to prevent and eradicate inhuman and exploitative 
practices such as black magic, witch-hunting, human sacrifice, and other 
superstitious rituals that affect the dignity, safety, and welfare of individuals, 
especially women, children, and marginalised communities; 
AND WHEREAS such practices continue to exist in various parts of country, 
causing physical and mental harm, often resulting in violence, exploitation, 
ostracism, and in extreme cases, death. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Black Magic, Witch -
Hunting, and Superstitious Practices Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State; in the case of a Union Territory, the
Union Territory Administration and in all other cases, the
Central Government;
(b) “black magic” means any practice, ritual, or act involving
the invocation or use of supernatural powers, occult techniques,
or mystical beliefs  performed with the intent to harm, explo
it
a
ny person physically, mentally, or f inancially, instill fear,
coercion, or intimidation in any person or manipulate others  by
c
laiming to possess unnatural or mystical abilities or by use of
spells, curses, or other alleged paranormal methods to achiev e
s
uch ends;
(c) “Fund” means Victim Compen sation Fund established
under section 17 of the Act; 
(d) “human sacrifice” means the killing of a human being or
the mutilation or amputation of any part of the human body, a s
pa
rt of any ritual aimed at invoking supernatural powers;
(e) “inhuman practices” means any act that causes physical or
mental suffering to an individual in the name of black magic,
witch-hunting, or superstitions;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed in the rules framed under
this Act;
(g) “Register” means the National Register of Offenders to be
maintained under section 15 of this Act;
(h) “repeat offender” means a person who, during any
continuous period of prescribed years, whether before or after
the commencement of this Act, has been convicted and
sentenced to imprisonment more than once on account of a ny
one or more of the offences under this Act committed on
different occasions and not constituting parts of same
transaction; and who has, as a result of such convictions,
suffered imprisonments at least for a prescribed period of time.
Explanation.––A conviction which has been set aside in appeal 
or revision and any imprisonment suffered in connection there 
with shall not be taken into account for the above purpose; 
(i) “superstitious practice” means any act, ritual, or practice
performed based on irrational beliefs that cause harm, violence,
exploitation, or deprivation of basic human rights or
 falsely
claiming the ability to cure ailments through supernatural
powers;
(
j) “Task Force” means the Special Enforcement Task Force
established under section 12 of this Act; and
(k) “witch-hunting” means accusations and acts of persecution,
including physical or mental abuse, against an individual,
especially women, on the grounds of alleged witchcraft or
supernatural abilities.
 
5 
1
0 
1
5 
 
20 
 
25 
3
0 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
CHAPTER II  
PROHIBITION OF BLACK MAGIC AND WITCH-HUNTING 
Prohibition of 
Black Magic 
and 
Superstitious 
Practices. 
3. (1) No person shall promote, perform, or propagate black magic or
superstitious practice that:
(a) exploits, deceives, or harms any individual or group of
individuals; or 
 
50 

3 
5 
(b) is detrimental to public health or safety.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section (1), the following
acts are hereby prohibited:
(a) the invocation of supernatural powers through human
sacrifice, ritual mutilation, or any other inhuman or degrading act,
whether for personal or communal gain; and
(b) any practice or ritual  that involves physical or mental torture,
endangers human life, or violates human dignity.
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
4. (1) No person shall, by words, gestures, or any other means, accuse any
individual of being a witch or practice any act of witch -hunting,
including but not limited to:
(a) subjecting such individual to violence or torture, whether
physical or mental; or
(b) subjecting such individual to discrimination, social ostracism, or
public humiliation; or 
(c) engaging in defamation or acts that harm the dignity or
reputation of such individual.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub- section (1), the following
acts are hereby prohibited:
(a) branding any person as a witch through rituals, ceremonies, or
any symbolic acts;
(b) performing exorcism or any such practice involving physical
harm, torture, or coercion of any individual; and
(c) organizing, inciting, or participating in public or private acts of
humiliation or endangering the life, dignity or reputation of any 
individual in the name of witch-hunting. 
Prohibition of 
Witch-Hunting. 
 
30 
 
35 
5. (1) No person shall, by any means of communication, including
advertisements, promotions, or public announcements —whether in print,
electronic, or digital form —claim or propagate the possession of
supernatural abilities for:
(a) he
aling ailments or curing diseases; or
(b) exorcising spirits or entities; or
(c) achieving a ny physical, men tal, or s piritual outcome t hrough 
occult practices.
(2) Any mi
sleading advertisement or any other form of communication,
either in print, electronic or digital form re lated to magical remedy or
black magic shall be deemed to be an offence under this Act and shall be
liable to such punishment as provided under this Act.
Prohibition of 
false or 
misleading 
advertisements 
claiming 
supernatural 
abilities, 
magical 
remedies o r 
black magic.  
CHAPTER III 
 
40 PENALTIES AND PUNISHMENTS 
 
45 
6. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend up 
to ten years and with fine, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, 
and for any subsequent contravention with im prisonment of either 
description for a term which shall not be less than fifteen years and with 
a fine of five lakh rupees. 
Punishment 
for Black 
Magic and 
Superstitious 
Practices. 
7. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4 shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than 
ten years and with fine, which shall not be less than five lakh rupees: 
Punishment 
for Witch -
Hunting. 

4 
       Provided that if the act of witch -hunting results in grievous harm or 
death of any person(s), the person shall be punished with death or 
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.  
Punishment for 
Human 
Sacrifice. 
8. Whoever performs, participates in, abets, or facilitates an act of human
sacrifice shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life and shall
also be liable to fine, which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.
 
5 
Punishment for 
abetment and 
attempt. 
9. Whoever is found guilty of abetting or aiding the principal offender in
committing or attempting to commit the offences under this Act, shall be
liable for the same punishment as provided for that offence under the
relevant provisions of this Act.
1
0 
Public Shaming 
and Ostracism. 
10. Any person or group of persons, who publicly shames, humiliates, or
ostracizes any individual on accusations of practice of black magic,
witchcraft, or any   superstitious practice shall be punished wit h
imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less than five years, but
which may extend up to seven years, and with fine, which shall not be
less than one lakh rupees.
1
5 
Offences to be 
cognizable, 
non-bailable 
and non -
compoundable. 
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, every offence under this Act shall be cognizable, non- bailable
and non -compoundable, except otherwise decided under exceptional
circumstances by the Special Court so designated under section 13.
 
20 
CHAPTER IV 
SPECIAL ENFORCEMENT TASK FORCE 
Establishment 
of Special 
Enforcement 
Task Force. 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Special Enforcement Task Force, under th e
administrative control of the Ministry of Home Affairs, to monitor
and investigate cases related to black magic, witch -hunting,
superstitious practice and other offences under the Act.
(2) The Task Force shall have the power to conduct raids, collect
evidence, and arrest individuals involved in offences under this Act and
exercise such powers and perform such other functions and dut ies, as
may be prescribed.
(3) The Task Force shall consist of such number of law enforcement
officers, forensic experts, and representatives from human rights
organizations, to be appointed by the Central Government in suc
h
m
anner, as may be prescribed.
(4) The method of recruitment, qualifications and experience,
salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the persons appointed under sub- section (3) shall be such
as may be prescribed.
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
CHAPTER V 
SPECIAL COURT 
 
40 
Designation of 
a court as 
Special Court. 
13. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Chief
Justice of the High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette,
designate for each district, a Court of Session to be a Special Court for
the purposes of providing a speedy trial on matters arising out of crimes
or offences committed under this Act.
(2) E very Special Court designated under this Act shall follow the same
procedure and have the same powers to hold any inquiry as are vested in
a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and in a criminal
court under the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
 
45 
5
0 
 5 of 1908 
46 of 2023 

5 
46 of 2023. 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
5 
10 
15 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (including the provisions as
to bail and bonds) shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court
and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be
deemed to be a Court of Sessions and the person conducting a
prosecution before a Special Court, shall be deemed to be a Public
Prosecutor.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, an appeal shall lie as a matter of right from any
judgment, sentence or order, not being interlocutory order, of a Special
Court to the High Court both on facts and on law, in a manner and
within such time as may be prescribed.
(5) The appropria te Government shall in order to ensure speedy trial
and disposal of cases under this Act, ensure that every trial proceeding
before the Special Court and every appeal under this Act is disposed of
within such period, as may be prescribed.
46 of 2023 
 
20 
25 
14. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint a Special Public Prosecutor for every Special Court, 
from amongst advocates with such number of years of practice, as may 
be prescribed, for conducting cases only under the  provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this
section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of
clause (v) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023 and the pr ovision of that Sanhita shall have effect
accordingly.
Special Public 
Prosecutor. 
47 of 2023. 
 
30 
 
35 
15. (1) The Task Force established under section 12 shall maintain a
National Register of Offenders containing details of individuals 
convicted under the provisions of this Act, in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed. 
(2) The Register shall be a public document, under section 74 of the
Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 and shall be published on the 
website of the Task Force, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The repeat offenders shall be placed under surveillance by the Task
F
orce, and their activities shall be monitored by the local authorities and
reported to the Task Force from time to time.
National 
Register of 
Offenders. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROTECTION AND REHABILITATION OF VICTIMS 
 
40 
 
45 
50 
16. (1) Every victim of black magic, witch -hunting, and superstitious
practices or any of the crimes and offences under this Act shall be
provided with immediate protection under the Witness Protection
Scheme, 2018, including relocation and identity protection or as per
directions or guidelines as may be prescribed.
(2) Any w histleblower who, provides infor mation or report crimes
and offences under this Act leading to the arrest of the offenders
shall be granted protection from retaliation in any form and
manner, in such manner as may be prescribed:
   Provided that any person(s) found guilty of issuing any t hreat or 
trying to harm or endanger, any whistleblower or their family members 
or property shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than seven years. 
Protection of 
victims and 
whistleblowers. 

6 
Victim 
Compensation 
Fund and 
compensation 
for victims. 
17. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Fund to be called as the Victim Compensation
Fund, which shall provide financial assistance and compensation to
victims of black magic, witch-hunting, and other   offences under this
Act.
(2) The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the
expenditure incurred in connection with granting of compensation to the
victim or the family of the victim, as follows,—
(a) Every victim who has suffered physical or mental harm as
a result of any crime or offence under the Act, shall be entitled
to receive compensation, which shall not be less than five lakh
rupees.
(b) In the event of death resultin g from any crime or offence
under the Act, the family of the deceased victim shall be entitled
to receive a compensation of ten lakh rupees, from the fund.
(3) The procedure, mode and manner of disbursement of compensation
under this section shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
Rehabilitation 
of victims. 
 
18.
 
(1) The appropriate Government shall provide long term -
rehabilitation support to the victim of any of the offences under this
Act, including medical treatment, psychological counselling, and
legal aid under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2)  The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain such
number of rehabilitation centers across all State, to provide support,
specifically for victims of black magic, witch hunting and other
superstitious practices, as may be prescribed.
 
20 
 
25 
 
39 of 1987. 
CHAPTER VII 
PREVENTION AND PUBLIC AWARENESS 
 
30 Public 
Awareness 
Campaigns. 
19. (1) The Central Government, in collaboration with the State
Governments, shall launch a nationwide awareness campaign to
educate citizens about the dangers of black magic, witch -hunting,
and superstitious practice.
(2) The media outlets, including television,  radio, and digital platforms,
shall be mandated to broadcast educational content on this subject.
(3) Every School and educational institution shall be mandated to include
modules on scientific reasoning, critical thinking, and the dangers of
superstitious practices in their curriculum.
 
35 
 
40 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 
20. The Central Government, shall from time to time, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide
adequate funds, as may be necessary, for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
 
45 Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 
21. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
Government or any officer or authority of the Government or any other
person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act.
 
 

7 
 
5 
22. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
10 
23. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of 
any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have ove rriding effect 
on the provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
1
5 
 
20 
24. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) E very rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or i n
t
wo or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the ses sion or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.
Power to 
make Rules. 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        The Prevention of Black Magic, Witch -Hunting, and Superstitious 
Practices Bill, 2024 , seeks to address the serious social issues stemming 
from the prevalence of black magic, witch -hunting, and superstitious 
practices, which undermine rational thought and contribute to human 
rights violations, particularly against vulnerable groups such as women 
and the marginalised communities. These practices often result in 
violence, social discrimination, and exploitation, fuelled  by ignorance and 
fear. The B ill aims to prohibit and criminalise  these harmful actions, 
establish protections for targeted individuals, promote awareness and 
education to combat misinformation and create support mechanisms for 
victims. Ultimately, this legislation aspires to foster a safer, more equitable 
society that values reason and dignity over superstition and fear. 
 Hence this Bill. 
SANJEEV ARORA 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
       
   Clause 12  of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Special 
Enforcement Task Force with such number of law enforcement officers, 
forensic experts, and representatives from human rights organizations to 
monitor and investigate cases related to black magic, witch -hunting, 
superstitious practices and other offences under the Bill and also provides 
for the salaries and allowances payable to them and other terms and 
conditions of their service. Clause 16 provides for the protection of 
victims of offences under the Act and their next of kin under the Witness 
Compensation Scheme including relocation and identity protection and for 
the protection of whistleblowers against retaliation from the offenders. 
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Victim 
Compensation Fund for the purpose of providing financial assistance and 
compensation to victims of black magic, witch- hunting, and other related 
crimes under this Bill.  Clause 18 provides for the rehabilitation, including 
medical treatment, psychological counselling, and legal aid to the victims 
of crimes and offences under the Bill and for the 
establishment of 
rehabilitation centres for victims across all States to provide support to the 
victims. Clause 19 of the Bill provides that the Central Government, in 
collaboration with the State Governments, s hall launch a nationwide 
awareness campaign to educate citizens about the dangers of black magic, 
witch-hunting, and other superstitious practices.  
Clause 20 provides that 
the Central Government shall provide adequate  funds, as may be 
necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
         The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure, both of 
recurring and non- recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, it is difficult to estim ate the exact expenditure likely to be 
involved at this juncture. 

10 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
         Clause 2 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government make such 
provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.  Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
         As the matters in respect of which rules or orders may be made are matters 
of procedure and administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power 
is, therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the prohibition, prevention, and eradication of black 
 magic, witch-hunting and superstitious practices, and to 
 protect individuals from exploitation and harm caused 
 by such practices with harsh penalties and strict 
 enforcement mechanisms and for matters  
connected therewith or 
 incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Shri Sanjeev Arora, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)—091‒10.02.2025 