THE CLINICAL TRIAL OF DRUGS ON PATIENTS (REGULATION)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of increasing clinical trials of various new drugs on patients
being conducted by various pharmaceutical companies in the country to verify their
clinical pharmacology or adverse effects; to determine their safety and efficacy and
to protect the interests of patients undergoing these trials in the absence of any
information or contract by these companies and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Clinical Trial of Drugs on Patients (Regulation) Act,
2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "clinical trial" means the process of verifying the efficacy, safety and adverse
effect of any new drug by pharmaceutical companies by testing it clinically on any
patient with or without his consent;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXXVIII of 2006
SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3610RS
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH NOVEMBER, 2006.
Definitions.
5

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3610RS
22
(b) "fund" means Clinical Trial Fund created under section7;
(c) "pharmaceutical company" means any establishment contracting or
outsourcing clinical trials of any drug on patients;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "Registry" means Clinical Trial of Drugs Registry established under section 4.
3. No pharmaceutical company shall conduct or outsource any clinical trial of a drug
on  any patient unless such clinical trial is registered under the provisions of this Act.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Registry to be known as the Clinical Trial of Drugs Registry for the purposes of performing
functions assigned under this Act.
(2) The Registry shall be headed by a Registrar and shall have such number of
officers and employees as may be specified and provided to it by the Central Government.
(3) The headquarters of the Registry shall be at Lucknow.
(4) The terms and conditions of service of the Registrar, officers and employees of
the Registry shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Every pharmaceutical company willing to conduct clinical trial of any drug in the
country shall make an application for the registration of clinical trial to the Registry in such
form and in  such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the pharmaceutical companies which are conducting clinical trials
in the country shall apply for registration of the clinical trial with the Registry within
one month of the commencement of this Act.
(2) The Registry shall, within one month of the filing of the application under sub-
section (1), either register the trial after verifying the fulfillment of the requirements under the
provisions of this Act or reject the application.
(3) While rejecting any application for clinical trial under sub-section (2), the Registry
shall give the reasons in writing to the concerned pharmaceutical company.
6. ( 1) Every pharmaceutical company or hospital or medical practitioner before
conducting clinical trial shall explain the whole process to the patient and obtain his consent
in writing.
(2) Every patient undergoing clinical trial shall be paid fifty thousand rupees by the
pharmaceutical company conducting or outsourcing the trial of drugs before starting the
trial.
(3) The hospital conducting the clinical trial shall ensure that the trial is conducted by
the trained and qualified persons and ensure for its proper monitoring.
7. (1) The Central Government, shall  by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Clinical Trial Fund for the welfare of the family of the person and the person himself in
case the trial goes wrong.
(2) The fund shall consist of such sums of money as may be contributed in it by the
Central and the State Governments and the donations received from various voluntary
organizations and individuals.
(3) The Central Government shall administer the fund in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Pharmaceutical
companies
not to
undertake
clinical trial
without
registration.
Establishment
of Clinical
Trial of
Drugs
Registry.
Registration
of clinical
trials.
Patient to be
paid and
explained the
process of
clinical trial.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Clinical Trial
Fund.

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3610RS
3
8.  In case the trial goes wrong, it shall be the responsibility of the hospital conducting
the clinical trial to record and find out the reasons and fix the responsibility:
Provided that if the trial goes wrong due to negligence, the patient or his immediate
family shall be entitled to claim damages from the Hospital or Pharmaceutical Company,
as the case may be.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made in this behalf, provide
such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
10. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment  for  a term, which may extend
to three years or with fine, which may extend to twenty lakhs rupees or with both.
11. Where a person committing a contravention  of any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of
business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section;—
(i) "Company" means any body Corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
12. If any difficulty arises in giving effort to the  provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficult:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to clinical trial of drugs.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out  the purposes of this Act.
Hospital to
record and
find reasons
if trial goes
wrong.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Penalty.
Offences by
companies.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the near future, India is going to be the world's favourite destination for conducting
clinical trials of various new drugs being manufatured by pharmaceutical giants in the world.
These major pharmaceutical companies are outsourcing the clinical trials in our country in a
big way. According to a study, the total market for clinical research activities in India is
expected to touch rupees two thousand crores. It has been further stated in the study that in
the next two years thirty per cent of global clinical trials will take place outside the US and
western Europe and India would be the most favoured country. With the cut-throat competition,
pharmaceutical companies are facing a lot of financial crunch due to spiraling  Research and
Development cost, and increasing overheads, therefore,  outsourcing of clinical trial appears
to be the viable option for them. By contracting such work to India, these companies can
save from forty to sixty per cent of the cost. Last year, nearly 175 trials were conducted  in the
country . These trials are not limited to multinational companies but also to Indian pharma
companies which are also contracting trial for research purposes in view of the new patent
regime. There is no doubt that if India has to participate in new drug development then
clinical trials are essential because the general use of drugs have to be tested in a variety of
ethnic groups or different genetic or race profiles. Though our country can take advantage
of this situation but at the same time, there are concerns which show that the Indians are
being used as guinea pigs for these clinical trials. Leading medical journals have noted how
developing countries with poor and illiterate patients, weak legal framework, laxed bureaucracy
and financially crunched hospitals have become hunting grounds for pharma giants to test
new drugs. The lucrative offers  for trials are difficult to resist as they give plenty of money
and promises.
In the recent past, over 430 unsuspecting young women were used as guinea pigs by
researchers to test if  anti-cancer drug Letrozole could be used to increase ovulation. According
to a report published in Monthly Index of Medical Specialities in December, 2003, Letrozole
belongs to Schedule G of the Drugs and  Cosmetics Rules and can be sold only against
prescription. But it was found out that many unauthorized practitioners had been prescribing
and retailers selling the drug. In another, case, new chemical entities discovered in the US
were unlawfully tested on 26 oral cancer patients at the Regional Cancer Centre in
Thiruvananthapuram. Fairplay requires the patient undergoing clinical trial should be
explained the whole process of the trial and his concent may be obtained in writing. But, with
the kind of money involved in these trials nobody bothers about these things. Further, in
case the trial goes wrong, there is no legal remedy available in our country and the law is
silent about any compensation to be paid to the patient on whom the trial was conducted. In
US and UK, the patients on whom the trials are conducted are paid anywhere between two to
three lakhs by the pharmceutical companies. But, in India, the  poor illiterate patients are not
paid a single paisa and rather are obliged by the doctor informing them that they are being
treated by an imported drug free of charge which they cannot affort.
It is also required in these cases that the trained persons should undertake the job of
clinical trial which should be closely supervised and monitored and responsibility should
also be fixed if the trial goes wrong. In view of the fact that extreme poverty and illiteracy
make us susceptible to such trials and the law provides no assistance to the patients in
conducting of clinical trials by pharma companies in our country, there is an ugent need for
regulation on this aspect covering the various aforesaid propositions.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides the establishment of the Clinical  Trial of Drugs Registry,
clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall contribute money to Clinical
Trial Fund. Further, clause 9 provides that Central  Government shall provide funds for being
utilized for the purpose of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, involve expenditure from the
consolidated fund of India to the tune of rupees twenty crore per annum. No non-recurring
expenditure is likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING   DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers  is
of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of increasing clinical trials of various new drugs on patients being
conducted by various pharmaceutical companies in the country to verify their clinical
pharmacology or adverse effects; to determine their safety and efficacy and to protect
the interests of patients undergoing these trials in the absence of any information or
contract by these companies and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3610RS(S1)—24.11.2006.