1
Bill No. LXXX of  2022
THE MAA MAMATA (ORPHAN'S WELFARE) SCHEME BILL, 2022
A
BILL
Short title and
commencement.
to provide for social security to orphan children, to ensure proper upbringing of the
orphan child, to ensure a bright future for the child and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maa Mamata Act, 2022.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) “orphan child” means any child below eighteen years of age, who has lost
both of his biological parents and registered in Central Registry of orphans as created
under section 9 of the Act;
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
Definitions.
5
10

2
(d) “Registry” means the Central Registry of Orphans established under section 9
of this Act;
(e) “Scheme” means the Maa Mamta Scheme as formulated under section 3 of
the Act; and
(f) “social security” means provision of food, shelter, education, healthcare, job
reservation quota, establishment of recreation centers and other amenities necessary
for the welfare of orphan child.
3. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a scheme to be known as “Maa
Mamata Scheme” to provide social security to all orphan children and to ensure healthy
upbringing at par with those children with biological parents and also ensure protection
from exploitation and ill treatment so as to ensure peaceful life thereon.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide every orphan child under the Scheme—
(i) a Bank account and deposit such monthly amount as may be prescribed,
which shall be handed over to the child on attaining eighteen years of age;
(ii) Free education;
(iii) Free medical and health care facilities;
(iv) Free food, lodging and clothing;
(v) Free travel by road, railways or by air;
(vi) Free sports facilities; and
(vii) Free legal assistance.
4. The appropriate Government may establish and maintain orphan homes at
accessible  places in each district which shall have such facilities as may be prescribed for
orphan child.
5. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to create awareness amongst
public about rights of orphan child and give wide publicity to the provisions of this Act by
organizing seminars, symposia, lectures and conferences.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide adequate funds  to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government shall establish maintain and operate a Registry to be
known as the Central Registry for Orphans, for implementation of  “Maa Mamta Scheme.”
(2) The Registry shall contain such details of every orphan child as may be prescribed.
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
5
10
15
20
Establishment
of orphan
homes.
Measures for
publicity,
awareness for
welfare of
orphan child.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
25
30
35
40
Maa Mamta
Scheme.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Central
Registry for
Orphans.
Power to
make rules.

3
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
An orphan child is deprived of love, care, respectable upbringing and security, which
any child with biological parents naturally inherits.
2. An orphan child is the most deprived class of people both materially and emotionally.
Hence, the Government of the day has to step in with motherly love, compassion and care
for these children and formulate a "Maa Mamta Scheme".
3. The proposed Bill seeks to provide every such rightful needs that an orphan child
will require to become a respectable contributing adult of the society.
4. Therefore, the Government should provide compulsory social security to the orphan
child. There should also be provision for financial security, education, food lodging and
clothing along with medical care for the orphan child and they should be given protection
against ill-treatment and exploitation.
Hence, this Bill.
SHANTA CHHETRI.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for social security to orphan child, monthly bank savings
for child welfare in future, free education, food, clothing and lodging, medical and other
healthcare facilities, free travel and free legal assistance may be provided to orphan child.
Clause 4 provides for establishment of homes for orphan child. Clause 5 provides for
measures for creating awareness among public about the rights of orphan child. Clause 6
provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of  the
Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated fund of
India.
It cannot be estimated at this stage as to how many orphan child will need assistance
from the Central Government. However, an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees
nine hundred crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of about rupees seventy crore is also likely to
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. Therefore, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for social security to orphan children, to ensure proper upbringing of the
orphan child, to ensure a bright future for the child and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Shanta Chhetri, M.P. )
MGIPMRND—1823RS(S3)—12-12-2022.