THE ACCIDENT VICTIMS (COMPULSORY EMERGENCY MEDICAL
AID BY PRIVATE HOSPITALS AND MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory emergency medical aid to the victims of accidents by private
hospitals and medical practitioners and for building confidence amongst the
members of the public to come forward and help the accident victims and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Accident Victims  (Compulsory Emergency Medical
Aid  by Private Hospitals and Medical Practitioners) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXXIX of 2006.
SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3608RS
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH NOVEMBER, 2006.
Definitions.
5

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3608RS
22
(b) "medical practitioner" means person holding medical qualification recognized
under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956;
(c) "medico legal case" means an accident case requiring compulsory information
to the police for the purpose of taking cognizance  and other formalities of registration
of FIR, etc;
(d) "private hospital" includes private nursing homes and clinics being run by a
medical practitioner or a group of medical practitioners or a trust or society;
(e) words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 shall have the same meaning assigned to them in that
Act.
3. (1) No private hospital or medical practitioner shall refuse to provide emergency
medical aid to the victims of accidents on the ground that the victims have been injured in a
medico legal case.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that no private hospital or medical
practitioner refuses to provide emergency medical aid to the victim of accidents by issuing
such directions as may be necessary and prescribed.
4.  (1) It shall be the duty of every private hospital or medical practitioner, to conduct
an initial examination of the victim and decide about the requirement of emergency treatment
whenever any accident victim is taken to them.
(2) In case it is required, the private hospital or the medical practitioner shall make all
necessary efforts to stabilize the condition of the victim.
(3) If the private hospital or the medical practitioner does not have the facilities for
examination, and stabilizing the condition of the victim or emergency medical aid, the victim
shall be immediately transferred to the nearby hospital having all these facilities.
(4) The private hospital or the medical practitioner, providing emergency treatment to
the accident victim shall, in such form as may be prescribed, send to the appropriate
Government, a claim for reimbursement of the expenditure incurred on the emergency medical
treatment of the accident victims.
(5) The private hospital or the medical practitioner shall, within twenty-four hours of
providing the emergency medical aid to the victim inform to the police station having
jurisdiction of that area  about the details of the accident victim.
5. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, publish
a scheme for reimbursement of the expenditure incurred by any private hospital or medical
practitioner in providing emergency medical aid to the accident victims.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the members of the public or the
medical practitioners who help the accident victim are not unnecessarily questioned or
detained at police stations:
Provided that if such a person does not want to disclose his identity he shall  not
Compelled be to do so.
(2) The appropriate Government shall  ensure that the member of the public who
takes the accident victim to any hospital or to any medical practitioner is paid transportation
charges then and there in such manner as may be prescribed.
Compulsory
medical aid to
accident
victims.
Hospital and
Medical
Practitioner
to conduct
initial
examination
and stabilize
the condition
of the victim.
Appropriate
Government
to frame
scheme for
reimbursement
to the
Private
hospital or
the medical
practitioner.
Members of
the public
helping the
accident
victim not to
be questioned
unnecessarily
and detained.
102 of 1956
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3608RS
3
7.  The appropriate Government shall through seminars, conferences, etc. undertake
such confidence building measures as may be necessary to encourage members of the
public to come forward to help the accident victims.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made in this behalf, provide
such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
9. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to
three years or with fine, which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
10. Where  a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of
business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association of
individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear  to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
12.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to accident victims.
13. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Appropriate
Government
to build
confidence in
members of
the public.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Penalty.
Offence by
companies.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Accidents are unfortunate and can happen with anybody at any time. But, the more
unfortunate and sad part of it is the indifferent attitude of the people and medical practitioners
towards the accident victims. Ironically, accident site attracts instant crowd but the victim
who needs immediate attention is ignored  due to fear of getting entangled in police case.
Even  if a fortunate victim is picked up by some good samaritan, he is stuck up at the private
hospital or the medical practitioner who refuses to provide emergency  medical aid stating it
to be a medico legal case. As a result of this refusal by hospital and medical practitioner, the
precious time available with them to save the life of the victim is lost leading to loss of life of
the individual. In a civilized society, such an act by these hospitals and doctors goes against
the ethics of their profession besides being against the morality. It becomes the duty of a
person in the medical profession to save a precious life without going into the legality of the
accident. The people and the medical professionals do not come forward to help the victim
mainly due to fear of harassment. At time, it has also been seen that private hospitals and
medical practitioners refuse to provide treatment as the victims are not in a position to make
payment  for immediate medical care or have no medical insurance which would entitle them
to reimbursement.
Besides being victims of accidents at construction site or in public violence, these
victims mainly belong to road accidents. According to the World Report on Road Traffic
Injury Prevention released by WHO in 2004, 12 lakh people die each year in road accidents.
The report highlighted that while in high income countries, there is reasonably well organized
ambulance based rescue system, in middle and low income countries, assistance of bystander
is most common (which is devoid of in our country). Further, it is a proven fact that a number
of accident victims can be saved if they receive immediate medical attention.
In Pt. Parmanand Katara vs Union of India AIR 1989, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had
observed as under.
"Every injured citizen brought for medical treatment should instantaneously be given
medical aid to preserve life and thereafter the procedural criminal law should be allowed to
operate in order to avoid negligent death. There is no legal impediment for a medical
professional when he is called upon and requested to attend to an injured person needing
his medical assistance immediately. The effort to save the person should be a top priority not
only of the medical professional but of the police and other citizens, There are no provisions
in the Indian Penal Code/Code of Criminal Procedure/Motor Vehicles Act which prevents
doctors from promptly attending to seriously  injured persons and accident cases before the
arrival of the police and taking into cognizance of such cases, preparation of FIR and other
formalities by Police."
Following the Supreme Court Judgement in 1989, the Motor V ehicles Act was amended
in 1994 and under section  134, it was made mandatory for the driver and the owner of the
vehicle to take the accident victim to the nearest doctor and for the doctor to treat the victim
without waiting for any formality. But, even after all this, the situation has not improved.
In addition to this, in view of the dubious distinction of maximum road accident in our
country, there is an urgent need for confidence building amongst the public and the medical
practitioners so that they come forward  and help the accident victims in time to save their
lives. In many countries, there are laws making it compulsory for hospitals and medical
practitioners to provide treatment to accident victims and these laws provided for punishment
if they refuse to do so.
In view of the above, legislation on this subject is long overdue.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA  MOHAN
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5, of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall frame scheme for
reimbursement of the expenditure incurred by the private hospital or the medical practitioner
in providing emergency medical aid to the accident victims. Clause 6 provides that appropriate
Government shall ensure that the member of the public who takes the accident victim to the
hospital or to the medical practitioner will be paid transportation charges. The expenditure
on this account for Union Territories shall be borne by the Central Government. Further,
Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall make the funds available for being
utilized for the purpose of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India to the tune of rupees twenty crore per annum.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of legislative
powers is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory emergency medical aid to the victims of accidents by private
hospitals and medical practitioners and for building confidence amongst the members
of the public to come forward and help the accident victims and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3608RS(S1)—24.11.2006.