AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LXXXV of 2024 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
 furth
er to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
Of India as follows:—  
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (2A), the followin g new
clauses shall be inserted, namely  :— 
Amendment 
of article 124. 
 
10 
“(2B) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the 
appointment of Judges to the Supreme Court shall be made by 
giving due representation to members of the Scheduled Castes, 

2 
 Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, religious 
minorities and women, in proportion to their population in the 
country: 
      Provided that  the provisions of this clause shall not apply to 
such categories which are already represented in the total strength of 
Judges of the Supreme Court in proportion to their population in the 
country. 
(2C) Subject to the provisions of clause (2B), the Central 
Government shall frame a Memorandum of Procedure for 
appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India, setting out the timelines and 
procedure including identifying, assessing, recommending, and 
appointing suitable candidates as Judges of the Supreme Court. 
 (2D) If the Chief Justice or Judge of any High Court is being 
considered for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court, 
the Central Government shall consult the Government of that 
State before making such appointment. 
(2E) The Central Government shall either return or notify any 
recommendation of the collegium of the Supreme Court for 
appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court within sixty days 
of receipt of the recommendation.  
     Provided that  if any recommendation is returned by the Central 
Government and the same is re-iterated by the collegium of the Supreme 
Court, the Central Government shall notify the same within a period of 
thirty days of receipt of the reiteration. 
 Explanation— For the purpose of this clause, ‘collegium of the Supreme 
Court’ shall mean a Committee comprising of five senior-most Judges of 
the Supreme Court including the Chief Justice of India.” 
 
5 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
25 
Amendment 
of article 217. 3. In article 217 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following new
clauses shall be inserted, namely :—
“(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, 
the appointment of Judges to the High Court of a State shall be 
made by giving due representation to members of the Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, religious 
minorities and women, in proportion to their population within 
that State: 
      Provided that  the provisions of this clause shall not apply to 
such categories which are already represented in the total strength of 
Judges of a High Court in proportion to their population within that State. 
(2B) In all cases of appointments to a High Court of a State, the 
Central Government, the collegium of the Supreme Court and 
the collegium of that High Court shall take into consideration 
the opinion of the Government of that State before making the 
appointment. 
Explanation— For the purpose of this clause, ‘State’ includes all States 
and Union Territories that share a common High Court. 
(2C) Subject to the provisions of clause (2A), the Central 
Government shall frame a Memorandum of Procedure for 
appointment of Judges of High Courts in consultation with all the 
State Governments, Governments of Union Territories, the Chief 
Justice of India and Chief Justices of all High Courts, setting out 
30 
 
35 
40 
45 
50 

3 
5 
10 
15 
the timelines and procedure including identifying, assessing, 
recommending, and appointing suitable candidates as Judges of 
High Courts.  
(2D) The Central Government shall either return or notify any 
recommendation of the collegium of the Supreme Court for 
appointment of Judges of the High Court within sixty days of 
receipt of the recommendation.  
    Provided that  if any recommendation is returned by the Central 
Government and the same is reiterated by the Supreme Court, the Central 
Government shall notify the same within a period of thirty days of receipt 
of the reiteration. 
Explanation— For the purpose of article 217, ‘collegium of Supreme 
Court’ shall mean a Committee comprising the five senior most Judges of 
the Supreme Court including the Chief Justice of India and ‘collegium of 
High Court’ shall mean a Committee comprising the three senior most 
Judges of that High Court including the Chief Justice of that High 
Court.” 
20 
25 
4. In article 224, after clause (1), the following new clause shall be inserted,
namely :—
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, 
the appointment of additional Judges to the High Court of a 
State shall be made, by giving due representation to members of 
the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward 
Classes, religious minorities and women, in proportion to their 
population within that State: 
      Provided that  the provisions of this clause shall not apply to 
such categories which are already represented in the total strength of 
Judges and additional Judges of a High Court in proportion to their 
population within that State.” 
Amendment 
of article 
224. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India is a diverse nation with a rich tapestry of cultures, communities, 
genders, and religions. The preamble of our Constitution envisions securing 
social justice for all. However, the current composition of the higher judiciary 
does not adequately reflect this diversity. The current trend in judicial 
appointments shows a dismal representation of socially marginalized groups and 
there is significant over-representation of certain sections. There is a diversity 
deficit in the appointment of Judges to Supreme Court and High Courts, leading 
to a situation of inequality. 
A representative judiciary is pivotal for fostering public confidence in 
the judiciary's ability to make sound and responsive decisions. When the 
judiciary includes J udges from all sections of society, it instills greater 
confidence amongst the public, who feel that their lived realities and concerns 
are understood and addressed. This inclusivity is essential for the public to 
perceive the court system as impartial and accessible. Further, a diverse judiciary 
is imperative to enhance the quality of judicial decisions.  Judges  bring their 
personal experiences and perspectives to the bench, influencing how they 
interpret and apply the law.  
Judges from varied backgrounds will draw from a wider range of 
experiences, resulting in more balanced and comprehensive judgments. A 
diverse judiciary is also less likely to violate the rights of underrepresented 
classes and more likely to prevent discrimination. The lack of J udges from 
historically oppressed and minority communities indicates systemic barriers that 
must be addressed. A judiciary that fails to reflect the social composition of the 
nation poses a serious constitutional challenge, undermining the public's 
confidence in the justice system. 
Increasing diversity en sures that the judiciary protects the rights of all 
citizens and reflects the nation's pluralistic society. A constitutional mandate in 
this regard would ensure that the superior courts are never underrepresented. It is 
of utmost importance t hat equitable representation and fair play in the higher 
judiciary are secured through constitutional channels.  
The Collegium of the Justice(s) of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Hon’ble High Courts is an aspect of judicial appointments which is a closed-door 
phenomenon. Having a transparent procedure for judicial appointments would 
reflect a greater faith in the Constitution and the Judiciary. An established 
Memorandum of Procedure by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India for appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and in 
consultation with all the State Governments, Governments of Union Territories, 
the Chief Justice of India and Chief Justices of all State High Courts for 
appointment of Judges of High Courts, would ensure that there are no deviations 
in conventions and would also ensure that the judicial appointments are fair and 
transparent. Furthermore, to enhance transparency, the Collegium should also 
consider the opinion of their respective State Governments while recommending 
names for appointment as Judges of the High Courts to the Central Government. 
Despite judicial pronouncements on the appointment of Judges calling for a 
Memorandum of Procedure, no such memorandum has been finalized till date by 
the Central Government. 
The opinions of th e State Government and the Central Government 
have to be considered for which there is no mechanism in place at present. The 
Memorandum of Procedure is contemplated to have a timely action so that the 
appointment procedure shall not be delayed beyond a fixed time period. 
Another important aspect is that the recommendations of the Supreme 
Court collegium for appointment of Judges to High Courts and Supreme Court 
are kept in cold storage without taking any decision. This has brought to a 

5 
grinding halt the process of appointment of Judges and the institutions suffer  on 
account of unfilled vacancies and delay in filling up of vacancies. 
Further, when the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts have 
the power of judicial review to test the policies and laws made or enacted by the 
lawfully and democratically elected State Governments, it is sequitur that the 
views and opinions of the concerned State Governments be heard before making 
such appointments. After all, the State and the Central Governments are equal 
and function in the spirit of co-operative federalism. A message should not be 
sent out to the Judges/ Chief Justices that only the views of the Central 
Government matter in the appointment of Judges, thereby cultivating a bias 
towards the Central Government, and proportionate disaffection towards the 
State Governments where an opposition party is in power. Therefore, the views 
of the Central Government alone are not sufficient in making judicial 
appointments.  
Therefore, this Bill seeks to amend the Constitution of India to 
provide for social diversity in the appointment of Judges to the Supreme Court 
and High Courts, proportional to the population of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes, and O ther Backward Classes and to bring transparency in judicial 
appointments in higher judiciary. P roviding for reservation in judicial 
appointments, with an aim to promote social diversity, will definitely help in 
improving the quality of judicial decisions, enhancing public confidence, 
bringing transparency to judicial appointments and upholding the constitutional 
values of equality and inclusivity. 
Th
e Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
P. WIL
SON.

RAJYA
 SABHA 
A 
BILL 
 furthe
r to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri P. Wils
on, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–049–10.02.2025 