Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  CONSUMER GOODS (PUBLICATION OF PRICE WITH
 ADVERTISEMENT)  BILL,  2007
A
BILL
to provide for  compulsory publication of retail sale price alongwith the advertisement
of the consumer goods and for matters connected  therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This  Act may be called the Consumer Goods (Publication of price with
Advertisement)  Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “advertised product” includes all products and services which for sale are
published or printed in newspaper, magazines or in any other form, broadcast or telecast
through radio or television or through any other media or  through verbal announcement
made in the public in this regard;
(b) "Consumer goods" include all raw materials, agricultural commodities, finished
goods of any kind or any other article and services intended for sale;
(c) "price" means the actual retail sale price of the product;
Bill No. LXXXIII of   2007
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 30TH  NOVEMBER, 2007
Definitions.
5
10

2
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be mandatory for an advertiser of any product or consumer goods to publish
simultaneously the price of the product which is intended to be sold in the domestic market
and the agency whether owned by Government or any individual or group of individuals
advertising such products shall ensure that no such product is advertised without
simultaneously publishing such price.
4.  (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of  section 3 of  this Act shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with  fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees or with both.
(2) if the offence under sub-section (1) is committed by an agency or a company the
head of such agency or company by whatever name called, shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Penalties.
Publication of
the retail sale
prices of the
consumer
goods in
advertisement. 5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Consumer movement at present is picking up its tempo in our country. Though  slowly,
it has forced the Government to bring forward legislations to protect the consumers and
accordingly  Parliament enacted the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Simultaneously, a number
of other enactments dealing with consumer interest were amended to protect the rights and
interests of the consumers. But still there are some shortcomings in the Consumer  Protection
Laws.  One such shortcoming is the non-publication or retail sale price of various consumer
goods along with their advertisements. It  is a well known trade practice that publicity of a
product is a must for capturing the market and to boost its sale. This publicity is done
through advertisements in Radio, T.V.,  newspapers, magazines, cinema slides,  hoardings,
posters, announcements in the public through loudspeakers, etc. Today, radio, TV ,
newspapers and magazines, etc. are the most popular  means of advertisement. The consumers
are, in fact,  lured by the advertisements to purchase a particular product but when the
consumer goes to the market  he finds different rates of the same product in  different shops
or agencies. The consumer is fleeced to the extent possible and he cannot  resist his being
fleeced because he does not know the actual sale price of the product. This can be stopped
if simultaneous publication of actual sale price of the product along with its  advertisement
is made mandatory by enacting a law in this regard and providing for stiff  penalties for
violation thereof. This mandatory publication of sale price will protect  the  consumer from
being fleeced by unscruplous traders but it will also give him opportunity  to think twice
before deciding to purchase a product according to the money in his pocket.  It will save him
from the mad rush of shopping without caring for his budget. It will go a long way in the
movement of consumer protection.
Hence this Bill.
S. S. AHLUWALIA
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory publication of retail sale price alongwith the advertisement of
the consumer goods and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri S. S. Ahluwalia, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5074RS(S5)—30.11.2007.