AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 
THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LXXXVI of 2024 
5 
THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE 
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2024 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013. 
BE it en acted b y Parliament in the S eventy-fifth Year o f t he R epublic of 
India as follows: — 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This A ct m ay b e called t he Sexual H arassment of W omen at
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Amendment Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2  
 
Amendment of 
section 4. 
 2. In the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and   Redressal) Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in section 4, — 
(i) in sub- section (2), in clause (c),  after the existing proviso, the 
following new proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Provided further that wherever applicable, at least one of the 
members shall be a woman belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes or the Othe r Backward Classes or a minority 
community as notified by the Central Government, from time to time.”  
(ii) in sub-section (5), after clause (d),  the following new clause shall 
be inserted, namely: — 
“(e) has been accused by the aggrieved woman of loss of trust and 
lack of confidence at any point of time during an inquiry,” 
5 
10 
14 of 2013. 
Amendment of 
section 6. 
 3. In the principal Act, in section 6 — 
(i)  in sub -section (1), the following new proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“Provided that if any District Officer fails to constitute a Local 
Committee, for whatsoever reasons, he shall be liable to a penalty 
in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to 
him.” 
(ii)  in sub -section (2), the following new proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“Provided that the details of the nodal officer designated by the 
District Officer shall be made available and publicized through 
every local government office to enhance the accessibility of any 
aggrieved woman to their rights under this Act.” 
15 
20 
25 
 
Amendment of 
section 7. 
 4. In the principal Act, in section 7 — 
(i)  in sub -section (1), after clause (b),  the following new clause shall 
be inserted, namely: — 
“(bb) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women 
working in the informal sector, such as domestic work, 
construction, street vending, gig work, who have engaged in 
the field of social work and are committed to the cause of 
women;” 
 (ii) in sub-section (3), after clause (d), the following new clause shall 
be inserted, namely: — 
“(e) has been accused by the aggrieved woman of loss of trust and 
lack of confidence  at any point of time during an inquiry,” 
30 
35 
 
Amendment of 
section 9. 
 
 5. In the principal Act, in section 9, in sub -section (1), for the words “three 
months”, wherever they occur, the words “one year”, shall be substituted.  40 
 
Insertion of 
new section 
11A. 
Replacement of 
the Presiding 
Officer or 
Member of the 
Internal 
Committee or 
Chairperson or 
Member of the 
Local 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.  In the principal Act, after section 11, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“11A. Any aggrieved woman, who loses trust and lacks confidence 
in any Presiding Officer or Member of the Internal Committee or 
any Chairperson or Member of the Local Committee, at any point of 
time during an inquiry, may request in writing to the employer or t he 
District Officer, as the case may be, to replace such member of the 
Internal Committee or Local Committee, as the case may be, until 
the inquiry is disposed of: 
45 
 

3  
 
  
 
5 
Provided that necessary action shall be taken by the employer 
or the District Officer, as the case may be, within a period of 
fifteen days from the date of receipt of such request: 
Provided further that both the aggrieved woman and the 
member so accused, shall, within the fifteen day period for 
processing the request for replacement , be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and/or to make a representation against 
the findings, before the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee, as the case may be.” 
 10 7. In the principal Act, in section 13, in sub -section (4), for the words “sixty 
days”, the words “thirty days”, shall be substituted. 
 Amendment of 
section 13. 
 
 
 
 
 
22 of 2005. 15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
8. In the principal Act, for section 16, the following shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“16.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to 
Information Act, 2005, the contents of the complaint made under 
section 9, the identity and addresses of the aggrieved woman, 
respondent and witnesses, any information relati ng to conciliation 
and inquiry proceedings, recommendations of the Internal 
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, and the 
action taken by the employer or the District Officer under the 
provisions of this Act shall not be published, communic ated or made 
known to the public, press and media in any manner: 
Provided that information may be disseminated regarding the 
justice secured to any victim of sexual harassment under this Act 
without disclosing the name, address, identity, or any other 
particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the aggrieved 
woman and witnesses. 
(2) Any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal with the 
complaint or inquiry under the provisions of this Act, shall not 
disclose the case to the responden t in any means before formal 
communication by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, 
as the case may be. 
(3) If the person who disclosed or publicized the identity and 
addresses of the aggrieved woman or witnesses, or contents of the 
complaint and inquiry proceedings, is a member of the Internal 
Committee or the Local Committee, the employer or the District 
Officer, as the case may be, shall take measures to immediately 
expel the guilty from the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee.” 
 Substitution of 
section 16. 
 
 
 40 
45 
9. In the principal Act, for section 17, the following shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“17. Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal 
with the complaint, inquiry or any recommendations or action to be 
taken under the provisions of this Act, contravenes the provisions of 
sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of section 16, such per son shall 
be liable to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of the 
service rules applicable to the said person or where no such service 
rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed.”   
 Substitution of 
section 17. 
 
 
50 
10. In the principal Act, in section 18, —  
(i)  for sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely : — 
“Any person aggrieved from the recommendations made under sub-
section (2) of section 13 or under clause (i)  or clause (ii)  of sub -
section (3) of section 13 or sub- section (1) or sub -section (2) of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 18. 

4  
 
section 14 or sub -section (3) of section 16 or section 17 or non -
implementation of such recommendations, may prefer an appeal to 
the court or tribunal in accordance with the provisi ons of the service 
rules applicable to the said person or where no such service rules 
exist then, without prejudice to provisions contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, the person aggrieved may prefer an 
appeal in such manner as may be prescribed.” 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “ninety days”, the words “forty -five 
days”, shall be substituted.  
 
5 
Amendment of 
section 20. 
 11. In the principal Act, in section 20, after clause (b), the following new 
clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(c) take such measures as may be necessary to maintain a list of 
practitioners or organizations that provide free legal aid and guidance 
for supporting the aggrieved women in ensuring their rights.” 
10  
Substitution of 
section 22. 
 
 
 
 12. In the principal Act, for section 22, the following shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“22. The employer shall include in its annual report and publish the 
report on its website or mobile -based application of the organisation, 
or both, as the case may be, the number of cases filed, if any, and their 
disposal under this Act, and further, intimate  such number of cases, if 
any, to the District Officer.” 
15 
20 
 
Substitution of 
section 24. 
 
 
 
 
 13. In the principal Act, for section 24, the following shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“24. The appropriate Government may, subject to the availability 
of financial and other resources, – 
(a)  develop relevant information, education, communication 
and training materials, and organise awareness programmes 
in every four months to advance public understanding of the 
provisions of this Act providing for protection against sexual 
harassment of woman at workplace; 
(b) formulate orientation and training programmes in every 
six   months for the members of the Local Committee.” 
25 
30 
 
Amendment of 
section 26. 
 14. In the principal Act, in section 26, in sub -section (1), for the words “fifty 
thousand rupees”, the words “two lakh rupees”, shall be substituted.  
  
 
  

5  
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition, and Redressal) Act, 2013 also known as the POSH Act, was 
enacted to prevent and manage sexual harassment of women in the workplace. 
While the Act has been instrumental in addressing workplace harassment, 
significant gaps remain in  its implementation, particularly in strict 
enforcement of the Act. More importantly, the provisions in the Act fail to 
capture the practical problems of women in reporting harassment and the case 
is worse for women in the informal sector. 
The informal sec tor constitutes a large portion of India's workforce, 
including domestic workers, agricultural laborers, construction workers, and 
others, who are highly vulnerable to sexual harassment but often lack access 
to formal mechanisms for redress. Local Complain
ts Committees (LCCs), 
which were designed to serve this purpose, are not sufficiently accessible or 
effective for women in the unorganized sector due to a lack of awareness, 
structural issues, and inadequate representation. The absence of concrete 
mechanisms to enforce accountability in both public and private institutions 
further exacerbates the problem. Hence there is an imperative need to check 
the execution of the Act to ensure that the benefits and protection of the Act 
reach every woman in both formal  and informal settings. Further, the goal is 
to bring confidence in the systems for women to come forward to report 
incidents of sexual harassment.  
Therefore, the Bill seeks to amend the POSH Act to ensure better 
representation, broader accessibility, effective inquiry processes, and 
increased penalties for non -compliance. Key amendments include mandating 
that District Officers establish fully functio nal LCCs in rural and urban areas 
and publicizing the nodal officers at every administrative level (block, taluka, 
tehsil, ward, and municipality) to expand accessibility to women. The Bill also 
obligates District Officers to maintain a list of organizatio ns and practitioners 
offering free legal aid to support aggrieved women, ensuring that financial 
constraints do not hinder their access to justice. Most importantly, the Bill has 
mandated the inclusion of women from the informal sector as members of the 
LC
Cs to make sure their representation is adequately met to capture the 
unique challenges of the informal sector.  
Further, to protect the privacy of complainants, the Bill strengthens 
confidentiality provisions – imposing stricter penalties for disclosing the 
identity of the aggrieved woman or other parties involved. It also empowers 
aggrieved women to request the replacement of any Internal Complaints 
Committee (ICC) or LCC member if they lose trust during an inquiry. Also, to 
provide women with greater flexibility to seek justice without undue pressure, 
the time limit for filing complaints of sexual harassment has been extended 
from three months to one year. Additionally, the time limit for issuing an 
inquiry report by ICCs and LCCs upon the completion of t he investigation is 
reduced from sixty days to thirty days, thereby reducing undue delays in 
justice delivery. The Bill mandates the Central and State Governments to 
organize public awareness initiatives every four months to ensure that women, 
including th ose in the informal sector, are empowered to seek redress when 
necessary. 
Hence, this Bill. 
JEBI MATHER HISHAM. 

6  
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 4 (i)  of the Bill proposes to amend section 7 of the Sexual 
Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) 
Act, 2013 (POSH Act) to include a member to be nominated from amongst 
the women working in the informal sector to the Local Complaints Committee 
(LCC), which will entail financial compensation to this additional member in 
the LCCs and will involve recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. Besides, Clause 13 of the Bill proposes to substitute section 24 of the 
POSH 
Act to improve measures to publicize the Act to the public by 
increasing the frequency of awareness events and prescribes conducting 
orientation and training programs every six months for the members of the 
LCC to improve its efficiency and sensitivity.   
Thus, the Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure of recurring nature 
from the Consolidated Fund of India.  However, it is difficult to estimate the 
actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage. 

7  
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE 
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL)  
ACT, 2013  
(14 OF 2013) 
        *     *           *    *                  *    
4. * *           *    *                  *    
(2) The Internal Committees shall consist of the following members to be
nominated by the employer, namely: —
(a) a Presiding Officer who shall be a woman employed at a senior level
at workplace from amongst the employees:
Provided that in case a senior lev el woman employee is not 
available, the Presiding Officer shall be nominated from other offices or 
administrative units of the workplace referred to in sub-section (1):  
Provided further that in case the other offices or administrative 
units of the workplace do not have a senior level woman employee, the 
Presiding Officer shall be nominated from any other workplace of the 
same employer or other department or organisation;  
(b) not less than two Members from amongst employees preferabl y
committed to the cause of women or who have had experience in social
work or have legal knowledge;
(c) one member from amongst non -governmental organisations or
associations committed to the  cause of women or a person familiar with
the issues relating to sexual harassment:
Provided that at least one-half of the total Members so nominated shall 
be women. 
        *     *           *    *                  *    
(5) Where the Presiding Officer or any Member of the Internal
Committee,—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under
any law for the time being in force is pending against him; or
(c) he has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a
disciplinary proceeding is pending against him; or
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest,
such Presiding Officer or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed 
from the Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy 
shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of 
this section. 
Constitution of 
Internal 
Complaints 
Committee. 
        *     *           *    *                  *    
6. (1) Every District Officer shall constitute in the district concerned, a
committee to be known as the Local Committee to receive complaints of 
sexual harassment from establishments where the Internal Committee has 
not been constituted due to having less than ten workers or if the complaint 
is against the employer himself.  
Constitution 
and jurisdiction 
of Local 
Committee. 

8  
(2) The District Officer shall designate one nodal officer in every block,
taluka and tehsil in rural or tribal area and ward or municipality in the urban
area, to receive complaints and forward the same to the concerned Local
Committee within a period of seven days.
Composition, 
tenure and other 
terms and 
conditions of 
Local 
Committee.
7. (1) The Local Committee shall consist of the following members to be
nominated by the District Officer, namely: —
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the eminent women i n
t
he field of social work and committed to the cause of women;
(b) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women working i n
b
lock, taluka or tehsil or ward or municipality in the district;
(c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a woman, to be
nominated from amongst such non- governmental organisations or
associations committed to the cause of women or a person familiar wit h
t
he issues relating to sexual harassment, which may be prescribed:
Provided that at least one of the nominees should, preferably, have a 
background in law or legal knowledge:  
Provided further that at least one of the nominees shall be a woman 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other 
Backward 
Classes or minority community notified by the Central 
Government, from time to time; 
(d) the concerned officer dealing with the social welfare or women and
child development in the district, shall be a member ex officio.
        *     *           *    *                  *    
(3) Where the Chairperson or any Member of the Local Committee—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under
any law for the time being in force is pending against him; or
(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a
disciplinary proceeding is pending against him; or
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest,
such Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed from 
the Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall 
be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of this 
section. 
        *     *           *    *                  *    
*         *    *       *       *          
Complaint of 
sexual 
harassment.
9. (1) Any aggrieved woman may make, in writing, a complaint of sexual
harassment at workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the
Local Committee, in case it is not so constituted, within a period of three
months from the date of incident and in case of a series of incidents, within
 a
pe
riod of three months from the date of last incident: Provided that where
such complaint cannot be made in writing, the Presiding Officer or any
Member of the Internal Committee or the Chairperson or any Member of th e
L
ocal Committee, as the case may be, shall render all reasonable assistan ce
t
o the woman for making the complaint in writing: Provided further that the
Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee may, for

9  
the reasons to be recorded i n writing, extend the time limit not exceeding 
three months , if it is satisfied that the circumstances were such which 
prevented the woman from filing a complaint within the said period 
        *     *           *    *                  *    
13. (4) The employer or the District Officer shall act upon the recommendati on
within sixty days of its receipt by him. 
Inquiry report 
        *     *           *    *                  *    
22 of 2005 16. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005 ,
the contents of the complaint made under section 9, the identity and 
addresses of the aggrieved woman, respondent and witnesses,  any 
information relating to conciliation and inquiry proceedings, 
recommendations of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the 
case may be, and the action taken by the employer or the District Officer 
under the provisions of this Act shall not  be published, communicated or 
made known to the public, press and media in any manner: Provided that 
information may be disseminated regarding the justice secured to any victim 
of sexual harassment under this Act without disclosing the name, address, 
identity 
Prohibition of 
publication or 
making known 
contents of 
complaint and 
inquiry 
proceedings. 
17. Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal with the
complaint, inquiry or any recommendations or action to be taken under the 
provisions of this Act, contravenes the provisions of section 16, he shall be 
liable for penalty in accordance wit
h the provisions of the service rules 
applicable to the said person or where no such service rules exist, in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
Penalty for 
publication or 
making known 
contents of 
complaint and 
inquiry 
proceedings. 
18. (1) Any person aggr ieved from the recommendations made under sub -
section (2) of section 13 or under clause (i)  or clause (ii)  of sub-section (3)
of section 13 or sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 14 or section 17
or non- implementation of such recommendations may prefer an appeal t o
t
he court or tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the service rules
applicable to the said person or where no such service rules exist then,
without prejudice to provisions contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the person aggrieved may prefer an appeal in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) The appeal under sub- section (1) shall be preferred within a period of
ninety days of the recommendations.
Appeal. 
        *     *           *    *            * Duties and 
powers of 
District Officer. 
20. The District Officer shall, —
(a) monitor the timely submission of report furnished by the Local
Committee;
(b) take such measures as may be necessary for engaging non -
governmental organisations for creation of awareness on sexual
harassment and the rights of the women.
        *     *           *    *                  *    
22. The employer shall include in its report the number of cases filed, if any,
and their disposal under this Act in the annual report of his organisation or 
where no such report is required to be prepared, intimate such number of 
cases, if any, to the District Officer 
Employer to 
include 
information in 
annual report. 
        *     *           *    *            *

10  
Appropriate 
Government to 
take measures 
to publicise the 
Act.
24. The appropriate Government may, subject to the availability of financial and
other resources, —
(a) develop relevant information, education, communication and training
materials, and organise awareness programmes, to advance the
understanding of the public of the provisions of this Act providing for
protection against sexual harassment of woman at workplace;
(b) formulate orientation and training programmes for the members of
the Local Committee.
        *     *          *    *            *     
Penalty for non-
compliance 
with provisions 
of Act.
26. (1) Where the employer fails to—
(a) constitute an Internal Committee under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b) take action under sections 13, 14 and 22; and
(c) contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets contravention of other
provisions of  this Act or any rules made thereunder,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees. 
        *     *           *    *            *

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal)  Act, 2013. 
_____________ 
(Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E) – 265 – 08.12.2025 