Bill No. LXXX-F  of  2006
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
   (AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJYA SABHA ON 18TH DECEMBER , 2008
LOK  SABHA  ON  23RD  DECEMBER,  2008)
ASSENTED TO
ON 7 JAN. 2009
ACT NO. 5 OF 2009

THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic  of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2.  In  section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), after clause (w), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(wa) “victim” means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by
reason of the act or omission for which the accused  person has been charged  and the
expression "victim" includes his or her guardian or legal heir;’.
3.   In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (8), the following  proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 2.
Bill NO. LXXX-F of  2006
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 24.

2
“Provided that the Court may permit the victim to engage an advocate of his
choice to assist the prosecution under this sub-section.”.
4.   In section 26 of the principal Act, in clause ( a), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that any offence under section 376 and sections 376A to 376D of the
Indian Penal Code shall be tried as far as practicable by a Court presided over by a
woman.”.
5. In section 41 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for clauses ( a) and ( b), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence;
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible
information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has
committed  a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years whether with
or without  fine, if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of  such
complaint, information, or suspicion that such person has committed the
said offence;
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary—
 ( a) to prevent such person from committing any further
offence; or
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the
offence to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any
manner; or
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the
case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court
or to the police officer; or
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the
Court whenever required cannot be ensured,
and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his reasons in
writing.
(ba) against whom credible information has been received that he has
committed a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to more than seven years whether with or without fine or
with death sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis
of that information that such person has committed the said offence;”;
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person concerned in a
non-cognizable offence or against whom a complaint has been made or credible
information has been received or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so
concerned, shall be arrested except under a warrant or order of a Magistrate.”.
6. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following new sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
Amendment
of  section  26.
Amendment
of  section  41.
45 of 1860.
Insertion of
new sections
41A, 41B, 41C
and 41D.

3
“41A. (1) The police officer may, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not
required under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 41, issue a notice directing
the person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information
has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable
offence, to appear before him or at such other place as may be specified in the notice.
(2) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that
person to comply with the terms of the notice.
(3) Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice, he
shall not be arrested in respect of the offence referred to in the notice unless, for
reasons to be recorded, the police officers is of the opinion that he ought to be
arrested.
(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice,
it shall be lawful for the police officer to arrest him for the offence mentioned in the
notice, subject to such orders as may have been passed in this behalf by a competent
Court.
41B. Every police officer while making an arrest shall—
(a) bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his name which will
facilitate easy identification;
(b) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be—
(i) attested by at least one witness, who is a member of the family of
the person arrested or a respectable member of the locality where the
arrest is made;
(ii) countersigned by the person arrested; and
(c) inform the person arrested, unless the memorandum is attested by a
member of his family, that he has a right to have a relative or a friend named by
him to be informed of his arrest.
41C. (1) The State Government shall establish a police control room—
(a) in every district; and
(b) at State level.
(2) The State Government shall cause to be displayed on the notice board kept
outside the control rooms at every district, the names and addresses of the persons
arrested and the name and designation of the police officers who made the arrests.
(3) The control room at the Police Headquarters at the State level shall collect
from time to time, details about the persons arrested, nature of the offence with which
they are charged and maintain a database for the information of the general public.
41D. When any person is arrested and interrogated by the police, he shall be
entitled to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation, though not throughout
interrogation.”.
7. In section 46 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances
indicate to the contrary, her submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall
be presumed and, unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless the police
officer is a female, the police officer shall not touch the person of the woman for
making her arrest.”.
Right of
arrested
person to meet
an advocate of
his choice
during
interrogation.
Procedure of
arrest and
duties of
officer
making
arrest.
Control
room at
districts.
Notice of
appearance
before police
officer.
Amendment
of section 46.

4
8. For section 54 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“54. (1) When any person is arrested, he shall be examined by a medical officer
in the service of Central or State Government, and in case the medical officer is not
available, by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is made:
Provided that where the arrested person is a female, the examination of the body
shall be made only by or under the supervision of a female medical officer, and in case
the female medical officer is not available, by a female registered medical practitioner.
(2) The medical officer or a registered medical practitioner so examining the
arrested person shall prepare the record of such examination, mentioning therein any
injuries or marks of violence upon the person arrested, and the approximate time when
such injuries or marks may have been inflicted.
(3) Where an examination is made under sub-section (1), a copy of the report of
such examination shall be furnished by the medical officer or registered medical
practitioner, as the case may be, to the arrested person or the person nominated by
such arrested person.”.
9.  After section 55 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“55A. It shall be the duty of the person having the custody of an accused to
take reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused.”.
10. After section 60 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“60A. No arrest shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of this
Code or any other law for the time being in force providing for arrest.”.
11. In section 157 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement
of the victim shall be conducted at the residence of the victim or in the place of her
choice and as far as practicable by a woman police officer in the presence of her
parents or guardian or near  relatives or social worker of the locality.’’.
12.  In section 161 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the following provisos shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘‘Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-
video electronic means.’’.
13. In section 164 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),  for the proviso, the
following provisos shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that any confession or statement made under this sub-section may
also be recorded by audio-video electronic means in the presence of the advocate of
the person accused of an offence:
Provided  further that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer on
whom any power  of a Magistrate has been conferred under any law for the time being
in force.”.
14. In section 167 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2),—
(a) in the proviso,—
Substitution
of new
section for
section 54.
Examination
of arrested
person by
medical
officer.
Insertion of
new section
55A.
Insertion of
new section
60A.
Amendment
of section
157.
Amendment
of section
161.
Health and
safety of
arrested
person.
Amendment
of section
164.
Amendment
of section
167.
Arrest to be
made strictly
according to
the Code.

5
(i) for clause ( b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention of the accused in
custody of the police under this section unless the accused is produced
before him in person for the first time and subsequently every time till the
accused remains in the custody of the police, but the Magistrate may
extend further detention in judicial custody on production of the accused
either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage;”;
(ii) for Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Explanation II.— If any question arises whether an accused person was
produced before the Magistrate as required under clause (b), the production of
the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order authorising
detention or by the order certified by the Magistrate as to production of the
accused person through the medium of electronic video linkage, as the case
may be.”;
(b) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that in case of a woman under eighteen years of age,
the detention shall be authorised to be in the custody of a remand home or
recognised social institution.”.
15. In section 172 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The statements of witnesses recorded during the course of investigation
under section 161 shall be inserted in the case diary.
(1B) The diary referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be a volume and duly
paginated.”.
16. In section 173 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The investigation in relation to rape of a child may be completed
within three months from the date on which the information was recorded by the
officer in charge of the police station.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), after clause ( g), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been
attached where investigation relates to an offence under sections 376, 376A,
376B, 376C or 376D of the Indian Penal Code.”.
17. After section 195 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“195A. A witness or any other person may file a complaint in relation to an
offence under section 195A of the Indian Penal Code.”.
18. In section 198 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), for the words “fifteen years
of age”, the words “eighteen years of age” shall be substituted.
19. In section 242 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
Amendment
of section
172.
Amendment
of section
173.
Insertion of
new section
195A.
Procedure for
witnesses in
case of
threatening,
etc.
Amendment
of section
198.
Amendment
of section
242.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.

6
“Provided that the Magistrate shall supply in advance to the accused, the
statement of witnesses recorded during investigation by the police.”.
20. In section 275 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may also be
recorded by audio-video electronic means in the presence of the advocate of the
person accused of the offence.”.
21. In section 309 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under sections
376 to 376D of the Indian Penal Code, the inquiry or trial shall, as far as possible,
be completed within a period of two months from the date of commencement of
the examination of witnesses.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), after the third proviso and before Explanation 1, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that—
(a) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except
where the circumstances are beyond the control of that party;
(b) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court,
shall not be a ground for adjournment;
(c) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is
not present or the party or his pleader though present in Court, is not
ready to examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks
fit, record the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks
fit dispensing with the examination-in-chief or cross-examination of the
witness, as the case may be.".
22. In section 313 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence Counsel in preparing
relevant questions which are to be put to the accused and the Court may permit
filing of written statement by the accused as sufficient compliance of this section.".
23. In section 320 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for the T
ABLE, the following T ABLE shall be substituted,
namely:—
“TABLE
Offence Section of the Person by whom offence
Indian Penal may be compounded
Code applicable
12 3
Uttering words, etc., with deliberate 298 The person whose religious feelings
intent to wound the religious are intended to be wounded.
feelings of any person.
V oluntarily causing hurt. 323 The person to whom the hurt is
caused.
V oluntarily causing hurt on 334 Ditto.
provocation.
Amendment
of section
275.
Amendment
of section
313.
Amendment
of section
320.
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section
309.
45 of 1860.

7
V oluntarily causing grievous hurt 335 Ditto.
on grave and sudden provocation.
Wrongfully restraining or confining 341, The person restrained or confined.
any person. 342
Wrongfully confining a person for 343 The person confined.
three days or more
Wrongfully confining a person for 344 Ditto.
ten days or more.
Wrongfully confining a person in 346 Ditto.
secret.
Assault or use of criminal force. 352, The person assaulted or to whom
355, criminal force is used.
358
Theft. 379 The owner of the property stolen.
Dishonest misappropriation of 403 The owner of the property
property. misappropriated.
Criminal breach of trust by a carrier, 407 The owner of the property in respect
wharfinger, etc. of which the breach of trust has been
committed.
Dishonestly receiving stolen 411 The owner of the property stolen.
property knowing it to be stolen.
Assisting in the concealment or 414 Ditto.
disposal of stolen property, knowing
it to be stolen.
Cheating. 417 The person cheated.
Cheating by personation. 419 Ditto.
Fraudulent removal or concealment 421 The creditors who are affected
of property, etc., to prevent thereby.
distribution among creditors.
Fraudulently preventing from being 422 Ditto.
made available for his creditors a
debt or demand due to the offender.
Fraudulent execution of deed of 423 The person affected thereby.
transfer containing false statement
of consideration.
Fraudulent removal or concealment 424 Ditto.
of property.
Mischief, when the only loss or 426, The person to whom the loss or
damage caused is loss or damage to 427 damage is caused.
a private person.
12 3

8
Mischief by killing or maiming 428 The owner of the animal.
animal.
Mischief by killing or maiming 429 The owner of the cattle or animal.
cattle, etc.
Mischief by injury to works of 430 The person to whom the loss or
irrigation by wrongfully diverting damage is caused.
water when the only loss or damage
caused is loss or damage to private
person.
Criminal trespass. 447 The person in possession of the
property trespassed upon.
House-trespass. 448 Ditto.
House-trespass to commit an 451 The person in possession of the
offence (other than theft) punishable h ouse trespassed upon.
with imprisonment.
Using a false trade  or property 482 The person to whom loss or injury is
mark. caused by such use.
Counterfeiting a trade or property 483 Ditto.
mark used by another.
Knowingly selling, or exposing or 486 Ditto.
possessing for sale or for
manufacturing purpose, goods
marked with a counterfeit property
mark.
Criminal breach of contract of 491 The person with whom the offender
service. has contracted.
Adultery. 497 The husband of the woman.
Enticing or taking away or detaining 498 The husband of the woman and the
with criminal intent a married woman.
woman.
Defamation, except such cases as 500 The person defamed.
are specified against section 500 of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)
in column 1 of the Table under
sub-section ( 2).
Printing or engraving matter, 501 Ditto.
knowing it to be defamatory.
Sale of printed or engraved 502 Ditto.
substance containing defamatory
12 3

9
matter, knowing it to contain such
matter.
Insult intended to provoke a breach 504 The person insulted.
of the peace.
Criminal intimidation. 506 The person intimidated.
Inducing person to believe himself 508 The person induced.”;
an object of divine displeasure.
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the TABLE the following TABLE shall be substituted, namely:—
“TABLE
Offence Section of the Person by whom offence
Indian Penal may be compounded
Code applicable
12 3
Causing miscarriage. 312 The woman to whom miscarriage is
caused.
V oluntarily causing grievous hurt. 325 The person to whom hurt is caused.
Causing hurt by doing an act so 337 Ditto.
rashly and negligently as to
endanger human life or the personal
safety of others.
Causing grievous hurt by doing an 338 Ditto.
act so rashly and negligently as to
endanger human life or the personal
safety of others.
Assault or criminal force in 357 The person assaulted or to whom
attempting wrongfully to confine a the force was used.
person.
Theft, by clerk or servant of 381 The owner of the property stolen.
property in possession of master.
Criminal breach of trust 406 The owner of property in respect of
which breach of trust has
been committed.
Criminal breach of trust by a clerk 408 The owner of the property in respect
or servant. of which the breach of trust has been
committed.
Cheating a person whose interest 418 The person cheated.
the offender was bound, either by
law or by legal contract, to protect.
Cheating and dishonestly inducing 420 The person cheated.
delivery of property or the making,
alteration or destruction of a valuable
security.
12 3

10
Marrying again during the life-time 494 The husband or wife of the person so
of a husband or wife. marrying.
Defamation against the President or the 500 The person defamed.
Vice-President or the Governor of a
State or the Administrator of a Union
territory or a Minister in respect of his
public functions when instituted upon
a complaint made by the Public
Prosecutor.
Uttering words or sounds or making 509 The woman whom it was intended to
gestures or exhibiting any object insult or whose privacy was intruded
intending to insult the modesty of a upon.”;
woman or intruding upon the privacy of
a woman.
(iii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) When an offence is compoundable under this section, the abetment
of such offence or an attempt to commit such offence (when such attempt is
itself an offence) or where the accused is liable under sections 34 or 149 of the
Indian Penal Code may be compounded in like manner.".
24. In section 327 of the principle Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided further that in camera trial shall be conducted as far as
practicable by a woman Judge or Magistrate.";
(b) in sub-section ( 3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the ban on printing or publication of trial proceedings in
relation to an offence of rape may be lifted, subject to maintaining
confidentiality of name and address of the parties.".
25. In section 328 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) If the civil surgeon finds the accused to be of unsound mind, he
shall refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist for care,
treatment and prognosis of the condition and the psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist, as the case may be, shall inform the Magistrate whether the
accused is suffering from unsoundness of mind or mental retardation:
Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the
psychiatric or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, to the Magistrate, he
may prefer an appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of—
(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest government hospital; and
(b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college.’’;
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) If such Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-
section ( 1A) is a person of unsound mind, the Magistrate shall further
determine whether the unsoundness of mind renders the accused incapable of
entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall
record a finding to that effect, and shall examine the record of evidence produced
by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but without
Amendment
of section
327.
Amendment
of section
328.
12 3
45 of 1860.

11
questioning the accused, if he finds that no prima facie case is made out against
the accused, he shall, instead of postponing the enquiry, discharge the accused
and deal with him in the manner provided under section 330:
Provided that if the Magistrate finds that a prima facie case is made out
against the accused in respect of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is
arrived at, he shall postpone the proceeding for such period, as in the opinion of
the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the
accused, and order the accused to be dealt with as provided under section 330.
(4) If such Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-
section (1A) is a person with mental retardation, the Magistrate shall further
determine whether the mental retardation renders the accused incapable of
entering defence, and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall
order closure of the inquiry and deal with the accused in the manner provided
under section 330.".
26. In section 329 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) If during trial, the Magistrate or Court of Sessions finds the accused
to be of unsound mind, he or it shall refer such person to a psychiatrist or
clinical psychologist for care and treatment, and the psychiatrist or clinical
psychologist, as the case may be  shall report to the Magistrate or Court whether
the accused is suffering from unsoundness of mind:
Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the
psychiatric or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, to the Magistrate, he
may prefer an appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of—
(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest government hospital; and
(b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college.’’;
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) If such Magistrate or Court is informed that the person referred to in
sub-section (1A) is a person of unsound mind, the Magistrate or Court shall
further determine whether unsoundness of mind renders the accused incapable
of entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate or
Court shall record a finding to that effect and shall examine the record of evidence
produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but
without questioning the accused, if the Magistrate or Court finds that no prima
facie case is made out against the accused, he or it shall, instead of postponing
the trial, discharge the accused and deal with him in the manner provided under
section 330:
Provided that if the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out
against the accused in respect of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived
at, he shall postpone the trial for such period, as in the opinion of the psychiatrist or
clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused.
(3) If the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out
against the accused and he is incapable of entering defence by reason of mental
retardation, he or it shall not hold the trial and order the accused to be dealt
with in accordance with section 330.".
27. For section 330 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
Amendment
of section
329.
Substitution
of new section
for section
330.

12
"330. (1) Whenever a person if found under section 328 or section 329 to be
incapable of entering defence by reason of unsoundness of mind or mental retardation,
the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be shall, whether the case is one in which bail
may be taken or not, order release of such person on bail:
Provided that the accused is suffering from unsoundness of mind or mental
retardation which does not mandate in-patient treatment and a friend or relative
undertakes to obtain regular out-patient psychiatric treatment from the nearest
medical facility and to prevent from doing injury to himself or to any other person.
(2) If the case is one in which, in the opinion of the Magistrate or Court, as the
case may be, bail cannot be granted or if an appropriate undertaking is not given, he
or it shall order the accused to be kept in such a place where regular psychiatric
treatment can be provided, and shall report the action taken to the State Government:
Provided that no order for the detention of the accused in a lunatic asylum shall
be made otherwise than in accordance with such rules as the State Government may
have made under the Mental Health Act, 1987.
(3) Whenever a person is found under section 328 or section 329 to be incapable
of entering defence by reason of unsoundness of mind or mental retardation, the
Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, shall keeping in view the nature of the act
committed and the extent of unsoundness of mind or mental retardation, further
determine if the release of the accused can be ordered:
Provided that—
(a) if on the basis of medical opinion or opinion of a specialist, the
Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, decide to order discharge of the
accused, as provided under section 328 or section 329, such release may be
ordered, if sufficient security is given that the accused shall be prevented
from doing injury to himself or to any other person;
(b) if the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, is of opinion that
discharge of the accused cannot be ordered, the transfer of the accused to a
residential facility for persons of unsound mind or mental retardation may be
ordered wherein the accused may be provided care and appropriate education
and training.".
28. After section 357 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"357A. (1) Every State Government in co-ordination with the Central Government
shall prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the
victim or his dependents who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime and
who require rehabilitation.
(2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the Court for compensation, the
District Legal Service Authority or the State Legal Service Authority, as the case may
be, shall decide the quantum of compensation  to be awarded under the scheme
referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) If the trial Court, at the conclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the
compensation  awarded under section 357 is not adequate for such
rehabilitation, or where the cases end in acquittal or discharge and the victim has to be
rehabilitated, it may make recommendation for compensation.
(4) Where the offender is not traced or identified, but the victim is identified,
and where no trial takes place, the victim or his dependents may make an application
to the State or the District Legal Services Authority for award of compensation.
(5) On receipt of such recommendations or on the application under sub-section
(4), the State or the District Legal Services Authority shall, after due enquiry award
adequate compensation by completing the enquiry within two months.
Release of
person of
unsound mind
pending
investigation
or trial.
Insertion of
new section
357A.
Victim
compensation
scheme.
14 of 1987.

13
(6) The State or the District Legal Services Authority, as the case may be, to
alleviate the suffering of the victim, may order for immediate first-aid facility or medical
benefits to be made available free of cost on the certificate of the police officer not
below the rank of the officer in charge of the police station or a Magistrate of the area
concerned, or any other interim relief as the appropriate authority deems fit.".
29. In section 372 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order
passed by the Court acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or
imposing inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the Court to which an
appeal ordinarily lies against the order of conviction of such Court.".
30. In section 416 of the principal Act, the words "order the execution of the sentence
to be postponed, and may, if it thinks fit" shall be omitted.
31. After section 437 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"437A. (1) Before conclusion of the trial and before disposal of the appeal, the
Court trying the offence or the Appellate Court, as the case may be, shall  require the
accused to execute bail bonds with sureties, to appear before the higher Court as and
when such Court issues notice in respect of any appeal or petition filed against the
judgment of the respective Court and such bail bonds shall be in force for six months.
(2) If such accused fails to appear, the bond stand forfeited and the procedure
under section 446 shall apply.’’.
32. In the Second Schedule to the principal Act, in Form No. 45, after the figures "437",
the figures and letter "437A" shall  be inserted.
Amendment
of section 372.
Amendment
of section
416.
Amendment
of Form 45.
Insertion of
new section
437A.
Bail to
require
accused to
appear before
next
appellate
Court.

14
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
—————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—109LS(S5)—14-01-2009.