1
THE  PREVENTION  OF  BEGGING  BILL,  2010
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of begging and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Begging Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. LXXXI of 2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011
Definitions.5

2
(b) "begger" means a person who indulges in begging;
(c) "begging" means:—
(i) soliciting alms in a public place, including railways, bus-stops, road
sides and public transport, by invoking compassion; and
(ii) entering in any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving
alms;
(d) "fund" means Beggars' Welfare Fund established under section 6.
(e) "rehabilitation centre" means a centre established under this Act where any
person taken into custody on the ground of begging shall be kept till the time he is
rehabilitated.
3. Begging by any person in any manner is hereby abolished.
4. Whoever forces or encourages any person, including a child in his care, custody or
charge, for begging or whoever uses any person as an exhibit for the purpose of begging,
shall, in the first instance, be warned of indulging in such activities and if he indulges inspite
of the warning be punished with a fine of rupees five thousand.
5. (1) Any person found begging shall be arrested by the Police.
(2) Any persons so arrested shall be sent to a rehabilitation centre, to be established
in every district by the appropirate Government, wherein such person shall be provided with
facilities for his rehabilitation in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the Beggars'
Welfare Fund for the welfare of the beggars.
(2) The fund shall be utilised by the Central Government as and when required for the
welfare and rehabilitation of beggars.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate such schemes, work out such
plans, including plans for provision of education, and create suitable infrastructure in
every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs for earning their livelihood.
(2) The appropriate Government shall set up destitute homes for providing food,
shelter and protection, to the old, infirm, helpless and destitute persons so as to discourage
them from indulging in begging.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Abolition of
begging.
Punishment
for forced
begging.
Arrest of
persons found
begging, etc.
Beggars’
Welfare Fund.
Formulation
of schemes
and plans for
beggars, etc.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Despite all efforts made and welfare measures taken by the Central Government and
the State Governments, the practice of begging continues unabated all over the country,
especially in the metropolitan cities and urban areas. There are organised gangs who exploit
innocent children and force them into begging not for the sustenance of these boys and girls
but for gathering alms for the gang leaders and organizers. Some people kidnap children and
force them to go for begging and collect huge amount of money.
The number of beggars in the country has increased manifold. As per an estimate the
number is somewhere around fifty lakhs.
While, the old and infirm beggars can be sent to destitute homes, the other beggars
should be given education and training so that they can get gainful employment.
Therefore, it is high time that a law for prevention of begging be enacted.
Hence this Bill.
NARENDRA  KUMAR  KASHYAP
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of "rehabilitation centres" in every
district by the appropriate Government. Clause 6 provides for setting up of Beggars' Welfare
Fund. Clause 7 provides for formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure by
appropriate Government in every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs. It
further provides for setting up of destitute homes by the appropriate Government. The
Central Government would have to incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India
for establishment of rehabilitation centres, destitute homes, formulating schemes, creating
suitable infrastructure in respect of Union territories and shall also have to contribute monies
into Beggars' Welfare Fund. As for as establishment of rehabilitation centres, destitute
homes, formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure in the States are concerned,
the concerned State Governments will incur expenditure from their Consolidated Funds,
through the Central Government may have to extend some financial assistance to the States
for implementing the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees five hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions
of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative
power is of normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—6680RS(S3)—28-02-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of begging and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap, M.P.)