AS INTRODUCECD IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MAY, 2012.
THE PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES ON WOMEN BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to prevent atrocities against women in the country, to provide for Special Courts for the
trial of such offences committed against women and for the relief and rehabilitation
of the victims of such offences and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Atrocities on Women Act,  2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may be notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act,  unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "atrocity" means an offence punishable under section 3;
(c) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXXVII of  2010
Definitions.
2 of 1974.
5
10

2
(d) "employer" means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment under the control of the appropriate
Government, the head of the Department or Ministry as the case may be;
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local authority or Local Self
Government, the Chief Executive Officer by whatever designation called;
(iii) in relation to other cases, the person or the authority who has the
ultimate control over the affairs of the work place.
(e) "Special Court" means a Court of Session specified as a Special Court in
section 7;
(f) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in Code
or the Indian Penal Code shall have the meanings assigned to them respectively in
the Code, or as the case may be, in the Indian Penal Code.
3. (1) Whoever,—
(i) makes any lewd remarks, gestures, signs or insinuations against a woman in
office or in any public place.
(ii) assaults or uses force against any woman with intent to dishonour or outrage
her modesty;
(iii) forcibly removes clothes from the person of a woman or parades her naked
or with painted face or body or commits any similar act which is derogatory to
human dignity;
(iv) compels or entices a woman to do 'begar' or other similar forms of forced
or bounded labour;
(v) being in a position to dominate the will of a woman and uses that position
to harass or exploit her sexually to which she would not have otherwise agreed;
(vi) intentionally insults or intimidates with intent to humiliate a woman in any
place within public view;
(vii) institutes false, malicious or vexatious suit or criminal or other legal
proceedings against a woman;
(viii) takes pictures or video of a woman without her consent or knowledge by
violating her privacy;
(ix) forces or compels any woman into prostitution;
(x) declares any woman witch or daiyan or by any other name called;
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years
but which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to twenty-five
thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever, being a public servant, commits any offence under this section, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which
may extend to the maximum punishment provided for that offence.
4. Whoever, being a public servant, willfully neglects his duties required to be performed
by him under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend to one year.
5. For the purposes of providing speedy trial, the appropriate Government shall, with
the concurrence of the Chief Justice of High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette,
45 of 1860.
Punishment for
Offences of
atrocities.
Punishment for
neglect of
duties.
Special Court.
5
1010
15
20
25
30
35
40

specify for each district a Court of Sessions to be a Special Court to try offences under this
Act.
6. (1) Where the Special Court is satisfied, upon a complaint or a police report that a
person is likely to commit an offence under this Act, it may, by order in writing, direct such
person to remove himself beyond the limits of such area, within such time as may be speci-
fied in the order, and not to return to that area from which he was directed to remove himself
for such period, not exceeding one year, as may be specified in the order.
(2) The Special Court shall, alongwith the order under sub-section (1), communicate to
the person directed under that sub-section the grounds on which such order has been
made.
(3) The Special Court may revoke or modify the order made under sub-section (1), for
the reasons to be recorded, on the representation made by the person against whom such
order has been made or by any other person on his behalf within thirty days from the date of
the order.
7.  Any person contravening an order of the Special Court made under section 6 shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine
which may extend upto ten thousand rupees.
8. A District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other Executive
Magistrate or any police officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police
may, on receiving information and after such inquiry as he may think necessary, has reason
to believe that a person or a group of persons, residing in or frequenting any place within
the local limits of his jurisdiction is likely to commit an offence or has threatened to commit
any offence under this Act and is of the opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding,
declare such an area to be an area prone to atrocities and take preventive action in such
manner as may be prescribed.
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide such relief and rehabilitation to the
victims of the atrocities under this Act by framing schemes as may be notified from time to
time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the aforesaid provision the appropriate
Government shall provide free board and lodging and medical facilities to the severely
affected victims of atrocities under this Act.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made in this behalf,
provide such requisite funds for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or against the State Government or any officer or authority of Government or
any other person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this
Act.
13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or any custom or usage or any instrument having effect by virtue of any
other law.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Procedure to be
followed by
Special Court.
Punishment for
contravention
of order of
Special Court.
Declaration of
area prone to
atrocities.
Appropriate
Government to
frame scheme.
Central Gov-
ernment to
provide funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Women are the most vulnerable lot of our society. Every now and then, women are
subjected to atrocities and violence in one form or the other. They are subjected to all kinds
of torture which more often than not go unreported. At times, the administration does not
respond with the kind of agility that is required on the incidents of atrocities on women.
There is no dearth of incidents when women are paraded naked in many places in our
country and, at times, also declared as witches or daiyans. This is the worst kind of treatment
given to women without any fault. They are left at the mercy of their fate and no one comes
to their rescue. Further, sexual harassment of women in work place is also very common and
frequent. The Supreme Court of India has taken this issue very seriously. In the case of
Vishaka and Others vs. State of Rajasthan and others, the Supreme Court  has laid down
norms and guidelines to be followed by employers or other responsible persons in the work
places or other institutions to prevent or deter the commission of acts of sexual harassment
as also to provide the procedures for resolution, settlement or prosecution of acts of sexual
harassment by taking all steps required including setting up of Complaints Committees for
redressal of the complaint made by the victim. The National Commission for Women has also
taken up this issue very seriously. It has, however been found that the Complaint Committees
have not been formed in a number of cases. Women are mentally and sexually exploited and
pushed into flesh trade. Therefore, in order to give women a respectable position in the
society and save them from the tyranny of the unscrupulous employers and other persons,
it is high time that a law should be framed to protect them from atrocities by providing strict
punishment which will serve as deterrent for others.
Hence this Bill.
VIJAY  JAW AHARLAL  DARDA

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide relief and
rehabilitation to the women and children who are victims of atrocities. Further, Clause 10
provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds for the purposes of this
Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees twenty crore will be required for
the purpose. Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one crore will also be required.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of details only. The delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent atrocities against women in the country, to provide for Special Courts for the trial
of such offences committed against women and for the relief and rehabilitation of the
victims of such offences and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1021RS(S3)—11-05-2012.