   AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
 
  
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
   Bill No. LXXXIII of 2024 
 
  
   THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE 
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2024 
  
   A    
   BILL   
   further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013. 
  
  BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:― 
  
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Amendment Act, 2024.  
 Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Amendment of 
the long title. 
 2. 
 
 
 
In the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition 
and Redressal) Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the 
long title for the word ‘women’, the word ‘persons’, shall be substituted.  
 
14 of  2013. 
Amendment of 
Section 1. 
 3. In the principal Act, in section 1, for sub -section (1), the following shall be 
substituted, namely:― 
“(1) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of Persons at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013.” 
5  
References to 
certain 
expressions to 
mean and 
include  
certain other 
expressions. 
 4. In the principal Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the words 
‘woman’ or ‘women’, wherever it occurs in the Act, shall mean and include 
‘persons of all gender’. 
 
10 
 
Amendment of 
Section 2. 
 5. In section 2 of the principal Act, ― 
(i) in clause (f), 
(a) after the words “daily wage”, the words, “or gig”, shall be 
inserted; and 
(b) after the words “co-worker”, the words, “gig worker”, shall be 
inserted. 
(ii) in clause (g), 
(a) in sub-clause (ii), after the word “workplace”, the words, “gig 
workers, and platform workers;”, shall be inserted; and 
(b) in the Explanation, after the words “organisation”, the words 
“including policies governing gig workers and platform workers;”, 
shall be inserted. 
15 
20 
 
Amendment of 
Section 4. 
 6.  In the principal Act, in section 4, in sub -section (2), after the proviso to 
clause (c), the following proviso, shall be inserted, namely:― 
“Provided further that in the event that the aggrieved person belongs 
to a gender other than female and requires adequate representation on the 
Internal Committee, an additional representative from within the 
organization, belonging to the gender of the aggrieved person, shall be 
nominated on the Internal Committee, in such manner, as may be 
prescribed.” 
25 
30 
 
Amendment of 
Section 7. 
 7. In the principal Act, in section 7, in sub -section (1), after clause (d), the 
following proviso, shall be inserted, namely:―  
“Provided that in the event that the aggrieved person belongs to a 
gender other than female and requires adequate representation on the Local 
Committee, an additional representative from within the organization, 
belonging to the gender of the aggrieved person, shall be nominated on the 
Local Committee, in such manner, as may be prescribed.” 
35 
 
 
  

3 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS   
  The Bill reflects the urgent need to protect all individuals in the workplace, 
regardless of their gender and nature of work, from sexual harassment. Recognizing 
that discrimination and harassment can affect people of all gender identities, this 
Bill seeks to make the legal framework more inclusive, progressive, and aligned 
with India’s constitutional and social values. 
There has been a flux in the Indian gig economy, which has introduced a large 
segment of workers who are often not covered under the traditional workplace 
protections. To address this gap, this Bill seeks to expand the definitions of 
“employee” and “employer” to explicitly include gig workers and platform 
workers. This aims to ensure that protections against sexual harassment extend to 
all types of work arrangements, reflecting the evolution of modern workplaces.  
The Bill upholds the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by articles 14, 15 and 
21 of the Constitution of India, which protect equality, prohibit discrimination, and 
ensure the right to life and personal dignity. The landmark case of NALSA v. Union 
of India (2014) recognized transgender persons as a third gender and affirmed their 
rights. This amendment, building on that precedent, extends protections to include 
all persons, thereby aligning the law with constitutional values and rights.  This 
amendment aligns with the Court’s recognition of the need for laws to evolve with 
changing social conditions, as underscored in cas es such as National Textile 
Workers’ Union v . P.R. Ramakrishnan and State v.  S.J. Chowdhury, wherein, the 
Supreme Court has emphasized the importance of adapting statutory interpretation 
to contemporary societal values. By updating the language and definit ions in the 
erstwhile POSH Act, this Bill acknowledges the shifting realities of gender 
identities and the evolving workforce. The amendment to cover persons of all 
gender identities, brings Indian law closer to global standards and recognizes the 
importance of inclusive workplace policies. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
                                                             MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE  
 
  
 
  

4 
 
 ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE 
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) ACT, 2013  
(14 OF  2013) 
 
 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
. 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013. 
 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
  *                       *                          *                       *                            *  
(f) “employee” means a person employed at a workplace for any work on 
regular, temporary, ad hoc or daily wage basis, either directly or through an 
agent, including a contractor, with or, without the knowledge of the 
principal employer, whether for remunerati on or not, or working on a 
voluntary basis or otherwise, whether the terms of employment are express 
or implied and includes a co-worker, a contract worker, probationer, trainee, 
apprentice or called by any other such name; 
(g) “employer” means ― 
(i) in re lation to any department, organisation, undertaking, 
establishment, enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit of the 
appropriate Government or a local authority, the head of that 
department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise, 
institution, office, branch or unit or such other officer as the 
appropriate Government or the local authority, as the case may be, 
may by an order specify in this behalf; 
(ii) in any workplace not covered under sub- clause (i), any person 
responsible for the ma nagement, supervision and control of the 
workplace. 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this sub- clause 
“management” includes the person or board or committee 
responsible for formulation and administration of polices for 
such organisation; 
(iii) in relation to workplace covered under sub -clauses (i) and (ii), 
the person discharging contractual obligations with respect to his or 
her employees; 
  *                       *                          *                       *                            * 
 
Constitution of 
Internal 
Complaints 
Committee. 
4.    *                       *                          *                       *                            * 
(2) The Internal Committees shall consist of the following members to be 
nominated by the employer, namely:— 
(a) a Presiding Officer who shall be a woman employed at a senior level 
at workplace from amongst the employees: 
Provided that in case a senior level woman employee is not 
available, the Presiding Officer shall be nominated from other offices or 
administrative units of the workplace referred to in sub-section (1): 
 Provided further that in case the other offices or a dministrative 
units of the workplace do not have a senior level woman employee, the 
 

5 
Presiding Officer shall be nominated from any other workplace of the 
same employer or other department or organisation; 
(b) not less than two Members from amongst employees  preferably
committed to the cause of women or who have had experience in social
work or have legal knowledge;
(c) one member from amongst non- governmental organisations or
associations committed to the cause of women or a person familiar with
the issues relating to sexual harassment:
Provided that at least one-half of the total Members so nominated 
shall be women. 
  *                 *                *                       *                            * 
7. (1) The Local Committee shall consist of the following members to be 
nominated by the District Officer, namely: —  
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the eminent women in
t
he field of social work and committed to the cause of women;
(b) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women working i n
b
lock, taluka or tehsil or ward or municipality in the district;
(c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a woman, to b e
nom
inated from amongst such non- governmental organisations or
associations committed to the cause of women or a person familiar with
the issues relating to sexual harassment, which may be prescribed:
Provided that at least one of the nominees should, preferably, have 
a background in law or legal knowledge: 
Provided further that at least one of the nominees shall be a woman 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other 
Backward Classes or minority community notified by the Central 
Government, from time to time;  
(d) the concerned officer dealing with the social welfare or women and
child development in the district, shall be a member ex-officio.
Composition, 
tenure and other 
terms and 
conditions of 
Local 
Committee. 
  *                 *                *           *       *

RAJYA SABHA 
__________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 
___________ 
(Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)–249‒08.12.2025 