RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh Act, 1966

(Dr. C.P. Thakur, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5778RS— 18.12.2000


5 of 1908.

- Ternt\kdbucep IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXXXII of 2000

THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL

further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and to provide for the matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of this Act and for different States or for different parts thereof.

2. In section 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

"(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the Court which
passed a decree to execute such decree against any person or property outside the
local limits of its jurisdiction.".

Short title
and
‘commencement.

Amendment of
section 39,


Amendment of
section 64

Substitution
of new
section for
section 100A

No further

appeal in
certain cases

Substitution of
new section for
section 102

No second
ap al in
ain cases

Amendment
of Order V

Delivery of
summons by
Court

2

3. Section 64 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (/) of that
section and after sub-section (/) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely —

(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any private transfer or delivery of
the property attached or of any interest therein, made in pursuance of any contract
for such transfer or delivery entered into and registered before the attachment "

4. For section 100A of the principal Act [as substituted by section 10 of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], the following section shall be substituted,
namely —

"100A Notwithstanding anything contained in any Letters Patent for any
High Court or in any instrument having the force of law or in any other law tor the
time being 1n force, where any appeal from an original or appellate decree or order ts
heard and decided by a single Judge of a High Court, no further appeal shall fie from
the judgment and decree of such single Judge "

5. For section 102 of the principal Act [as substituted by section 11 of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], the following section shall be substituted,
namely —

"102 No second appeal shall lie from any decree, when the subject matter of
the original suit 1s for recovery of money not exceeding twenty-five thousand
rupees "

6. In the First Schedule to the principal Act (hereinafter referred to as the First
Schedule), in Order V,—

(2) in rule 1, for sub-rule (/) [as substituted by clause (7) of section 15 of the
Code ० Crvil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], the following sub-rule shall be
substituted, namely —

“(2) When a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may be issued to
the defendant to appear and answer the clam and to file the written statement
of his defence, if any, within thirty days trom the date of service of summons
on that defendant

Provided that no such summons shall be issued when a defendant has
appeared at the presentation of plaint and admitted the plainuff’s claim

Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written state-
ment within the said period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the same
on such other days as may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, but which shall not be later than ninety days from the date of
service of summons ",

(u) for rule 9 (as substituted by clause (v) of section 15 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], the following rules shall be substituted, namely —

“Q (1) Where the defendant resides within the jurisdiction of the Court
in which the suit is instituted, or has an agent resident within that jurisdiction
who 1s empowered to accept the service of the summons, the summons shall,
unless the Court otherwise directs, be delivered or sent either to the proper
officer to be served by him or one of his subordinates or to such courier
services as are approved by the Court

(2) The proper officer may be an officer of a Court other than that in
which the suit 1s instituted, and, where he 1s such an officer, the summons may
be sent to him in such manner as the Court may direct

.(3) The services of summons may be made by delivering or transmitting
a copy thereof by registered post acknowledgment due, addressed to the

46 of 1999

46 of 1999

46 of 1999

46 of 1999


46 of 1999.

3

defendant or his agent empowered to accept the service or by speed post or by
such courier services as are approved by the High Court or by the Court
referred to in sub-rule (/) or by any other means of transmission of documents
(including fax message or electronic mail service) provided by the rules made
by the High Court:

Provided that the service of summons under this sub-rule shall be made
at the expenses of the plaintiff.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (/), where a defendant
resides outside the jurisdiction of the Court in which the suit is instituted, and
the Court directs that the service of summons on that defendant may be made
by such mode of service of summons as is referred to in sub-rule (3) (except by
registered post acknowledgment due), the provisions of rule 21 shall not
apply.

(5) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be
signed by the defendant or his agent is received by the Court or postal article
containing the summons is received back by the Court with an endorsement
purporting to have been made by a postal employee or by any person authorised
by the courier service to the effect that the defendant or his agent had refused
to take delivery of the postal article containing the summons or had refused to
accept the summons by any other means specified in sub-rule (3) when tendered
or transmitted to him, the Court issuing the summons shall declare that the
summons had been duly served on the defendant:

Provided that where the summons was properly addressed, pre-paid and
duly sent by registered post acknowledgment due, the declaration referred to
in this sub-rule shall be made notwithstanding the fact that the acknowledgment
having been lost or mislaid, or for any other reason, has not been received by
the Court within thirty days from the date of issue of summons.

(6) The High Court or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall prepare
a panel of courier agencies for the purposes of sub-rule (/).

9A. (1) The Court may, in addition to the service of summons under rule
9, on the application of the plaintiff for the issue of a summons for the
appearance of the defendant, permit such plaintiff to effect service of such
surnmons on such defendant and shall, in such a case, deliver the summons to
such plaintiff for service.

(2) The service of such summons shall be effected by or on behalf of
such plaintiff by delivering or tendering to the defendant personally a copy
thereof signed by the Judge or such officer of the Court as he may appoint in
this behalf and sealed with the seal of the Court or by such mode of service as
is referred to in sub-rule (3) of rule 9.

(3) The provisions of rules 16 and 18 shall apply to a summons personally
served under this rule as if the person effecting service were a serving officer.

(4) If such summons, when tendered, is refused or if the person served
refuses to sign an acknowledgment of service or for any reason such summons
cannot be served personally, the Court shall, on the application of the party,
re-issue such summons to be served by the Court in the same manner as a
summons to a defendant.".

7. In the First Schedule, in Order VI, for rules 17 and 18 [as they stood immediately
before their omission by clause (iii) of section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1999]. the following rules shall be substituted, namely:—

"17. The Court may allow cither party to alter or amend his pleadings where

it is satisfied that cither new facts have come into existence subsequent to the

Summons
given to the
planutf for
service

Amendment of
Order VI

Amendment of
pleadings


Failure to
amend after
order.

Amendment of
Order VII.

Procedure on
admitting
plaint.

Amendment of
Order शा.

Written
statement.

4

institution of the suit necessitating the amendment or the amendment is necessi-
tated by change in law.

18. Ifa party who obtained an order for leave to amend does ‘not amend accord-

ingly within the time limited for that purpose by the order, or if no time is thereby

limited then within fourteen days from the date of the order, he shall not be permit-
ted to amend after the expiration of such limited time as aforesaid or of such fourteen
days, as the case may be.".

8. In the First Schedule, in Order VII,—

(i) for rule 9 [as substituted by clause (i) of section 17 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], the following rule‘shall be substituted,
namely:—

“9. Where the Court orders that the summons be served on the defendants
in the manner provided in rule 9 of Order V, it will direct the plaintiff to
present as many copies of the plaint on plain paper as there are defendants
within seven days from the date of such order along with requisite fee for
service of summons on the defendants.”;

(i) in rule 11, for sub-clauses (f) and (g) [as inserted by clause (ii) of section 17
of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], the following sub-clause
shall be substituted, namely:—

“(f) where the plaintiff fails to comply with the provisions of rule 9.”;

(iii) in rule 14 [as substituted by clause (iii) of section 17 of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], for sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule
shall be substituted, namely:—

“(3) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the plaintiff
when the plaint is presented, or to be entered in the list to be added or annexed
to the plaint but is not produced or entered accordingly, shall not, without the
leave of the Court, be received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the
suit.”;

(iv) rule 18 [as amended by clause (v) of section 17 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999] shall be omitted.

9, In the First Schedule, in Order VIH,—

(i) for rule 1 [as substituted by clause (i) of section 18 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], the following rule shall be substituted,
namely:—

“1, The defendant shall, within thirty days from the date of service of
summons on him, present a written statement of his defence:

Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement
within the said period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the same on
such other day, as may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, but which shall not be later than ninety days from the date of service
of summons.”;

(ii) in rule 1A [as inserted by clause (ii) of section 18 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999), for sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall
be substituted, namely:—

“(3) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the defendant

under this rule, but, is not so produced shall not, without the leave of the
Court, be received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit.”;

46 of 1999

46 of 1999

46 of 1999.

46 of 1999,

46 of 1999,

46 of 1999.


5

(iit) for rules 9 and 10 [as they stood immediately before their omission by
46 of 1999. clause (iii) of section 18 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999],
the following rules shall be substituted, namely:—

“9. No pleading subsequent to the written statement of a defendant Subsequent
other than by way of defence to set-off or counter-claim shall be presented _ pleadings.
except by the leave of the Court and upon such terms as the Court thinks fit;
but the Court may at any time require a written statement or additional written
statement from any of the parties and fix a time of not more than thirty days
for presenting the same.

10. Where any party from whom a written statement is required under procedure
rule | or rule 9 fails to present the same within the time permitted or fixed by when _ party

the Court, as the case may be, the Court shall pronounce judgment against fails to
him, or make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit and on the Haan state:
pronouncement of such judgment a decree shall be drawn up.”. ment. called

for by Court.

10. In the First Schedule, in Order IX, for rule 2 [as substituted by clause (४) of | Amendment of
46 of 1999, section 19 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], the following rule Order IX.
shall be substituted, name!

“2. Where on the day so fixed it is found that the summons has not been served Dismissal of
upon the defendant in consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court-fee | suit where
or postal ‘charges, if any, chargeable for such service, or failure to present copies of hot served in
the plaint as required by rule 9 of Order VII, the Court may make an order that the suit consequence

be dismissed: of plaintiff's
है a हे हि failure to
Provided that no such order shall be made, if notwithstanding such failure, the pay costs.

defendant attends in person or by agent when he is allowed to appear by agent on the
day fixed for him to appear and answer.”.

11. In the First Schedule, in Order XIV, for rule 5 [as it stood immediately before its Amendment of
omission by clause (ii) of section 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, Order XIV.
46 of 1999, 1999}, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:—

“5. (1) The Court may at any time before passing a decree amend the issues or Power to
frame additional issues on such terms as it thinks fit, and all such amendments or amend, and
additional issues as may be necessary for determining the matters in controversy stnke out,
between the parties shall be so made or framed. हु

(2) The Court may also, at any time before passing a decree, strike out any
issues that appear to it to be wrongly framed or introduced.”.

12. In the First Schedule, in Order XVIII,— Amendment of
Order XVII.

(a) in rule 2, after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rules shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(3A) Any party may address oral arguments in a case, and shall, before
he concludes the oral arguments, if any, submit if the Court so permits
concisely and under distinct headings written arguments in support of his
case to the Court and such written arguments shall form part of the record.

(3B) A copy of such written arguments shall be simultaneously fur-
nished to the opposite party.

(3C) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written
arguments unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it
necessary to grant such adjournment.

(3D) The Court shall fix such time-limits for the oral arguments by
either of the parties in a case, as it thinks fit.”;


Recording
of evidence.

Amendment of
Order XX.

6

(6) for rule 4 [as substituted by clause (ii) of section 27 of the Code of Civil

Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999], the following rule shall be substituted,
namely:—

“4. (1) In every case, the examination-in-chief of a witness shall be on
affidavit and copies thereof shall be supplied to the opposite party by the
party who calls him for evidence:

Provided that where documents are filed and the parties rely upon the
documents, the proof and admissibility of such documents which are filed
along with affidavit shall be subject to the orders of the Court.
हु (2) The evidence (cross-examination and re-examination) of the witness
in attendance, whose evidence (examination-in-chief) by affidavit has been
furnished to the Court (other than the Higli Court), shall be taken either by
the Court or by the Commissioner appointed by it:

Provided that the Court may, while appointing a commission under this
sub-rule, consider taking into account such relevant factors as it thinks fit:

Provided further that in a suit tried by the High Court, the evidence shall
ordinarily be recorded by the Commissioner unless the Court directs
otherwise.

(3) The Court or the Commissioner, as the case may be, shall record
evidence either in writing or mechanically in the presence of the Judge or of
the Commissioner, as the case may be, and where such evidence is recorded by
the Commissioner he shall return such evidence together with his report in
writing signed by him to the Court appointing him and the evidence taken
under it shall form part of the record of the suit.

(4) The Commissioner may record such remarks as it thinks material
respecting the demeanour of any witness while under examination:

Provided that any objection raised during the recording of evidence
before the Commissioner shall be recorded by him and decided by the Court
at the stage of arguments.

(5) The report of the Commissioner shall be submitted to the Court
appointing the commission within sixty days from the date of issue of the
commission unless the Court for reasons to be recorded in writing extends the
time.

(6) The High Court or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall pre-
pare a panel of Commissioners to record the evidence under this rule.

(7) The Court may by general or special order fix the amount to be paid
as remuneration for the services of the Commissioner.

(8) The provisions of rules 16, 16A, 17 and 18 of Order XXVI, in so far as
they are applicable, shall apply to the issue, execution and return of such
commissions under this rule.”.

13, In the First Schedule, in Order XX, in rule 1, for sub-rule (/), the following sub-
rule shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment in an

open Court, either at once, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable and when the
judgment is to be pronounced on some future day, the Court shall fix a day for that
purpose, of which due notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders:

Provided that where the judgment is not pronounced at once, every endeavour

shall be made by the Court to pronounce the judgment within thirty days from the
date on which the hearing of the case was concluded but, where it is not practicable
so to do on the ground of the exceptional and extraordinary circumstances of the
case, the Court shall fix a future day for the pronouncement of the judgment, and
such day shall not ordinarily be a day beyond sixty days from the date on which the
hearing of the case was concluded, and due notice of the day so fixed shall be given
to the parties or their pleaders.”.

46 of 1999


7
14. In the First Schedule, in Order XXI,—

(a) in rule 32, in sub-rule (5), the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:—

“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the
expression "the act required to be done" covers prohibitory as well as manda-
tory injunctions.";

(6) in rule 92, in sub-rule (2),—
(i) for the words "thirty days", the words “sixty days" shall be substituted;

(ii) after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—

“Provided further that the deposit under this sub-rule may be made
within sixty days in all such cases where the period of thirty days, within
which the deposit had to be made, has not expired before the commence-
ment of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2000.".

15. In the First Schedule, in Order XXXIX,—
(a) in rule 2, sub-rule (2) shall be omitted;
(0) after rule 2A, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:—

"2B. The Court may by order grant injunction under rule 1 or rule 2, as
the case may be, on such terms as to the duration of the injunction, keeping an
account, giving security, or otherwise, as the Court thinks fit.”.

46 of 1999 16. In the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act 1999,—
(a) section 30 shall be omitted;
(b) in section 32 in sub-section (2),—
(i) clauses (g) and (A) shall be omitted;
(ii) for clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(j) the provisions of rules 1, 2, 6, 7,9, 9A, 19A, 21, 24 and 25 of
Order V of the First Schedule as amended or, as the case may be,
substituted or omitted by section 15 of this Act, and by section 6 of the
Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2000, shall not apply to in
respect of any proceedings pending before the commencement of section
15 of this Act and section 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Act, 2000;";

(iii) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —
"(&) the provisions of rules 9, 11, 14, 15 and 18 of Order VII of the

First Schedule as amended or, as the case may be, substituted or omitted”

by section 17 of this Act and by section 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2000, shall not apply to in respect of any proceed-
ings pending before the commencement of section 17 of this Act and
section 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2000;";

(iv) for clause (J), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(D the provisions of rules 1, 1A, 8A, 9 and 10 of Order VIII of the
First Schedule as substituted or, as the case may be, inserted or omitted
by section 18 of this Act and by section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2000, shall not apply to a written statement filed and
presented before the commencement of section 18 of this Act and section
9 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2000;";

Amendment of
Order XXI.

Amendment of
Order XXXIX

Conditions
for grant of
inyunction.

Amendment of
the Code of
Civil Procedure
(Amendment)
Act, 1999,


Repeal and
savings.

8
(v) for clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(q) the provisions of rules 4 and 5 of Order XIV of the First
Schedule as amended or, as the case may be, substituted by section 24
of this Act and section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment)
Act, 2000, shall not affect any order made by the Court adjourning the
framing of the issues and amending and striking out issues before the
commencement of section 24 of this Act and section 11 of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2000;";

(vi) clause (४) shall be omitted.

17. (1) Any amendment made, or any provision inserted in the principal Act by a
State Legislature or High Court before the commencement of this Act shall, except in so far
as such amendment or provisions are consistent with the principal Act as amended by this
Act, stand repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding that the provisions of this Act have come into force or repeal
under sub-section (/) has taken effect, and without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897,—

(a) the provisions of section 102 of the principal Act as substituted by section
5 of this Act, shall not apply to or affect any appeal which had been admitted
before the commencement of section 5; and every such appeal shall be disposed of
as if section 5 had not come into force;

(b) the provisions of rules 5, 15, 17 and 18 of Order VI of the First Schedule as
omitted or, as the case may be, inserted or substituted by section 16 of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999 and by section 7 of this Act shall not apply
to in respect of any pleading filed before the commencement of section 16 of the
Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999 and section 7 of this Act;

(c) the provisions of rule 1 of Order XX of the First Schedule as amended by
section 13 of this Act shall not apply to a case where the hearing of the case had
concluded before the commencement of section 13 of this Act;

(d) the provisions of sub-rule (2) of rule 2 and rule 2A of Order XXXIX of the
First Schedule as omitted or, as the case may be, inserted by section 15 of this Act,
shall not affect any temporary injunction granted before the commencement of
section 15 of this Act.

10 of 1897.

46 of 1999.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTSAND REASONS

The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the Code contains the
law relating to the procedure in suits and civil proceedings, The Code has been amended
from time to time by various Acts of Central and State Legislatures. Recently, the Code of
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999 was enacted by Parliament with a view to cutting
short the delays at various levels. After its enactment, a large number of representations
were received both for and against its enforcement. The Law Commission of India in its
163rd Report also dealt with the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 1997 which
was enacted later on as the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999,

2. Before action could be initiated for enforcement of the said Act, the Bar Council of
India and certain local Bar Associations asked the Government to relook into certain provi-
sions which could cause hardship to the litigants. Accordingly, the provisions of the Code
of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999 and other proposals to reduce delay in the dis-
posal of civil cases were discussed with legal luminaries. The Government has further con-
sidered the matter in all its aspects after consulting the Bar Council of India and others
concerned and based on the outcome of the deliberations, it is now proposed to further
amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, consistent with the demands of fair play and
justice.

3. The proposed amendments inter alia seek to provide, that—

(a) plaintiff shall produce documents and pay requisite fee for service of sum-
mons on the defendants within seven days from the date of order by the Court for
issue of summons;

(b) the summons would be served on the defendant by the Court either by its
process servers or through private courier agencies approved by the Court. In addi-
tion to the service of summons by the Court, the plaintiff may also serve summons on
the defendant;

(c) a defendant is to file written statement within thirty days from the date of
service of summons but such date can be extended up to ninety days by the Court for
reasons to be recorded in writing;

(व) the documents may be produced by the plaintiff or by the defendant, as the
case may be, with the leave of the Court at the time of the hearing of the suit where
such documents could not be filed by the plaintiff along with the plaint or by the
defendant with his written statement. Rule 14 of Order VII of the First Schedule to the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the "Code") and rule 1A of
Order VIII after the amendments made in the year 1999 do not provide an opportunity
to the plaintiff or the defendant, as the case may be, to produce documents at the
hearing of the suit;

(e) the Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow either party to alter or
amend his pleadings only where it is satisfied that either new facts have come into
existence subsequent to the institution of a suit or the amendment is necessitated by
change in law and for this purpose rule 17 in Order VI is being restored. This rule was
omitted by clause (iii) of section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
1999;

(f) under rule 5 of Order XIV of the Code, amendment of issues or framing of
additional issues may be allowed. This rule was omitted by clause (ii) of section 24 of
the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999;

9


10

(g) in place of insertion of sub-rule (2) in rule | of Order XXXIX, a new rule 28
be added which would provide that the stipulation of furnishing security would
apply under rule | as well as under rule 2 of Order XXXIX. By section 30 of the Code
of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999, a new sub-rule (2) was inserted in rule |
of Order XXXIX so as to provide that a person seeking injunction will be required to
furnish security by the Court. This section is proposed to be omitted;

(A) time-limit for oral arguments by the parties may be fixed and with the leave
of the Court, the parties may be required to submit written arguments before
concluding the oral arguments in a case by insertions a suitable provision in Order
XVIII of the Code;

(i) the examination-in-chief of a witness shall be recorded on affidavit. The
cross-examination and re-examination of a witness in the High Courts having original
jurisdiction shall be recorded ordinarily by the Commissioner and in Courts subordi-
nate to the High Court, such evidence shall be recorded either by the Court or by the
Commissioner appointed by it. The Commissioner shall also have the power to record
the demeanour of a witness and any objection made in regard to such matter shall be
decided by the Court at the time of arguments of the case. A Commissioner is required
to submit his report within six months from the date of issue of the commission. Rule 4
of Order XVIII as amended in the year 1999 which provided for recording of evidence
(cross-examination and re-examination) of the witnesses by the Commissioners in
all cases is proposed to be substituted in this regard;

(j) the judgments are to be pronounced within definite time-frame after a case
has been heard. The general rule proposed is that a judgment is to be pronounced at
once and where it is not practicable to do so, the Court shall make an endeavour to
pronounce judgment within thirty days from the date on which hearing of the case
was concluded. Where it is not practicable for the Court to pronounce judgment
within thirty days because of exceptional and extraordinary circumstances of the
case, the Court shall fix a day for the pronouncement of judgment which shall not
ordinarily be beyond sixty days from the date on which the case was heard;

(0 appeals to division Bench of the High Courts in writs under articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution shall be restored. Section 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1999 abolished appeals against judgments of a single Judge of the
High Court in all cases;

(0 no second appeal shall lie in money suits where the value of the subject-
matter in the suit does not exceed rupees twenty-five thousand. Section 11 of the
Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999 abolished second appeal in all
cases where value of the subject-matter in the suit did not exceed rupees twenty-five
thousand;

(m) section 39, section 64 and rules 32 and 92 of Order XXI of the Code, shall
be amended on the basis of the 54th, 139th and 144th Reports of the Law Commission
of India. These amendments are clarificatory in nature.

4, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI; ARUN JAITLEY.
The 21st December, 2000.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE Cope oF (शा, Procepure, 1908
(5 of 1908)

* * * * *

64, Where an attachment has been made, any private transfer or delivery of the

property attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the judgment-debtor of
any debt, dividend or other monies contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against
all claims enforceable under the attachment. हु

* * * * *
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, claims enforceable under an attach-
ment include claims for the rateable distribution of assets.

* * * * *

100A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any Letters Patent for any High Court
or in any other instrument having the force of law or in any other law for the time being in
force,—

(a) where any appeal from an original or appellate decree or order is heard
and decided,

(b) where any writ, direction or order is issued or made on an application
under article 226 or article 227 of the Constitution,

by a single Judge of a High Court, no further appeal shall lie from the judgment, decision
or order of such single Judge.

* * * * *

102. No second appeal shall lie from any decree, whe the amount or value of the
subject-matter of the original suit does not exceed twenty-five thousand rupees.

* * * * *

ORDER V
15808 AND SERVICE OF SUMMONS
15508 oF SUMMONS

1. (1) When a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may be issucd to the defendant
to appear and answer the claim and to file the written statement of his defence, if any, on
such day within thirty days from the day of institution of the suit as may be specified
therein:

Provided that no such summons shall be issued when a defendant has appeared at
the presentation of the plaint and admitted the plaintiff's claim:

Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement on the
said day, he shall be allowed to file the same on such other day which shall not be beyond
thirty days from the date of service of summons on the defendant, as the court may think
fit.

* * * * *

9. (1) The court shall issue summons and deliver the same to the plaintiff or his
agent, for service, and direct the summons to be served by registered post acknowledg-
ment due or by speed post or by such courier service as may be approved by the High

11

Private
alwenation of
property after
attachment to
be void.

No further ap-
peal in certain
cases,

No second ap-
peal in cortain
cases.

Summons.

Delivery of
summons to
the plaintiff
or his agent.


Simultaneous
issue of
summons for
service by
the court
controlled
process.

Amendment
of pleadings

Failure to
amend after or-
der.

12

Court or by fax message or by Electronic Mail Service or by such other means as the High
Court may prescribe by rules, addressed to the defendant to accept the service at the place
where the defendant or his agent actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or
personally works for gain.

(2) The plaintiff or his agent shall send the summons by any means as directed by
the court under sub-rule (/) within two days from the delivery of summons to the plaintiff
by the court under that sub-rule.

(3) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the
defendant or his agent received by the court or postal article containing the summons 1s
received back by the court with an endorsement purporting to have been made by a
postal employee or by any authorised person to the effect that the defendant or his agent
had refused to take delivery of the postal article containing the summons or refused to
accept the summons by any other means specified in sub-rule (1), when tendered or trans-
mitted to him the court issuing the summons shall declare that the summons had been duly
served on the defendant:

Provided that summons was properly addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by regis-
tered post acknowledgment due, the declaration referred to in this sub-rule shall be made
notwithstanding the fact that the acknowledgment having been lost or misled or for any
other reasons has not been received by the court on the date fixed by it.

9A. (1) The court may, in addition to, and simultaneously with the delivery of
summons for service to the plaintiff as provided in the manner provided in rule 9, may
also direct that summons to be served on the defendant or his agent empowered to accept
the service at the place where the defendant or his agent actually and voluntarily resides
or carries on business or personally works for gain.

(2) The summons shall, unless the court otherwise direct, be delivered or sent to
the proper officer in such manner as may be prescribed by the High Court to be served by
him or one of his subordinates.

(3) The proper officer may be an officer of the court other than that in which the
suit is instituted, and where he is such an officer, the summons may be sent to him in such
manner as the court may direct.

(4) The proper officer may serve the summons by registered post acknowledgment
due, by speed post, by such courier service as may be approved by the High Court, by fax
message, by Electronic Mail Service or by such other means as may be provided by the
rules made by the High Court.

* * oo * *
ORDER VI
PLEADINGS GENERALLY
* * * * *

17. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow either party to alter or
amend his pleadings in such manner and on such terms as may be just, and all such
amendments shall be made as may be necessary for the purpose of determining the real
questions in controversy between the parties.

18. Ifa party who has obtained an order for leave to amend does not amend accordingly
within the time limited for that purpose by the order, or if no time is thereby limited then
with fourteen days from the date of the order, he shall not be permitted to amend after the
expiration of such limited time as aforesaid or of such fourteen days, as the case may be,
unless the time is extended by the Court.


13
ORDERVII

Piaine

* * * * *

9 (1) Where the plaint is admitted, the court shall give to the plaintiff summons in
the name of all the defendants to be served upon or get served in the manner provided
under Order V

(2) Within two days of the receipt of summons under sub-rule (/), the plainuff shall
send or cause to send the summons to the defendants along with the copy of the plaint in the
manner provided under Order V

(3) Where the court orders that the summons be served on the defendants in the
manner provided in rule 9A of Order V, it will direct the plaintiff to present as many copies
of the plaint on plain paper as there are defendants within two days from the date of such
order along with requisite fee for service of summons on the defendants

* * * * *
11 The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases —
* * * * *

oad (f) where the paintift fails to comply sub-rule (2) of rule 9,
(g) where the plaintift fails to comply sub-rule (3) of rule 9

* * * * *

Documents relied on in plant
14 (7) * * * * *
(3) Where a document or a copy thereof 1s not filed with the plaint under this rule, it
shall not be allowed to be received in evidence on behalf of the plainuff at the hearing of
the suit

* * * * *

18 (/) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the plaintiff when the
plaint 1s presented, or to be entered in the list to be added or annexed to the plaint, and
which ts not produced or entered accordingly, shall not, without the leave of the Court, be
received in evidence on his behalf at the heartng of the suit

(2) Nothing in this rule applies to documents produced for cross-examination of the
defendant's witnesses, or in answer to any case set up by the defendant or handed to a
witness merely to refresh his memory

ORDER VIII
Written STATEMENT, SET-OrF AND COUNTER-CLAIM

1 The defendant shall at or before the first hearing or within such time as the Court
may permit, which shall not be beyond thirty days from the date of service of summons on
the defendant, present a written statement of his defence

1A * * * * *
(3) Where a document or a copy thereof ts not filed with the written statement under

this rule, it shall not be allowed to be received in evidence on behalf of the defendant at the
hearing of the suit

* * * * *

Procedure on
admitting
plant

Rejection of
plaint

Production of
document on
which plaintiff
sues or relies

Inadmissibility
of document
not produced
when plaint
filed

Written
statement

Duty of de-
tendant to pro-
duce docu
ments upon
which reliet 1s
claimed or re
lied upon by
hum


Subsequent
pleadings.

Procedure
when party
fails to
present
written
statement
called for by
Court.

Dismissal of
suit where
summons not
served by the
plaintiff or his
agent or in
consequences
of failure to
pay cost.

Power to
amend, and
stirke out, is-
sues,

Recording of
evidence by
Commissioner.

14

9. No pleading subsequent to the written statement of a defendant other than by way
of defence to a set-off (or counter-claim) shall be presented except by the leave of the Court
and upon such terms as the Court thinks fit, but the Court may at any time require a written
statement or additional written statement from any of the parties and fix a time for
presenting the same.

10. Where any party from whom a written statement is required under rule 1 or rule 9
fails to present the same within the time permitted or fixed by the Court, as the case may be,
the Court shall pronounce judgment against him, or make such order in relation to the suit
as it thinks fit and on the pronouncement of such judgment, a decree shall be drawn up.

* * * * *

ORDER IX

APPEARANCE OF PARTIES AND CONSEQUENCE OF Non-APPEARANCE

* * * * *

2. Where on the day so fixed it is found that the summons has not been sent within
stipulated period of two days, to the defendant by the plaintiff or his agent or in conse-
quence of their failure to pay the court-fee or any charges, if any chargeable for such
service, the Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed:

Provided that no such order shall be made if, notwithstanding such failure, the defen-
dant attends in person or by agent when he is allowed to appear by agent on the day fixed
for him to appear and answer.

ORDER XIV
‘SETTLEMENT OF ISSUES AND DETERMINATION OF Surt ON ISSUES OF LAW OR ON ISSUES AGREED UPON
* * * * *

5. (1) The Court may at any time before passing a decree. amend the issues or frame
additional issues on such terms as it thinks fit, and all such amendments or additional issues
as may be necessary for determining the matters in controversy between the parties shall be
so made or framed.

(2) The Court may also, at any time before passing a decree, strike out any issues that
appear to it to be wrongly framed or introduced.

* * * * *

ORDER XVI

HEARING OF THE SUIT AND EXPLANATION OF WITNESSES

* * * * *

4. (1) In every case, the evidence of a witness of his examination-in-chief shall be
given by affidavit and copies thereof shall be supplied to the opposite party by the party
who calls him for evidence.

(2) The evidence (cross-examination and re-examination) of the witness in attendance,
whose evidence (examination-in-chief) by affidavit has been furnished to the Court shall
be taken orally by a Commissioner to be appointed by the Court from amongst the panel of
Commissioners prepared for this purpose on the same day:

Provided that, in the interest of justice and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the
court may direct that the evidence of any witness shall be recorded by the Court in the
presence and under the personal direction and superintendence of the judge.

(3) The Commissioner shall be paid such sum of recording of evidence as may be
prescribed by the High Court.


15

(4) The amount payable to the Commissioner under sub-rule (3) shall be paid by the
Court or by the parties summoning the witness as may be prescribed by the High Court.

(5) The District Judge shall prepare a panel of Commissioners to record the evidence
under this rule.

(6) The Commissioner shall record evidence either in writing or mechanically in his
presence and shall make a memorandum which shall be signed by him and the witnesses
and submit the same to-the Court appointing such Commissioner.

(7) Where any question put to a witness is objected by a party or his pleader and the
Commissioner allows the same to be put, the Commissioner shall take down the question
together with his decision.

* * * * *

ORDER XX
JUDGMENT AND DECREE

1. (7) The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment in open
Court, either at once or as soon the thereafter as may be practicable, on some future day; and
when the judgment is to be pronounced on some future day, the Court shall fix a day for that
purpose, of which due notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders:

Provided that where the judgment is not prononuced at once, every endeavour shall
be made by the Court to pronounce the judgment within fifteen days from the date on
which the hearing of the case was concluded but, where it is not practicable so to do, the
Court shall fix a future day for the pronouncement of the judgment, and such day shall not
ordinarily be a day beyond thirty days from the date on which the hearing of the case was
concluded, and due notice of the day so fixed shall be given to the parties or their pleaders:

Provided further that, where a judgment is not pronounced within thirty days from
the date on which the hearing of the case was concluded, the Court shall record the reasons
for such delay and shall fix a future day on which the judgment will be pronounced and
due notice of the day so fixed shall be given to the parties or their pleaders.

* * * * *

ORDER XXI

EXECUTION OF DECREES AND ORDERS

* * * * *

32. (1) Where the party against whom a decree for the specific performance of a
contract, or for restitution of conjugal rights, or for an injunction, has been passed, has had
an opportunity of obeying the decree and has wilfully failed to obey it, the decree may be
enforced in the case of a decree for restitution of conjungal rights by the attachment of his
property or, in the case of a decree for the specific performance of a contract, or for an
injunction by his detention in the civil prison, or by the attachment of his property, or by
both.

(2) Where the party against whom a decree for specific performance or for an injunction
has been passed is a corporation, the decree may be enforced by the attachment of the
property of the corporation or, with the leave of the Court, by the detention in the civil
prison of the directors or other principal officers thereof, or by both attachment and detention.

(3) Where any attachment under sub-rule (/) or sub-rule (2) has remained in force for
six months if the judgment-debtor has not obeyed the decree and the decree-holder has
applied to have the attached property sold, such property may be sold; and out of the
proceeds the Court may award to the decree-holder such compensation as it thinks fit, and
shall pay the balance (if any) to the judgment-debtor on his application.

Judgment
when
pronounced.

Decree for
specific
performance
for restitution
of conjugal
rights or for
an injunction,


Sale when to
become

absolute or
be set aside

Injunction to
restran
repetition
or continu-
ance of
breach

Amendment
of Order
XXXIX

16

(4) Where the judgment-debtor has obeyed the decree and paid all cost of executing
the same which he is bound to pay, or where, at the end of six months from the date of the
attachment, no application to have the property sold has been made, or if made has been
refused, the attachment shall cease.

(5) Where a decree for the specific performance of a contract or for an injunction has
not been obeyed, the Court may, in lieu of or in addition to all or any of the processes
aforesaid, direct that the act required to be done may be done so far as practicable by the
decree-holder or some other person appointed by the Court, at the cost of the judgment-
debtor, and upon the act being done the expenses incurred may be ascertained in such
manner as the Court may direct and may be recovered as if they were included in the
decree.

Illustration

A, a person of little substance, erects a building which renders uninhabitable a
family mansion belonging to B. A, in spite of his detention in prison and the attachment
‘of his propoerty, declines to obey a decree obtained against him by B and directing him
to remove the building The Court 1s of opinion that no sum realizable by the sale of A's
property would adequately compensate B for the depreciation in the value of his mansion
B may apply to the Court to remove the building and may recover the cost of such
removal from A in the execution-proceedings

* * * * *
92. (1) * * * * *

(2) Where such application is made and allowed, and where, in the case of an appli-
cation under rule 89, the deposit required by that rule is made within thirty days from the
date of sale, or in cases where the amount deposited under rule 89 is found to be deficient
owing to any clerical or arithmetical mistake on the part of the depositor and such deficiency
has been made good within such time as may be fixed by the Court, the Court shall made
an order setting aside the sale:

Provided that no order shall be made unless notice of the application has been given
to all persons affected thereby.

* * * * *
ORDER XXXIX
TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS

Temporary Injunctions

* * * * *

2. (1) * * * * *

(2) The Court may by order grant such injunction, on such terms as to the duration of
the injunction, keeping an account, giving security, or otherwise, as the Court thinks fit.

* * * * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE Cope oF CiviL PRocEDURE (AMENDMENT) Act, 1999
(46 oF 1999)

* * * * *

30. In the first Schedule, in Order XXXIX, rule | shall be renumbered as sub-rule (/)
of that rule and after sub-rule (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-rule shall be inserted,
namely:—

"(2) The court shall, while granting a temporary injunction to restrain such act
or to make such other order for the purposes of staying and preventing the wasting,


10 of 1897.

17

damaging alienation, sale, removal or disposition of Property or dispossession of the
plaintiff, or otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff in relation to any property under
disposition in the suit under sub-rule (J), direct the plaintiff to give security or
otherwise as the court think fit.".

* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
Repeal and Savings
32, (7) * * * * *

(2) Notwithstanding that the provisions of this Act have come into force or repeal

under sub-section (1) has taken effect, and without prejudice to the generality of the provi-
sions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897,—

* * % * *

(g) the provisions of section 100A of the principal Act, as substituted by section
10 of this Act, shall not apply to or affect any appeal against the decision of a single
Judge of a High Court under article 226 or article 227 of the Constitution which had
been admitted before the commencement of section 10; and every such admitted
appeal shall be disposed of as if section 10 had not come into force;

(h) the provisions of section 102 of the principal Act, as substituted by section
11 of this Act, shall not apply to or affect any appeal which had been admitted
before the commencement of section 11; and every such appeal shall be disposed of
as if section 11 had not come into force;

* * * * *

(/) the provisions of rules 1, 2, 6, 7,9, 9A, 19A, 21, 24 and25 of OrderV of the
First Schedule as amended or, as the case may be, inserted or omitted by section 15
of the this Act shall not apply to any summons issued immediately before the
commencement of section 15;

(k) the provisions of rules 9, 11, 14, 15 and 18 of Order शा of the First
Schedule, as amended or, as the case may be, substitued or amended by section 17 of
this Act, shall not apply to in respect of any proceedings pending before the
commencement of section 17;

(i the provisions of rules 1 and 1A of Order VITI of the First Schedule, as
substituted or inserted by section 18 of this Act, shall not apply to a written statement
filed and presented before the court immediately before the commencement of sec-
tion 18;

* * * * *

(व) the provisions of rules 4 and 5 of Order XIV of the First Schedule, as amended
and omitted by section 24 of this Act, shall not affect any order made by the court
adjourning the framing of the issues and amending and striking out issues before the
commencement of section 24 of this Act;

(w) in sub-rule (2) of rule 1 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule, as inserted by
section 30 of this Act, shall not affect any temporary injunction granted before the
commencement of section 30 of this Act;

* * * *

*

Repeal
savings

and


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and to provide for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MRND--5887RS—21.12.2000.