1
Bill No. LXXXI of 2022
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 2 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009,
(hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), after clause (g), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(gg) 'learning outcomes' means assessment standards indicating the expected
level of learning that children should achieve for each class."
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
5
10
35 of 2009.

2
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, after clause ( i), the following clause shall be
inserted namely:—
"(j) ensure yearly evaluation of 'Learning outcomes' of each class and subject
as required."
4. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words "other than a school
established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government or the local authority"
shall be omitted.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section 18.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 was enacted with
the good intention of providing free and compulsory education to the children of India.
However, it suffers from a flaw that undermine its purpose. The exemption of schools
established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government or the local authority from
the recognition criteria under section 18 of  the Act, leaves many schools out of the
requirements necessary for quality education. There is a need for amendment in the Act to
ensure quality education in all the schools.
2. Secondly, in evaluating the performance of schools, apart from the "inputs" the
addition of evaluation of learning outcomes can be a tool for significantly improving the
quality of learning. The principal Act is completely silent on learning outcomes. The current
Bill provides for the right to quality education while ensuring quality learning outcomes.
Hence, this Bill.
DEREK  O' BRIEN.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE R IGHT OF C HILDREN TO F REE AND C OMPULSORY E DUCA TION ACT, 2009
(ACT NO. 35 OF 2009)
* * * * *
18. (1) No school, other than a school established, owned or controlled by the
appropriate Government or the local authority, shall, after the commencement of  this Act, be
established or function, without obtaining a certificate of recognition from such authority,
by making an application in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
No School to
be established
without
obtaining
certificate of
recognition.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Shri Derek O' Brien, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1795RS(S3)—12.12.2022.