AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LXXXVII of 2024 
THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the National Food Security Act, 2013. 
        BE it enacted  by Parliament  in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:
  
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the National Food Security (Amendment) Act,
2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
10 
2. In section 2 of the National Food Security Act, 2013  in clause (5), the
following shall be substituted, namely: —
―(5) ―foodgrains‖ means millets, rice, wheat or coarse grains or any 
combination thereof conforming to such quality norms as may be 
determined, by order, by the Central Government from time to 
time.‖ 
Amendment of 
section 2. 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
  Under the National Food Security Act, 2013  (NFSA), the term 
―foodgrains‖ is defined as rice, wheat or coarse grains or any combination 
thereof conforming to such quality norms as may be determined, by order, 
by the Central Government from time t o time. There is no specific 
provision for millets, such as, bajra, jowar, maize, ragi etc. as they have 
not been defined under ―foodgrains‖  in the Act. However, to improve the 
level of nutrition among st the beneficiaries covered under the NFSA, all 
the States and Union territories have been requested to procure millets and 
distribute for NFSA beneficiaries as per local consumption preferences 
and as per the guidelines issued by the Government from time to time. The 
United Nations, on India‘s initiative, ha s declared the year 2023 as the 
International Year of Millets. 
 Recognizing the nutritional value of millets and the fact that 
consumption of millets can significantly improve key nutrition parameters 
among children and women in rural and urban ar eas, the Government of 
India has created a sub -mission under the National Food Security Mission 
to encourage millet cultivation and its inclusion in Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS). Now, millets are already a part of the TPDS. 
The procurement, s torage, and distribution of coarse grains by the States 
and Union territories  is done under  the Decentralized Procurement (DCP) 
system. 
         The word ‗millets‘ is used to describe small -grained cereals like 
sorghum (jowar), pearl millet (bajra), foxtai l millet (kangni/ Italian millet), 
little millet (kutki), kodo millet, finger millet (ragi/ mandua), proso millet 
(cheena/ common millet), barnyard millet (sawa/ sanwa/ jhangora), and 
brown top millet (korale). Millets were among the first crops to be 
domesticated. There is evidence for consumption of millets by the Indus 
valley people (3,000 BC), and several varieties that are now grown around 
the world were first cultivated in India. West Africa, China, and Japan are 
home to indigenous varieties of the crop.  
 Millets can help combat health challenges such as obesity, diabetes 
and lifestyle problems as they are gluten -free, have a low glycemic index 
and are high in dietary fiber and antioxidants .  D istribution of millets or 
coarse grains, such as,  jowar, bajra and ragi in addition to rice and wheat 
under the National Food Security Act  and other social welfare schemes 
including Integrated Child Development Services and Pradhan Mantri 
Poshan Shakti Nirmal (PM -Poshan) is, therefore, required to ensure 
overall health and development of the citizens of the country . The Bill 
accordingly, seeks to amend the National Food Security Act , 2013  to 
include millets as a foodgrain to ensure targeted distribution and improve 
nutritional status. 
 Hence, the Bill. 
 IRANNA KADADI. 

3 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY ACT, 2013 
(20 OF 2013) 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
* *  * *   * 
(5) "foodgrains" means rice, wheat or coarse grains or any combination thereof
conforming to such quality norms as may be determine d, by order, by the Central
Government from time to time;
* *  * *  * 
 Definitions. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the National Food Security Act, 2013. 
_____________ 
(Shri Iranna Kadadi, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–269–08.12.2025