THE DESTITUTE AND NEGLECTED WOMEN (WELFARE) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the maintenance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for
the destitute, neglected, old, infirm or physically challenged widow, divorcee or
unmarried women through establishment of an Authority and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute and Neglected Women (Welfare) Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “authority” means the Destitute and Neglected Women Welfare Authority
established under Section 3;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011
Bill No. LXXX of  2010
Definitions.
5
10

2
(c) “destitute” in relation to a women who may be a widow, divorcee or unmarried
means a women who has no relative or kinsmen to support her or who has no independent
and adequate source of livelihood including the livelihood to her minor children
dependent on her or any women stricken with infirmity owing to old age, physical
deformity, ailment, mental imbalance and who lives uncared for;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “widow” means an adult female human being whose husband has died after
her legal marriage.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish the Destitute and Neglected Women Welfare Authority for the purposes
of this Act;
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued;
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Chandigarh in the State of Punjab and
the Authority shall establish its branches in all the States and Union Territories at such
conspicuous places as may be prescribed; and
(4) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and employees,
with such terms and conditions of service as may be necessary for the efficient functioning
of the Authority as may be prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) the Minister of Women and Child Development of the Union Council of
Ministers who shall be ex-offico Chairperson of the Board;
(b) a Deputy-Chairperson preferably a woman with such qualifications as may
be prescribed to be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) five women members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the Lok
Sabha and two from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding
Officers of each House;
(d) three members representing the Union Ministry of Human Resource
Development and Social Justice and Empowerment to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(e) not more than five members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Governments of States, by rotation in alphabetical order, to
represent the Governments of the States; and
(f) four members to be appointed by Central Government from amongst the
Non-Governmental Organizations working for destitute women or neglected women.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to promote by such measures, as it thinks fit
or appropriate, welfare measures for destitute or neglected women or widows of the country.
(2) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the Authority
shall,—
(a) maintain district-wise register of destitute or neglected women or widows
who are in need of assistance from the Authority with such details and in such manner
as may be prescribed;
(b) work out plans and formulate schemes for the welfare of destitute or neglected
women or widows covered under this Act;
(c) give wide publicity through the electronic and print media about the welfare
measures being undertaken by the Authority; and
Establishment
of Destitute
and Neglected
Women
Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(d) perform such other functions not inconsistend with the provisions of this
Act, as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government from time to time.
5. The appropriate Government shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, provide
the women covered under this Act, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) monthly allowance of two thousand five rupees, if the woman is having any
dependent children and rupees one thousand five hundred in case she has no
dependent child as subsistence allowance;
(b) free medical aid and legal aid;
(c) free education including technical education to dependent children;
(d) free residential accommodation wherever necessary;
(e) gainful employment after imparting vocational education; and
(f) such other facilities, as may be necessary, for her rehabilitation, proper
development, and for maintaining a respectable life in the society:
Provided that if any woman covered under this Act either gets gainful employment or
remarries, all the facilities provided to her and to her dependent in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, shall be withdrawn from the date of the gainful employment or
remarriage, as the case may be.
6. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, from time to time for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being applicable to women covered under this Act.
8. The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Facilities to be
provided by
appropriate
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
Funds.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our Country, a large number of women particularly those belonging to lower and
middle income groups of the society become destitute after the death of their husbands.
Divorced women or unmarried women too are either neglected by their families or have no
means to support them. In many cases, the widows are thrown out of the households. Many
of them work as housemaids for their survival and to support their children. But even this is
not possible for the infirm, old, physically or mentally challenged women and so they lead a
miserable life and very often subsist on alms, which they get from begging. Sometimes they
are forced into flesh trade and become sex workers to avoid starvation, which makes their
lives disgraceful. The position of destitute women is more dreadful in rural areas, as being
illiterate, they subjected to exploitation. It is expedient to stop the exploitation of the destitute,
neglected women or widows in a welfare State like India and provide financial assistance and
other essential facilities to such women so that they live honourably in the society. For this
reason, a Destitute and Neglected Women Welfare Authority should be set up to ensure that
the conditons of destitute, neglected women or widows should not become so miserable as
may enable the unscrupulous elements of the society to exploit the situation.
Hence this Bill.
A VTAR SINGH KARIMPURI

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Destitute and Neglected
Women Welfare Authority. Clause 5 provides for certain facilities to the destitute and neglected
women. Clause 6 lays down that Central Government shall provide requisite funds. The Bill,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum. Non
recurring expenditure to the tune of one hundred crore may also involve.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—6690RS(S3)—28.02.2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the maintenance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the
destitute, neglected, old, infirm or physically challenged widow, divorcee or
unmarried women through establishment of an Authority and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri, M.P.)