1
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred as Code),
sub-section (a) shall be renumbered as (aaa) and before sub-section (aaa), so renumbered,
the following shall be inserted, namely:—
"(a) 'anticipatory bail' means a bail that a person seeks in anticipation of an arrest
for an accusation under an offence that is non-bailable.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXXIV of 2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
Amendment of
section 2.
5
10

2
(aa) 'bail' means a surety bond that includes a personal bond from the accused
for his release by the Court, the police or the Investigating Agency which is a conditional
release based on the suspect's solemn undertaking to co-operate with both the
investigation and the trial."
 (2) sub-section (a) shall be renumbered as (aaa).
3. For section 265H of the Code, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) A Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this
chapter,—
(a) all the powers vested in respect of bail, trial of offences and other matters
relating to the disposal of a case in such Court under this Code; and
(b) the power to suo moto review cases under trial and make decision as to their
eligibility for plea bargaining".
4. In section 309 of the Code,—
(i) after proviso to sub-section ( 1), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided further that such adjournment or postponement of the
proceedings shall not affect the conclusion of the trial within a period of
 two months from the date of filing the charge sheet, except in cases where the
delay is reasonable for the reasons recorded thereof."
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words "and may by a warrant remand the accused
if in custody.", the words "and may release the accused on bail if the trial does not
relate to an offence under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 where the punishment for such
offence is life imprisonment or death or imprisonment exceeds seven years, or remand
the accused to further custody, for the reasons to be recorded in writing." shall be
inserted.
(iii) in sub-section ( 2), for the third proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Provided also that, the Court if deems it necessary in the interests of
justice, may adjourn the proceedings for the purpose of enabling the accused
person to show cause against the sentence proposed to be imposed on him, for
such time as it considers reasonable and for the reasons to be recorded in
writing".
5. In section 358 of the Code,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Whenever any person causes a police officer to arrest another person,
if it appears to the Magistrate by whom the case is heard that there was no
sufficient ground for causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such
compensation, to be paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so
arrested, for his loss of time and expenses in the matter, and the damages incurred,
including but not limited to financial losses as the Magistrate thinks fit".
(ii) in sub-section (2), the words, "not exceeding one thousand rupees", shall be
omitted.
(iii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) All compensation awarded under this section may be recovered as if
it were a fine, and, if it cannot be so recovered, the person by whom it is payable
Amendment
of Section
265H.
Power of the
Court in plea
bargaining.
Amendment
of section
309.
Amendment
of section
358.
45 of 1860
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
shall be sentenced to simple imprisonment for such term as the Magistrate
directs, unless such sum is sooner paid after taking into consideration the factors,
including but not limited to, the gravity of the offence the person so arrested is
charged with, and the extent of the damages incurred in the matter, including but
not limited to financial losses".
6. After section 358 of the Code, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:—
"358A. In section 436A of this Code, where the undertrial prisoner is detained
beyond the maximum period prescribed, the Magistrate may award such compensation,
as the Magistrate thinks fit in the interests of justice, after taking into consideration
the factors including but not limited to, the cause for delay, extent of the delay, and the
damages incurred by the reason of such delay including but not limited to financial
losses".
7. In section 436 of the Code, after sub-section ( 1), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
 "Provided that the officer-in-charge or the Court, shall decide the bail application
within fourteen days from the first day of receiving such application."
8. After section 436A of the Code, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:—
"436B. A Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under
this chapter, the power to suo moto review cases undertrial and make decision as to
their eligibility for bail".
9. In section 437 of the Code,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after sub-clause ( ii), the following sub-clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
 "(iii) such person shall not be so released if on such release he may
directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or promise to any person
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such
facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the evidence, or there
appear reasonable grounds to believe that the presence of such person required
for producing before the Court cannot be assured",
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
 "( 4) An officer or a Court not releasing any person on bail under
 sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall record in writing his or its reasons for
not doing so."
 ( iii) for sub-section ( 5), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
 "(5) Any Court which has released a person on bail under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2), may, if it considers it necessary so to do, direct that
such person be arrested and commit him to custody for the reasons to be
recorded in writing."
10. In section 438 of the Code, in sub-section (2), for clause (ii), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
 "( ii) the existence of reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant may
directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted
with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the court
or to any police officer or tamper with the evidence".
Insertion of
new section
358A.
Compensation
to undertrial
prisoners
detained
beyond the
maximum
prescribed
period.
Amendment
of section
436.
Insertion of
section 436B.
Power to take
suo moto
cognizance of
undertrial
prisoners.
Amendment
of section
437.
Amendment
of section
438.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
S3\F\BILL 2022\RS\1603RS THE CODE OF CRIMINAL
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND   REASONS
The Code of Criminal Procedure does not define the words 'Bail' and 'Anticipatory
Bail', and only categorizes the offence into bailable or non-bailable. While Code of Criminal
Procedure provides for the grant of bail as a right in bailable offences after furnishing of
bond with surety; in case of indigence, the officer in-charge or the Magistrate may, if deems
fit, provide bail without surety; and in case of cognizable offences the grant of bail is subject
to Magistrate's discretion.
2. There are reports of overcrowding in jails, in which two thirds of the prisoners are
undertrials and of these undertrials, the substantial number is of those who are arrested in
non-cognizable offence. The practice of indiscriminate arrests defeats the purpose of 'bail,
not jail', wherein bail is a rule and jail is an exception, as also reiterated in several judgments
of the Supreme Court, the latest being Satender Kumar Antil v/s CBI (CRL. No. 5191 of 2021).
The arrests shall be necessitated instead of being mandatory, and only where there is a
reasonable ground to believe that the accused will not appear before the Court at the stipulated
time and place, or there is a reasonable ground to believe that the accused may if not arrested
can tamper with the potential witnesses or evidence, then the accused may be so detained.
The condition of jails with majority of undertrials in non-cognizable offences frustrates the
spirit of liberty as a fundamental right enshrined in the constitution.
3. It is with this objective that the proposed Bill is presented to redefine a procedural
framework with regard to the bail provisions. The aim is to reduce the population of undertrials
in the jails whose arrests are not necessitated, the speedy disposal of bail applications so as
to bring in certainty, and narrow down the scope of discretionary power that exists with the
judiciary in deciding on bail applications.
Hence, this Bill.
SUJEET KUMAR.

5
S3\F\BILL 2022\RS\1603RS THE CODE OF CRIMINAL
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(ACT NO. 2 OF 1974)
* * * * *
In this code, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bailable offence" means an offence which is sown as bailable in the First
Schedule, or which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force; and
"non-bailable offence" means any other offence;
* * * * *
265H. A Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this
Chapter, all the powers vested in respect of bail, trial of offences and other matters relating to
the disposal of a case in such Court under this Code.
* * * * *
309.  (1) In every inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be continued from day-to-day
until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the
adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded:
Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under section 376,
section 376A, section 376B,  section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA or section
376DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the inquiry or trial shall be completed
within a period of two months from the date of filing of the charge sheet.
(2)  If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement of trial, finds
it necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry or trial,
it may, from time to time, for reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such
terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable, and may by a warrant remand
the accused if in custody:
Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to custody under
this section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a time:
 Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no adjournment or
postponement shall be granted, without examining them, except for special reasons to
be recorded in writing:
Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose only of
enabling the accused person to show cause against the sentence proposed to be
imposed on him:
Provided also that—
(a) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where
the circumstances are beyond the control of that party;
(b) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall
not be a ground for adjournment; and
(c) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not
present or the party or his pleader though present in Court, is not ready to
Definitions.
Power of the
Court in plea
bargaining.
Power to
postpone or
adjourn
proceedings.

6
examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks fit, record the
statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with the
examination-in-chief or cross-examination of the witness, as the case may be.
Explanation 1.— If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise a
suspicion that the accused may have committed an offence, and it appears likely
that further evidence may be obtained by a remand, this is a reasonable cause for
a remand.
Explanation 2.—The terms on which an adjournment or postponement
may be granted include, in appropriate cases, the payment of costs by the
prosecution or the accused.
* * * * *
358.  (1) Whenever any person causes a police officer to arrest another person, if it
appears to the Magistrate by whom the case is heard that there was no sufficient ground for
causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such compensation, not exceeding one
thousand rupees, to be paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so arrested, for
his loss of time and expenses in the matter, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
(2) In such cases, if more persons than one are arrested, the Magistrate may, in like
manner, award to each of them such compensation, not exceeding one thousand rupees, as
such Magistrate thinks fit.
(3) All compensation awarded under this section may be recovered as if it were a fine,
and, if it cannot be so recovered, the person by whom it is payable shall be sentenced to
simple imprisonment for such term not exceeding thirty days as the Magistrate directs,
unless such sum is sooner paid.
* * * * *
436.  (1) When any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence is
arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or
is brought before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer or
at any stage of the proceeding before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released
on bail:
Provided that such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit,  may, and shall, if such
person is indigent and is unable to furnish surety, instead of taking bail from such
person, discharge him on his executing a bond without sureties for his appearance as
hereinafter provided.
Explanation.—Where a person is unable to give bail within a week of the date of
his arrest, it shall be a sufficient ground for the officer or the Court to presume that he
is an indigent person for the purposes of this proviso:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 116 or section 446A.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  (1), where a person has failed
to comply with the conditions of the bail-bond as regards the time and place of attendance,
the Court may refuse to release him on bail, when on a subsequent occasion in the same case
he appears before the Court or is brought in custody and any such refusal shall be without
prejudice to the powers of the Court to call upon any person bound by such bond to pay the
penalty thereof under section 446.
436A. Where a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under
this Code of an offence under any law (not being an offence for which the punishment of
death has been specified as one of the punishments under that law) undergone detention for
a period extending up to one-half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for that
offence under that law, he shall be released by the Court on his personal bond with or
without sureties:
Compensation
to persons
groundlessly
arrested.
In what cases
bail to be
taken.
Maximum
period for
which an
undertrial
prisoner can
be detained.

7
Provided that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for reasons
to be recorded by it in writing, order the continued detention of such person for a
period longer than one-half of the said period or release him on bail instead of the
personal bond with or without sureties:
Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained during
the period of investigation, inquiry or trial for more than the maximum period of
imprisonment provided for the said offence under that law.
Explanation.—In computing the period of detention under this section
for granting bail, the period of detention passed due to delay in proceeding
caused by the accused shall be excluded.
437.  (1) When any person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of any non-
bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police
station or appears or is brought before a Court other than the High Court or Court of session,
he may be released on bail, but—
(i) such person shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for
believing that he has been guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment
for life;
 (ii) such person shall not be so released if such offence is a cognizable offence
and he had been previously convicted of an offence punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for seven years or more, or he had been previously
convicted on two or more occasions of 3 a cognizable offence punishable with
imprisonment for three years or more but not less than seven years:
Provided that the Court may direct that a person referred to in clause (i) or
clause (ii) be released on bail if such person is under the age of sixteen years or
is a woman or is sick or infirm:
Provided further that the Court may also direct that a person referred to in
clause (ii) be released on bail if it is satisfied that it is just and proper so to do for
any other special reason:
Provided also that the mere fact that an accused person may be required
for being identified by witnesses during investigation shall not be sufficient
ground for refusing to grant bail if he is otherwise entitled to be released on bail
and gives an undertaking that he shall comply with such directions as may be
given by the Court:
Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been
committed by him is punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment
for seven years or more, be released on bail by the Court under this sub-section
without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Public Prosecutor.
(2) If it appears to such officer or Court at any stage of the investigation, inquiry or
trial, as the case may be, that there are not reasonable grounds for believing that the accused
has committed a non-bailable offence, but that there are sufficient grounds for further inquiry
into his guilt, the accused shall, subject to the provisions of section 446A and pending such
inquiry, be released on bail, or, at the discretion of such officer or Court, on the execution by
him of a bond without sureties for his appearance as hereinafter provided.
(3) When a person accused or suspected of the commission of an offence punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to seven years or more or of an offence under Chapter
VI, Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or abatement of, or
conspiracy or attempt to commit, any such offence, is released on bail under sub-section  (1),
the Court shall impose the conditions,—
(a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of the bond
executed under this Chapter,
When bail
may be taken
in case of
non-bailable
offence.

8
(b) that such person shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which
he is accused, or suspected, of the commission of which he is suspected, and
(c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat
or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence, and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such other conditions as it
considers necessary.
 ( 4) An officer or a Court releasing any person on bail under sub-section  (1) or
 sub-section (2), shall record in writing his or its reasons or special reasons for so doing.
(5) Any Court which has released a person on bail under sub-section  (1) or
 sub-section (2), may, if it considers it necessary so to do, direct that such person be arrested
and commit him to custody.
(6) If, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a person accused of any
 non-bailable offence is not concluded within a period of sixty days from the first date fixed
for taking evidence in the case, such person shall, if he is in custody during the whole of the
said period, be released on bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate, unless for reasons to be
recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs.
(7) If, at any time, after the conclusion of the trial of a person accused of a non-bailable
offence and before judgment is delivered, the Court is of opinion that there are reasonable
grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty of any such offence, it shall release the
accused, if he is in custody, on the execution by him of a bond without sureties for his
appearance to hear judgment delivered.
438. (1) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation
of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of
Session for a direction under this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that in the
event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail.
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under sub-section
(1), it may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular
case, as it may think fit, including—
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a
police officer as and when required;
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so
as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous
permission of the Court;
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section ( 3) of section
437, as if the bail were granted under that section.
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a
police station on such accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time
while in the custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail; and if a
Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should be issued in the
first instance against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in confirmity with the
direction of the Court under sub-section  (1).
 (4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person
on accusation of having committed an offence under sub-section ( 3) of section 376 or
section 376AB or section 376DA or section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
* * * * *
Direction for
grant of bail
to person
apprehending
arrest.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Sujeet Kumar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND— 1815RS(S3)—12-12-2022.