1
Bill No. LXXXII of  2022
Short title and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR CONTROLLING MEDICAL
INFLATION BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for Controlling Medical
Inflation in order to monitor , regulate and standardise the rising costs of
medicines, medical diagnostic tests and pathological examinations,
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Controlling Medical Inflation
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
5
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022

2
(b) “Commission” means the National Commission for Controlling the Medical
Inflation established under section 3;
(c) “diagnostic laboratory” means a place owned or run by an industrial or a
group of persons or by a private or corporate hospital where pathological tests or
investigations are conducted on the advice of a bonafide medical practitioner;
(d) “diagnostic tests” means a variety of physical examinations both invasive
and non-invasive, given by medical professionals to confirm the presence or absence
of illness or disease in patients, which may include, but not limited to,—
(i) all such pathological tests that are prescribed by qualified doctors
whether in a private clinic or a private and/or corporate hospital; and
(ii) all such scanning or imaging services, namely, x-ray, ultrasound, MRI,
or CT scan, whether done in a private clinic or a private or corporate hospital;
(e) ‘‘medical expenditure” means expenses related to necessary medical, surgical,
x-ray or dental services, including prosthetic devices, and necessary ambulance,
hospital, professional, nursing and funeral services;
(f) ‘‘medical inflation” means an increase in the average medical expenditure per
person from year to year;
(g) “medical practitioner” means a person who holds a valid registration or
licence from the Medical Council of any State or Medical Council of India or Council
for Indian Medicine or for Homeopathy set up by the Government of India or a State
Government and is thereby entitled to practice medicine within its jurisdiction, and is
acting within the scope and jurisdiction of the registration or license; and
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Controlling
Medical Inflation in the country in order to monitor, regulate and control the rising
costs of medicines, medical diagnostic tests and pathological examinations.
(2) The Commission shall consist of —
(a) Chairperson;
(b) Deputy Chairperson; and
(c) Five members
to be appointed by the President by warrant under his signature and seal from
amongst the persons having special knowledge and vast experience in the field of
public health, healthcare management, hospital and diagnostic tests industry.
(3) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and staff including
experts to the Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, members, officers, staff and experts of the
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
4. The Commission shall perform functions which shall include but not be limited to,
the following:—
(a) to monitor the rising medical expenses and out-of-pocket expenses regularly,
and take necessary steps to control the medical inflation in the country;
(b) to standardise the prices of essential medicines, medical diagnostic tests,
pathological tests and all other relevant medical and allied services across the country
in order to reduce out-of-pocket expenses;
5
10
15
20
Establishment
of a National
Commission
for
Controlling
Medical
Inflation.
25
30
35
40
Functions of
the
Commission.
45

3
(c) to determine the upper limit of the fee charged for each type of medical
procedure, test and service from time to time in consultation with the appropriate
Governments;
(d) to draft a national policy for the standardisation of medical expenses and
design an appropriate quality assurance framework for both public and private service
providers;
(e) to prepare a standard template for determining the cost of procedures
including medical diagnostic tests and pathological tests;
(f) to conduct detailed costing exercise for hospitals across the country in order
to determine average costing modalities and cost inputs under various components
so as to streamline reimbursements as well as the pricing of healthcare services;
(g) to ensure the rational prescription of drugs by each medical practitioner
with their generic names written legibly in capital letters; and
(h) to submit reports to the President regarding the activities undertaken by it
while performing the functions referred to in clauses ( a) to ( f) and containing its
recommendations, on annual basis or at such intervals as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The President shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament, all the
reports submitted to him under clause (g) of section 4 along with a memorandum explaining
the reasons for not accepting any of the recommendations made thereon.
(2) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues connected with
the State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of that
State, who shall in turn, along with an explanatory memorandum concerned with the action
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations related to the State, if any, and
reasons for not accepting any of the recommendations, cause to be laid such report before
the State legislature.
6. The Commission shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this
Act, have all the powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit and, in particular in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall consult the Commission on all policies related
to the control and monitoring of medical inflation.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law on this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Commission for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Report to be
laid before
each Houses
of the
Parliament
and State
Legislatures.
Commission
to have
powers of
Civil Court.
Appropriate
Government
to consult the
Commission.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds to the
Commission.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5 of 1908

4
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of
 two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
an overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

5
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In India, the Directive Principles of State Policy mandate the State to ensure the
health and well-being of the workers, children and general public. Apart from that, the
judicial review process has put the right to health under the purview of article 21 of the
Constitution of India. Yet, affordable health care is a distant dream for a large number of
people in the country. Every year, healthcare expenses are increasing at a very fast rate and
even the middle class cannot afford hospitalisation.
2. In the year 2021, India witnessed the highest medical inflation rate of 14 per cent
among Asian countries.  As per the official data of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, the cost of medical treatment in India went up by 7.21 per cent in April 2022.
There is an accelerating rate of increase in the price of medicines, pathological diagnosis,
hospitalisation and everything related to healthcare.   This trend is more evident after the
pandemic. A record 55 million Indians were pushed into poverty because of the high
out-of-pocket (OOP) health expenses. This is more than the population of three countries—
South Korea, Spain and Kenya. As of now, the out-of-pocket expenditure of an individual
for healthcare is 63 per cent in India. This means that whether an individual has private
health insurance or visits a Government healthcare facility for treatment, they will have to
spend a significant amount from their pocket for getting treated in the country.
3. One of the most critical reasons for the high medical inflation is the exorbitant rate
of medicines, diagnostic tests, pathological examination and cost of other allied services.
The recent Economic Surveys also state that, there are wide differences in the average
prices of medical diagnostic tests across cities. The available data reflects that a Lipid
Profile Test can cost a minimum of Rs. 90 and a maximum of Rs. 7,110 in various States.
Similarly, the cost of a 2D Echo Test varies from Rs. 500 to Rs. 5200, and Liver Function Test
costs range between Rs.100 to Rs. 2500.
4. Diagnosis tests provide vital information to make informed decisions about
treatment methods.  Hence, limited affordability and less access to quality diagnostic and
medical services are among the major challenges contributing to delayed or inappropriate
responses to disease control and patient management. The recent findings of the Household
Health Expenditure survey in India indicate that about 10 per cent of Out -of- pocket expenses
are spent on diagnostic tests. Still, there is hardly any effective mechanism to monitor,
control, regulate and standardise the price of these tests and essential drugs. Most hospitals
follow market-based pricing for tests and allied services.
5. Therefore, there is an urgent need to regulate, monitor and standardise the price
set by corporate hospitals, the differential pricing of drugs, and the functioning of
pharmaceutical companies and diagnostic laboratories. The proposed Bill seeks to attain
the objectives mentioned above through the establishment of the National Commission for
Controlling Medical Inflation in the country.
Hence, this Bill.
SANDOSH  KUMAR  P .

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National Commission for
Controlling Medical Inflation to carry out the responsibilities assigned to it. It also provides
for the appointment of a Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, members, officers, staff and
experts to the Commission. Clause 8 provides for the Central Government to provide adequate
funds for the functioning of the Commission.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India which cannot be estimated at present. Recurring expenditure is also likely to be
incurred.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for Controlling Medical
Inflation in order to monitor, regulate and standardise the rising costs of
medicines, medical diagnostic tests and pathological examinations,
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P ., M. P .)
MGIPMRND—1805RS(S3)—12-12-2022.