As Insropucen mn THE RAtys SARHA

? 11£7 1992

Bill No, LKXX of 1992

_———— + पक जनानानननक
THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-NINTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992
A

६ BILL :
further to amend the Constitution of India,

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows: —

1, (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amend- Short title
ment) Act, 1992. and com-
men-
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government cement.
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. After article 47 of the Constitution, the following article shall be Insertion of
inserted, namely:— 1 new article
ATA.
“478. The State shall endeavour to promote population control uty of the
10 and the small family norm.”, State to
7 promote
population
control
and small
कु family
norm
3. In article 51A of the Constitution, after clause (j), the following Amendment
clause shall be inserted, namely: — of article
SIA
“(k) to promote and adopt the small family norm.”.


Amendment
of article
102.

Amendment
Of article
191.

Addition of
Thirteenth
Schedule,

4. In article 102 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after sub-clause (6),

the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(dd) if he is so disqualified under the Thirteenth Schedule,”

5. In article 191 of the Constitution, in clause (1), afier sub-clause (d)

the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely: —

“(dd) if he is so disqualified under the Thirteenth Schedule;”.

6. After the Twelfth Schedule to the Constitution, the following Sche-

dule shall be added, namely: —

‘THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 102(1) and 191(1)] 10

Provisions as to disqualification on ground of violation of the small
family norm

1. Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise
requires —
(0) “Act” means the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amend- 15
ment) Act, 1992;
(b) “House” means either House of Parliament or the Legis-
lative Assembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legis-
lature of a State;

(c) “member”.means a member, whether elected or nomina- 29
ted, of a House.

2, Disqualification on ground of violation of small family notm.—
A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a
member of a House if he has more than two children:

Provided that nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to 95
any person—

(a) having more than two children on the date of commen-
cement of the Act or, as the case may be, within a period of one
year of such commencement, unless he begets an additional child
afier the said period of one year; 30

(b) having one child on the date of commencement of the
Act or, as the case may be, within a period of one year of such
commencement, if a subsequent childbirth results in the birth
of more than one child.

Explanation—For the purposes of this paragraph, a person shall 35
not cease to incur disqualification merely by reason of his giving his
child in adoption’.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

According to the 1991 Census, as on 1st March, 1991, the population of
India was 844.3 million. It is increasing by more than 17 million annually,
At the present growth rate of 2,5 per cent, media’s population may cross
‘one billion by 2000 A.D. Stabilisation of the population at the replacement
level is an overriding national priority.

2. Unchecked population growth will have. adverse implications for
our socio-economic development. ‘Enormous resources would be required
to fulfl basic needs of food, housing, education, health, etc.

3. The population explosion has to be tackled on the basis of a national
consensus with the participation of all citizens backed by strong political
comfnitment.-Elected representatives have to set an example and demons-
trate political will and commitment for population contro!. Awareness of
the population problem and willingness ‘o tackle it is an important attri-
‘buie of responsible citizenship.

4. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Directive Principles of State
Policy to provide that the State shall endeavour to promote population
contro! and the smal! ‘fam‘ly norm and io include in the Fundamental
Duties, a duty to promote and adopt tke smal! family norm. It is also
Proposed that a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
being, a member of either House of Parliament or either House of the
Legislature of a State, if he has more than two children. The proposed
amendments will, however, have prospective effect and will not apply to
any person who has more than two children on the date of commencement
of the proposed amendment or within a period of one year of such com-
™Tencement. However, if such person has another child after the said
period of one year he will incur the disqualification. Similarly, in the case
of a person having only one child on the date of commencement of the
amendment or within a period of one year of such commencement, it is
Proposed to provide that if a subsequent childbirth results in the birth
of more than one child he will not incur any disqualification. It is also
proposed to provide ‘that the mere act of giving a child in adoption will
Not enable a person to escape disqualification.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Dewar; M. L, FOTEDAR.
The 18% December, 1992, हि


ANNEXURE

ExTRAcTs FROM ‘THE CONSTITUTION oF INDIA

3 * * क्र * *
t _ PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES

514. It shal! be the duly of every citizen of India— '

* * * * *

102, (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
beirre, a member of either House of Parliament—

+ * * * *

है si. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
being, a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a
State—

Fundamental
duties.

Disquali-
fications
for
member-
ship

Disqualifica-
tions for
member-
ship.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri M, L, Fotedar, Minister of Health and Family Weljare)