AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
THE PUBLIC LIABILITY FOR NON-NUCLEAR INDUSTRIAL
MISHAP BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for stringent punishment and adequate compensation for non-nuclear
industrial mishaps in the country and for matters connected therwtih and incidental
thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) The Act may be called The Public Liability for Non-Nuclear Industrial Mishap
Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases the Central Government;
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXXIX of  2010
Definitions.
5

2
Compensation
for Non-
nuclear &
Industrial
Mishaps.
Adjudicating
procedure and
powers of
Claims
Commissioner.
Inviting
applications
for claims by
Claims
Commissioner.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(b) "claim Commissioner" means the claims Commissioner appointed under
section 3 for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims for compensations with respect
of non-nuclear and Industrial mishaps;
(c) "Fund" means Non-nuclear Industrial Mishap Fund established under
section 15.
(d) "Liability" means the liability of the State or the Central Government or both
for fixing and awarding compensation to the victims of any mishaps causing minor or
major injuries or death of the individuals.
(e) "mishap" means any incident causing injury or death of any individual due to
operational fault in the non-nuclear industry;
(f) "Non-Nuclear Industries" includes industries other than the nuclear industries,
which are covered under the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010 and the
Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991, whether Government undertakings, private or in
joint venture or an autonomous undertaking;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Whoever suffers due to Non-nuclear Industrial mishap shall be entitled to claim
compensation in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) For the purpose of adjudicating upon claims for compensation for any mishap, the
appropriate Government shall notify the mishap within a period of six months from the date
of occurrence of such mishap and appoint one or more Claims Commissioners for such areas,
as may be specified in that notification.
4. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Claims Commissioner unless
he—
(a) is, or has been, a District Judge or
(b) in the service of the appropriate Government and has held the post not below
the rank of Joint Secretary or Deputy Collector of the area or any other equivalent
post.
5. The salary and allowances, if payable to, and other terms and conditions of service,
of Claims Commissioner shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. ( 1) For the purpose of adjudication of claims under this Act, the Claims
Commissioner shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.
(2) For the purpose of holding inquiry, the Claims Commissioner may associate with
him such persons having expertise in non-nuclear industries or such other persons and in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Any person associated under sub-section (2), shall be paid such remuneration, fee
or allowance, as may be prescribed.
(4) The Claims Commissioner shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of
discharging his functions under the Act and shall have the same powers as are vested in a
Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
7. After the notification of non-nuclear mishap under sub-section (2) of section 3, the
Claim Commissioner, having jurisdiction over the area, shall cause wide publicity to be
given, in such manner as he deems fit, for inviting applications for claiming compensation
for injuries or death caused due to such mishap.
Qualification
for
appointment
as Claims
Commissioner.
Salary,
Allowances &
other terms
and
conditions of
service of the
Claims
Commissioner.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
38 of 2010.
6 of 1991.

Persons
entitled to
make
application
for Non-
nuclear and
Industrial
mishaps.
Procedure for
making
applications
before Claims
Commissioner.
Award by
Claims
Commissioner.
Limits of
Liability.
Penalties.
Offences by
Industries.
Offences by
Government
Department.
Non-nuclear
Industrial
Mishap Relief
Fund.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
8. An application for Compensation before the Claim Commissioner of Non-nuclear
and Industrial mishap shall be made by,—
(a) a person who has sustained injury; or
(b) the legal representatives of the deceased; or
(c) any agent duly authorized by such persons.
9. (1) Every application for compensation before the Claims Commissioner shall be
made in such form, containing such particulars and accompanied by such documents as may
be prescribed.
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) of section 9 shall be made within a period
of six months from the date of issue of notification.
10. On receipt of an application under sub-section (1) of section 9,—
(1) The Claims Commissioner shall, after giving notice of such application to the owner
and affording an opportunity of being heard to the parties, dispose of the applications within
a period of three months from the date of such receipt and make an award accordingly.
(2) The Claims Commissioner shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties
within a period of fifteen days from the date of pronouncing the award.
11. The maximum amount of liability with respect of Non-nuclear and Industrial
mishap which causes loss of life to a person shall be rupees ten lakh and in case of permanent
injury including immediate and long term health impact to a person shall vary from rupees
two lakh to five lakh depending upon the nature of such injury.
12. Whoever—
(a) Negligently causes loss of life or personal injury, in any mishap or
(b) contravenes any provisions of this Act and rules made under it shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto five years or with fine
which shall not be less than rupees fifty thousand but which may extend to rupees one
lakh, or with both the first offence:
Provided that if offender fails to pay the penal amount under clause (b) his term of
imprisonment shall be extended by another two years:
Provided further that if second mishap causing death or permanent injury takes place
in any non-nuclear Industry by an act of negligence of any person, the operations in
that industry shall be stopped forthwith.
13. Where a contravention under this Act has been committed by a Private sector or
Joint venture Industry, the owner, or the majority shareholding person who at the time the
offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was responsible to the conduct of
business of the industry shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
14. Where a contravention under this Act, has been committed by any Department of
the Government, the Head of that Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
15.  (1) The appropriate Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette
establish a fund to be known as Non-nuclear Industrial Mishap Relief Fund which shall be
utilized for paying in accordance with provisions of this Act relief under the award made by
Claims Commissioner.
(2) The contribution to the Fund shall be made by the Control and the state Government
in such proportions as may be prescribed from time to time.

4
(3) The appropriate Government may by notification in Official Gazette, shall specify
the authority in which the relief fund shall vest, the manner in which the fund shall be
administered and the form and manner in which money shall be drawn from relief fund.
16. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
contained herewith in any other law for time being in force on the subject and the provisions
of the Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other law for the time in force.
17. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
Overriding
effects and
savings.
Power to
make rules.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Non-nuclear industrial mishaps causing injury or danger to life in respect of person's
engaged in such sectors or industries are on the rise in the country and the affected people
are not adequately covered by relevant laws in respect of such industries, which result into
the affected individual’s or his/their family/families not getting adequate compensation or
the offender getting away with mild charges being made against him or the concerned
industry's, management. It is, therefore, need of the hour that law be passed in this regard for
stringent punishment and adequate compensation before the situation goes beyond control.
The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 was supposed to reflect post-Bhopal concerns.
Despite amendments providing for minimal insurance and interim relief, it proved to be a
damp squib. Insurance does not reflect claims. The Act is barely used. Therefore, there is a
pressing need for a law to ensure all such disasters other than nuclear ones are covered
under it and victims are paid adequate and timely compensation.
Hence, this Bill.
PRAKASH  JA V ADEKAR
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for salary, allowances, etc. payable to Claims Commissioner.
Clause 6 provides for payments to persons associated for adjudicating of claims by the
Claims Commissioner. Clause 7 provides for wide publicity to be given for inviting application
for claims. Clause 11 provides for a compensation of rupees ten lakh in case of death caused
by non-nuclear industrial mishaps in the country and compensation to injured person which
may vary from rupees two lakh to five lakh depending upon the nature of injuries. Clause 15
provides for establishment of non-nuclear Industrial Mishap Relief Fund.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve recurring as well as non-recurring expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India though it is very difficult to estimate the expenditure at this
juncture.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

GMGIPMRND—946RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for stringent punishment and adequate compensation for non-nuclear and
industrial mishaps in the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Prakash Javadekar, M.P.)