THE FARMERS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to protect the interests of farmers by providing special facilities to improve their standard
of living, removal of indebtedness, remunerative prices for their produce, increasing
the yield by improving farming practices, techniques and allied occupations, for
introducing compulsory market intervention in case of bumper crops, compulsory
insurance of crops, livestock, old age allowance and welfare measures to be
undertaken by the state and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India is as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers (Protection and Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "agricultural produce" includes wheat, paddy, coarse cereals like jowar, bajra,
millet, maize, barley, madwa, gram, pulses, sugarcane, cotton, oilseed, vegetables,
spices, jute, coconut, all types of fruits including areca nuts and such other agricultural
commodities which may be notified from time to time by the Central Government in the
Official Gazette and also includes seed as defined in the Seeds Act, 1966;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that state and in other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXXVII of 2006
SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3198RS/3198RS
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006
Definitions.
54 of 1966.
5
10

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3198RS/3198RS
22
Long term
action plan
for the
welfare of
farmers.
Facilities to
farmers.
(c) "bumper crop" means excess yield of any agriculture produce when the
return to the farmer is not reasonable as compared to its cost of production;
(d) "crop insurance" means insurance against loss of crop due to natural calamity
and also includes loss suffered by a farmer on account of bumper crop;
(e) "farmer" means a person who owns land and cultivates  or causes it to be
cultivated thereon for agricultural or horticultural purposes and includes big, middle,
small and marginal farmers as identified by the Union Planning Commission;
(f) "natural calamity" includes calamity due to drought, flood, hail, wind, cyclone,
super cyclone, Tsunami, storm, frost, winter kill, lightening, fire excessive or heavy
rains, snow, wild life, insect infestation, plant disease  and such other causes as may be
prescribed;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a long term action
plan for the protection and welfare of the farmers throughout the country and in particular for
the farmers of drought prone, coastal and other calamity prone areas and regions of the
country as may be necessary, incidental or conducive for such action plan.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions
such action plan may include—
(a) comprehensive crop and livestock insurance scheme so as to compensate
the farmer against losses due to natural calamity or on account of bumper crop;
(b) compulsory market  intervention scheme for bumper crops to procure or
arrange to procure excess crop of the farmer;
(c) interim relief to farmers affected by natural calamity;
(d) writing off loans and interest accrued on farmers if crops are affected by
natural calamity consecutively for two years;
(e) easy credit facility with nominal interest thereon through commercial and
cooperative banks;
(f) institutional mechanism for efficient marketing and export of farm produce;
and
(g) welfare schemes including old age pension scheme for farmers who have
attained the age of sixty years or more.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to,—
(a) consistently monitor the trends of production of agricultural produce right
from the beginning of every sowing season of every crop so as to estimate the likely
production, local consumption, purchases by Government agencies, surplus and such
other things;
(b) in case of bumper crops, make transportation arrangements at subsidized
rates to carry the surplus produce to identified areas of State where such produce is
likely to be consumed and make necessary marketing and yard facilities for such
bumper crop;
(c) ensure that farmer do not resort to distress sale of their agricultural produce
and compulsorily extend market intervention through appropriate agencies in case of
bumper crops;
(d) study the requirements of the farmers for promoting agriculture including
agricultural education, research and training and establish well equipped modern  Krishi
Vigyan Kendras and agricultural universities at conspicuous places in the country;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3198RS/3198RS
3
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
(e) establish agricultural farms in every block which shall ensure timely and
adequate supply of quality seeds and saplings to farmers;
(f) establish well equipped and modern veterinary hospitals in every block to
assist farmers in animal husbandry;
(g) promote agro based industries such a food processing, dairy, poultry, rearing
of animals, piggery, etc. to enhance farm income;
(h) promote the technique of group farming to encourage better farm management
and farming techniques with a view to  making agriculture economically viable;
(i) promote cultivation of vegetables, spices, floriculture, pisciculture, poultry
farming, piggery, sericulture, bee keeping, horticulture in the suitable areas for
supplementing the income of farmers;
(j) promote organic farming, use of natural manure, use of biomass for energy
production, water harvesting and conservation techniques for the benefit of farmers;
(k) provide such other facilities as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide to every farmer—
(a) free of cost medicare;
(b) free of cost, education to his children including technical, medical and
vocational;
(c) easy institutional loans to remove indebtedness due to loans from
moneylenders on exorbitant rate of interest;
(d) adequate compensation in case of loss of crop due to natural calamity, disease
or pest attack, as the case may be;
(e) adequate compensation of not less than four lakh rupees to the dependents
of a farmer in such manner as may be prescribed who takes the extreme step of committing
suicide;
(f) adequate old age pension which is sufficient to lead a dignified life; and
(g) such other protective measures as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf provide, the requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act;
7. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law as aforesaid,
the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force dealing with farmers.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Ours is predominantly an agrarian country because agriculture is the main occupation
or means of dependence of more than seventy per cent of our population. The farmers who
not only constitute majority  of our population but, in fact, are the backbone of our economy
because agriculture is the biggest  economic sector of our nation which contributes extensively
to the gross domestic product(GDP), provides employment and livelihood to the maximum
number of people. Agriculture sustains the country with food security and provides largest
share of raw material to our industrial sector. Unfortunately, this vital  sector of our economy
is badly neglected and so are the farmers  who are engaged in agriculture. As a result there
are spate of suicides being committed by poor and indebted farmers in various parts of the
country particularly in Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana,  etc. The farmers are highly exposed to the vagaries of
nature. Natural calamities like flood, drought, heavy rains, cyclones or super cyclone, Tsunami,
hail, wind, storm, frost, winter kill, lightening, fire, snow, wild life, insect infestation, plant
diseases and vagaries of weather often reduce them to a state of extreme distress. Failure to
get remunerative prices for the crops more so when bumper crops are grown and the
shortcomings and the irregularities of the state procuring agencies also add to the distress of
the poor farmers. Whenever there is a natural calamity, the state and the central governments
under ad hoc measures spend crores of rupees every year in compensating the affected
farmers but such ad hoc measures are   inadequate which fail to instill any sense of confidence
in the farmers. Therefore, the need is felt to provide adequate security and protection to the
farmers so far neglected which can be done through comprehensive crop and livestock
insurance scheme and other schemes for the protection, benefit and welfare of the helpless
farmers of the country.
Hence this Bill.
E.M. SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain facilities to be given to the farmers. Clause 5
provides for payment of certain compensations, free of cost medicare, education to children,
old age pensions etc.   to the farmers. Clause 6 makes it obligatory for the Central Government
to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
ten thousand crores may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one thousand crores may also
involve.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to protect the interests of farmers by providing special facilities to improve their standard of
living, removal of indebtedness, remunerative prices for their produce, increasing the
yield by improving farming practices, techniques and allied occupations, for introducing
compulsory market intervention in case of bumper crops, compulsory insurance of
crops, livestock, old age allowance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the
state and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4119RS(S-1)—08.12.2006.