Server-5/Bills-2004/RS/3606RS
THE  HAWKER,  VENDOR,  RICKSHAW  PULLER  AND  ROADSIDE
MECHANIC  (FREEDOM  TO  EARN  LIVELIHOOD)  BILL,  2006
A
BILL
to provide for the freedom of earning livelihood to hawkers, vendors, rickshaw pullers and
roadside mechanics and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Hawker, Vendor, Rickshaw Puller and Roadside
Mechanic (Freedom to earn livelihood) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, The Government of
the State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “hawker” means a person who sells household consumer items such as
vegetables, fruits, clothes, food items, dry fruits, etc. going from house to house and
street to street hawking on cart, cycle carrying basket or by any other mode;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definition.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
oN THE 24TH NOVEMBER, 2006
Bill No. LXXXV of 2006
5
10

2
Server-5/Bills-2004/RS/3606RS
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) “rickshaw puller” means a person who pulls a cycle rickshaw of any kind to
earn his livelihood;
(e) “roadside mechanic” includes any person who repairs cycle, cycle rickshaw,
scooter, motor cycle, car and other motorized vehicles, footwears, utensils and other
wares by the roadside or under a tree without any permanent structure built at the work
place;
(f) “vendor” means a person who sells food items, fruits, vegetables and other
small household items, from a stall or place in the open.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force the
hawkers, rickshaw pullers, roadside mechanics, vendors, and persons carrying similar other
vocations shall have complete freedom to earn their livelihood without hindrance from any
authority whatsoever including those of police and local self government bodies.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
authority of the local self Government such as, "municipality", Municipal Corporation,
Municipal Council or by whatever name called shall impound the articles, tools, carts, cycle
rickshaws, etc. belonging to the hawkers, rickshaw pullers, roadside mechanics, vendors as
the case may be.
5. For earning livelihood under the provisions of this Act:—
(a) a hawker shall not hawk any article which is injurious to health and he shall
not obstruct any public place and the flow of traffic;
(b) a rickshaw puller and roadside mechanic shall not obstruct the flow of traffic
of vehicles or pedestrians as the case may be;
(c) a vendor shall not sell anything which is injurious to health.
6. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure strict compliance of the
provisions of this Act, in a manner as may be prescribed.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
8. The Central Government may give directions to any State Government for the effective
implementation of the provisions of this Act in the State.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Complete
freedom to
earn
livelihood.
No authority
to impound
articles, tools,
etc.
Certain
conditions to
be followed by
hawkers etc.
Duty of
appropriate
Government
to ensure
compliance.
Over-riding
effect of the
Act.
Power to give
direction.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our country is facing a serious problem of the constantly increasing unemployment as
a result of the population explosion. Number of unemployed persons is rapidly increasing.
It has become immensely difficult to get Government jobs because of the policy of to  reduce
staff in various government departments. The public sector undertakings are adopting
voluntary retirement schemes and are being disinvested for privatisation. Agriculture, which
used to provide maximum employment is also facing economic recession due to unprofitable
price structure and fall in the prices of agricultural products. The Private Sector is making
more and more use of computers in its work. Thus, employment is not increasing in proportion
to the increasing population.
Self-employment therefor, seems to be the only solution to tackle unemployment. But,
it needs money which everybody does not have. Some citizens try to earn their livelihood by
pulling rickshaws or hawking or vending articles or repairing motorized vehicles, bicycles,
shoes, etc. by the roadside, but most of them are intimidated by the officials of the local
police or municipality. Either they have to bribe the police and or the officer of municipality
or their articles and other items are taken away and confiscated. Thus, they have to live in an
atmosphere of fear. They can not earn their livelihood fearlessly. Since, the Government is
unable to provide employment to these poor people, they should not be deprived of the right
to earn their livelihood. It is, therefore, felt that these poor people should have full freedom
to earn their livelihood and they should not be interfered in any way by Police or local
authorities in pursuing their profession.
Hence this Bill.
JAI  PARKASH  AGGARW AL
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the freedom of earning livelihood to hawkers, vendors, rickshaw pullers and
roadside mechanics and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3606RS(S-5)—24-11-2006.