AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. LXXXI of 2024 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India.
  BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:
  
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notificationin the Official Gazette, appoint:
         Provided that the Central Government shall appoint such date 
within three months from the date  on wh ich the Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill, 2024 receives the assent of the President. 
Short title  and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
article 243D. 
2. In article 243D of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following new
clause shall be inserted, namely:
 “(3A) At least one seat out of the total seats to be filled by direct 
election in every Panchayat shall be reserved for persons with 
disabilities and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different 
constituencies in a Panchayat: 
  Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, enhance the 
number of seats to be reserved for persons with disabilities up to a  
maximum of four percentage of  the total number of seats to be filled by 
direct election in every Panchayat.   
Explanation.– For the purpose of this clause, „persons  with disabilities‟ 
shall have the same meaning assigned to  „person with benchmark 
disability‟ as defined under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
2016.”  
5 
10 
49 of 2016. 
Amendment of 
article 243T.
3. In article 243T of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following new
clause shall be inserted, namely:
“(3A) At least one seat out of the total seats to be filled by direct 
election in every Municipality shall be reserved for persons with 
disabilities and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different 
constituencies in a Municipality: 
   Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by  law, enhance the 
number of seats  to be reserved for persons with disabilities up to a  
maximum of four percentage of  the total number of seats to be filled by 
direct election in every Municipality.   
Explanation.– For the purpose of this Article clause, „persons with 
disabilities‟ shall have the same meaning assigned to  „person with 
benchmark disability ‟ as defined under the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 2016.”  
15 
20 
25 
49 of 2016.

 
3 
 
 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
   
 
 
      
 
 
           The Election Commission of India operates under the principle of "No 
Voter Left Behind," striving to ensure comprehensive inclusion in the 
electoral process, which is celebrated as a festival in India. Despite these 
efforts, Divyangs (Persons with Disabilities) remain significantly overlooked 
in public discourse and electoral participation. Although post -colonial India 
has made great strides  in enhancing the quality of life for Divyangs, these 
improvements are still insufficient, especially regarding their inclusion in the 
electoral process, particularly so when it comes to the number of Divyangs in 
the Union and State Legislatures and Local Self Government bodies. 
According to the 2011 Census, Divyangs constitute 2.21  per cent . of the 
population, or 2.68 crore individuals. Yet, their participation in the legislative 
bodies and LSGs is not adequately addressed. 
 
          The absence of Divyang representation in the el ectoral process 
undermines the principles of representation, diversity, and inclusivity crucial 
for a well -functioning democracy. Elected representatives from the Divyang 
community can advocate for accessibility and inclusion, benefiting society as 
a whole . It is essential that Divyangs have a voice and influence in our 
democratic structures commensurate with their presence in society. Currently, 
many decisions affecting their lives are made without proper representation, 
resulting in policies that fail to address their specific needs and experiences. 
 
          As an initial step in the direction of ensuring adequate representation of 
Persons with Disabilities in electoral bodies, it is ideal to provide reservation 
for them in the Local Self Government bodies. The noble concept of „equality‟ 
enshrined in our Constitution can be achieved only with special consideration 
for the vulnerable classes like Divyangs. The Constitution already provides 
reservation for some other identified vulnerable classes, namely , Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women, in elected bodies of Local Self 
Governments. Along with these classes, the Divyangs should also be 
considered for providing reservation so as to ensure their representation in 
Panchayat and Municipal bodies. Ne w Clauses are to be incorporated in the 
Articles dealing with reservation of seats in Panchayats and Municipalities in 
Part IX and Part IXA of the Constitution respectively. 
 
 
        The Bill seeks to achieve this objective. 
 
 HARIS BEERAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
        ANNEXURE 
  EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
Reservation 
of seats. 243D. (1) Seats shall be reserved for,–– 
(a) the Scheduled Castes; and
(b) the Scheduled Tribes,
in every Panchayat and the number  of seats so reserved shall bear, as 
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be 
filled by direct election in that Panchayat as the population of the 
Scheduled Castes in that Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribes in 
that Pa nchayat area bears to the total population of that area and such 
seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a 
Panchayat. 
(2) Not less than one -third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one -third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of
the t otal number of seats to be filled by direct election in every
Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by
rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.
       * *  * *  * 
243T. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes in every Municipality and the number of seats so reserved shall 
bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of 
seats to be filled by direct election in that Municipality as the population 
of the Scheduled Castes in that Municipality area or of the Scheduled 
Tribes in that Municipality area bears to the total population  of that area 
and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a 
Municipality. 
(2) Not less than one -third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one -third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of
the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every
Municipality shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted
by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.
       * *  * * *

RAJYA SABHA 
_________ 
 A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
__________ 
(Shri Haris Beeran, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–033–10.02.2026.