1
SERVER-5/BILLS-2004/RS/4149RS
THE CHILDREN SCHOOL BAGS (LIMITATION ON WEIGHT)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for limitation on the weight of school bags, duties and responsibilities of the
schools to ensure the compliance of the limitations so imposed and to provide lockers
in schools and to issue necessary instructions for handling and carrying of school
bags by children and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Children School Bags (Limitation on Weight)
Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State the Government of that
State and in other  cases, all the Central Government;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. LXXXVI of 2006
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.

2
SERVER-5/BILLS-2004/RS/4149RS
Weight of
school bag not
to be more
than ten per
cent of body
weight.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
lockers in
school.
Schools to
issue guidelines
on school
bags.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that the weight of
the school bag to be carried by a child of particular class shall not be more than ten per cent
of the weight of the child:
Provided that there shall not be any school bag for a child studying in nursery
and Kindergarten classes.
(2) The appropriate Government, shall in consultation with the Indian Academy of
Pediatricians or such other body as may be specified by the Central Government, notify  in
the Official Gazette, the average weight of the child for a particular class for determining the
weight of the school bag.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within its territorial jurisdiction, ensure that
every school provides lockers of such size, as may be prescribed, to each student in the
school up to class eighth in order to enable him to keep his sports equipments, books and
note books in the school.
(2) The appropriate Government shall issue necessary instructions to every school authority
wherein every teacher shall have responsibility to inform the students upto class fifth  in advance
about the books and note books to be brought to school on a particular day.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every school, within its jurisdiction,
issues guidelines and instructions prescribing dimensions and the fabric for the school bag
for students upto a particular class in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall direct every school within its jurisdiction to
issue guidelines  and ensure that:—
(a) the students should use appropriate school bag with several  compartments
to balance the weight and broad padded straps for symmetrical distribution of weight
on their spine;
(b)  the students should always use both straps for carrying school bags and no
student is slinging his bag over one shoulder;
(c) the students should always keep the bag down while waiting for the school
conveyance  or in the school assembly;
(d) the students should bend at knees with back straight while lifting the school
bag.
(e) the students should be told how to pack their school bags so that heavy
items should be close to the body and not carry unwanted items to school.
6. Any school violating the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall
be liable for fine which may extend to three lakh rupees:
Provided that the appropriate Government may, if the school is recognized,
derecognize the school in case of  second or subsequent violation and rules made under
this Act.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to school bags.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this  Act.
Overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
45
50

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Small children often have been seen tottering to school with heavy backpacks. The
results of this excessive weight is more serious than ever expected. Some children may
develop a permanent stoop due to the heavy pressure on their spinal cord, which would lead
to permanent damage to their physical structure and back muscles.
It is a medically proven fact that lifting heavy burdens for a  long time or distance is not
good for anyone, especially children. In the tender age, bones are delicate and excessive
weight can misalign the spine leading to offensive skeletal and muscle maturity. Carrying a
heavy bag on the back often results in aches in the back and shoulders. Forward bending at
the back makes the work of breathing harder. Children carrying bags weighing more than
10 per cent of their body weight have been found to have poorer lung function.
Yet, life goes on as before for most families  even after they hear their children
complaining about pain in back and neck.  Growing weight of school bag and its effect on
health of the children has became a matter of grave concern for every parent School authorities
have also been expressing their concern over the issue but nothing is being done to lessen
the burden of school bags.
Along with books, children have to carry their sports and other equipment with them.
If lockers are provided to children in school, it will allow them to leave sports equipment, and
certain books and notebooks in school. Further, the school should issue common instructions
to students in advance which books will be needed and which can be left at home and
teaching the child to put down the bag when waiting at the bus stop, in the assembly, and to
use both straps of the bag, etc. Some schools have adopted a way for reducing the weight of
school bags. They don't send all the books back home. Only those books are kept in the bags
which the students are required to study at home. This has been working very well for junior
classes. Therefore, there is an urgent need to enact legislation for the whole of the country
to save the children from carrying heavy loads on their back.
Hence this Bill.
VIJAY J.  DARDA
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers is
of normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for limitation on the weight of school bags, duties and responsibilities of the
schools to ensure the compliance of the limitations so imposed and to provide lockers in
schools and to issue necessary instructions for handling and carrying of school bags
by children and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vijay J. Darda, MP)
MGIPMRND—4149RS(S5)—8-12-2006.