 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
 
Bill No. LXXXIV of 2024 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE WELFARE 
OF SALT WORKERS BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for the 
Welfare of Salt Workers and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for the Welfare of
Salt Workers Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions.  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—  
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b) "Commission" means the National Commission for the 
Welfare of Salt Workers established under section 3;  
(c) "employer” means any person who employs, whether directly 
or through any other person, or contractor, whether on behalf of 
himself or on behalf of any other person, one or more labourer or 
workers for work related to salt making from sea or salt lake, as 
the case may be, including handling of salt; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 
(e) “salt worker” means any person engaged in making salt from 
sea or lake water on land by digging shallow wells and pumping 
out brine or in a chemical factory or any related occupation as a 
wage earner, whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Establishment 
of a National 
Commission for 
the Welfare of 
Salt Workers. 
 3.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a Commission to be known as the National 
Commission for the Welfare of Salt workers to improve the 
conditions of salt workers in the country. 
(2)  The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, 
sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.  
(4) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, 
establish offices at other places in the country, as it may deem necessary, 
for the efficient discharge of its functions as assigned under this Act. 
 (5) The Commission shall consist of the following, namely— 
(a) a Chairperson; 
(b) a Deputy Chairperson; and 
(c) three Members 
to be appointed by the President by warrant under his  hand and seal 
from amongst  persons having special knowledge and vast experience in 
the field of human rights, law, social security and healthcare of 
vulnerable sections of the society.    
 (6) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary and at such times 
and places as the Chairperson may deem fit for the efficient discharge of 
the functions assigned to it under this Act. 
 (7) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure 
with regard to transaction of its business. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
Terms of office 
and conditions 
of service of the 
Chairperson 
and Members. 
 4. (1) The term of office of, salaries and other allowances payable to, 
and other conditions of service of, the Chairperson, Deputy 
Chairperson and Members of the Commission shall be such as may 
be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 

3 
 
 (2) The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or a Membe r may, at any 
time, resign from his office, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
President and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to 
have vacated his office. 
. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
5. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by 
reason of: 
(a)  any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
Commission; 
(b)  any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or 
Member of the Commission; or 
(c)  any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not 
affecting the merits of the case. 
 Vacancies etc. 
not to invalidate 
proceedings 
  
 
 
 
15 
6. (1)  The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers 
and staff including experts to the Commission, as may be required, 
for its efficient functioning. 
(2)   The method of recruitment, qualifications and experience, 
salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the officers, staff and experts of the Commission shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
 Officers, staff 
and experts of 
the 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
45 of 2023. 
 
20 7. The Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, Members, officers, staff and 
experts of the Commission shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to 
act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public 
servants within the meaning of sub- section (2) of section 28 of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
 Members, 
officers and staff 
to be public 
servants. 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
8. 
 
(1) It shall be the duty of the Commission to take such steps, as it may 
deem appropriate, for the welfare and protection of the rights of salt 
workers and their dependent family members. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the 
Commission shall ensure the following provisions are made for the 
benefit and welfare of salt workers, namely,— 
(a)  draft a national policy for the welfare and rehabilitation of salt 
workers across the country that shall be binding on both the 
Central and State Governments;   
(b) ensure the collection of statistics of all salt workers in the 
country on a regular basis;  
(c) undertake the registration of all salt workers at the national 
and state level by  assigning and issuing a Salt Worker 
Identification Number (SWIN) Card for each of them, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed; 
(d)  ensure legal equality to salt workers in status and rights in 
relation to other wage earners performing the same work; 
(e) ensure decent wages, social security and occupational health 
and safety provisions for salt workers through appropriate 
legislative and administrative measures;  
(f)   identify, prevent and mitigate potential human rights violations 
that affect salt  workers; 
(g) promote community -based skill -building trainings for the 
salt workers  in coordination with the State and local 
Governments;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions of the 
Commission.   

4 
 
(h)  ensure financial and digital inclusion of salt workers; 
(i) receive grievances or c omplaints from salt workers or their 
representatives regarding deprivation of their rights, exploitation 
or violation of any of the provisions of this Act and investigate 
into complaints so received from them;  
 (j) collaborate with all relevant stakeholde rs including the 
representatives of salt workers, NGOs and trade unions in 
pursuance of the objective of the Commission;  
(k)  prepare and present to the President, annually and at such 
other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports on any 
matters relating to the welfare of salt workers and in particular in 
relation to its functions assigned under this Act, containing therein 
its recommendations to the Centre and the States, as the case may 
be, for the effective implementation of the safeguards for the  
protection of their interests and removal of any difficulties faced 
by them, in such form and manner as may be prescribed; and    
         (l)   any other matter related to salt workers and their welfare, 
which may be referred to the Commission by the Central or State 
Governments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
President to lay 
reports.  9.  (1) The President shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament, 
all such reports presented to him under clause (k)  of sub-section (2) of 
section 8, alongwith a memorandum explaining the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations rela ting to the Centre and 
the reasons for the non- acceptance, if any, of any of such 
recommendations. 
(2)  Where  any such report, or any  part thereof  relates to any  matter 
with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report 
shall be forwarded to the Governor of that State, who shall in turn, cause 
it to be laid before each House of the Legislature of the State, where it 
consists of two House, or where such Legislature consists of one House, 
before that House, alongwith an explanatory memora ndum  explaining 
the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations related 
to the State,  and the reasons for  the non- acceptance, if any, of  any of 
such recommendations. 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
Commission to 
have powers of a 
Civil Court. 
 
 10. The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in 
clause (f) and clause (i) of sub -section (2) of section 8, have all the 
powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in particular in respect of the 
following matters, namely, — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court 
or office; 
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and 
documents; and 
(f)  any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
40 
 
Appropriate 
Government to 
consult the 
Commission. 
 11. The appropriate Government shall consult the Commission on all 
policies affecting the interests of salt workers. 
  

5 
 
  12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
Commission for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 Central 
Government to 
provide 
adequate funds 
to the 
Commission. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
13. (1) The Commission shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and 
manner and at such time of each financial year, as may be prescribed. 
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified 
by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor -
General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed 
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission 
under this Act shall have  the same rights and privileges and the 
authority in connection with such audit as the  Comptroller and 
Auditor-General; generally has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and 
other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the 
Commission. 
(4)    The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the Commission. 
 Accounts and 
audit. 
  14. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such 
time, for each financial year, as  may be prescribed, its annual report, 
giving a full account of its activities during the  previous financial year 
and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government. 
 Annual report. 
 
 
 
30 15. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with 
the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after the reports  are 
received, before each House of Parliament. 
 Annual report 
and audit report 
to be laid before 
Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
16.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
       Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of the commencement of this Act. 
(2)  Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
  17.  The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any 
other law for the time being in force. 
 Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
18.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 (2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide 
 
 
 
 
Power to make 
rules and 
regulations.   

6 
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the 
purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(3) Every rule and regulation made under this Act s hall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprise d
i
n one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
5 
 
10 

7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 India is the world’s third largest producer of common salt after 
China and the USA. In India, salt is produced in the coastal states of 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, West 
Bengal and Tamil Nadu.  Although salt is popularly perceived as the 
greatest symbol of India’s struggle for independence, salt workers in our 
country continue to live under extreme poverty, bonded labour and chronic 
diseases. Salt Industry in India is labour intensive and majority of the 
workers are unskilled. They are seasonal workers with marginal source of 
income. Since their job is seasonal in nature, they lack permanent 
employment contract, adequate wages and soc ial security. The living 
conditions of these salt workers lack basic amenities like potable drinking 
water, toilets and waste management systems. Besides, they are exposed to 
hazardous environmental factors including extreme climatic conditions. 
They do the toughest of manual jobs, risking blindness, blood pressure, 
skin lesions, knee injury, back pain and exhaustion, and epidemics such as 
malaria. Their children are mostly school drop -outs and are vulnerable to 
chronic cough and tuberculosis. Even though t he salt workers make salt 
under extreme weather conditions, they were often exploited by the 
contractors, intermediaries and money-lenders. The employers hardly offer 
them protective gear such as eye goggles or gum boots. Amenities for first 
aid and recreation are inadequate in many places. The recent evidences 
from the field studies reflect that salt workers in India suffer from 
substance abuse, alcohol dependency, work place violence, low wage, 
poor nutrition status, illiteracy and domestic violence again st women. 
Since they are out of the purview of social and health security schemes, 
there is an urgent need to initiate appropriate legislative measures to 
empower the salt workers economically and socially. There is a critical 
need to enact a comprehensive national policy on salt workers and support 
them with economic, social and health security measures. Besides, there 
should be continuous monitoring and evaluation of the condition of salt 
workers alongwith strict mechanisms to prevent exploitation and physical 
abuse by contractors and employees. Therefore, the establishment of a 
national level independent body, i.e., the National Commission for the 
Welfare of Salt Workers, with quasi -judicial power s, is proposed to 
address many of these issues faced by salt workers.      
 H
ence, this Bill. 
SANDOSH KUMAR P.  

8 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
       Clause 3  of the Bill provides for constitution of the National 
Commission for the Welfare of Salt Workers to carry out the responsibilities 
assigned to it consisting of a Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members.  
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the salaries and allowances payable to and 
other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson 
and Members of the Commission, whereas Clause 6 provides that the Central 
Government shall provide such number of officers, staff and experts to the 
Commission, as may be required for the efficient performance of its duties and 
for the salaries and allowances payable and other terms and conditions of 
service applicable to them . Clause 8 of the Bill lays down the functions of the 
Commission, inter alia including collection of statistics of salt workers across 
the country and ensuring their registration, assigning and issuing of
 Salt 
Worker Identification Number (SWIN) Card to each salt worker, conducting 
of community- based skill -building trainings for them etc.  Clause 12 of the 
Bill provides  for the Central Government to provide adequate funds to the 
Commission to aid its efficient functioning. 
       The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure , both of 
non-recurring and recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India .  
However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure 
likely to be involved. 

9 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
         Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government make such 
provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.  Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Government to make  rules and the National Commission for the 
Welfare of Salt Workers, with the approval of the Central Government, to make 
regulations, for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
      As the matters in respect of which rules or regulations or orders may 
be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

  RAJYA SABHA 
  ____________ 
A 
BILL 
  to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for the 
   Welfare of Salt Workers and for matters connected  
  therewith or incidental thereto. 
  _____________ 
  (Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)—061—10.02.2025. 