RAYA SABHA

A
BILL
to repeal the Indian Universities Act, 1904.

(Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi, Minister of Human Resource Development)


AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXXI of 2000

THE CHIT FUNDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
to amend the Chit Funds Act, 1982.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Chit Funds (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title and

. commence-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by ment.

notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for
5 different States.

40 of 1982. 2. In section 6 of the Chit Funds Act, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Amendment of
Act), in sub-section (3), for the words “thirty per cent.”, the words “forty per cent.” shall be section 6.
substituted.

3. In section 13 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 13.
10 (i) in sub-section (/), for the words “twenty-five thousand rupees”, the words on

“rupees one lakh” shall be substituted;

(ii) in sub-section (2),—


(A) in clause (a), for the words “one lakh”, the words “six lakhs” shall be
substituted;

(B) in clause (b), for the words “twenty-five thousand rupees”, the words
“rupees one lakh” shall be substituted.

Amendment 4. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for clause (a), the following
of section 20. clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(a) deposit in the name of the Registrar, an amount equal to,—
(i) fifty per cent. of the chit amount in cash in an approved bank; and

(ii) fifty per cent. of the chit amount in the form of bank guarantee from an
approved bank; or”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Chit Funds Act, 1982 was enacted to provide for the regulation of chit funds
and for matters connected therewith. Sub-section (3) of section 1 of the Act, inter alia,
confers powers upon the Central Government to appoint different dates for commencement
of the said Act for different States. The Act has so far been brought into force in sixteen
States and six Union territories.

2. The provisions contained in sub-section (3) of section 6 of the Act, provide
that the maximum amount of discount, which the prized subscriber has to forego at any
instalment to any chit, shall not exceed thirty per cent. of the chit amount that is, the
sum-total of subscriptions payable by all the subscribers for any instalment of a chit with-
out any deduction for discount or otherwise.

3. Clause (j ) of section 2 of the Chit Funds Act, 1982 defines “foreman” which
means the person who under the chit agreement is responsible for the conduct of the chit
and includes any person discharging the functions of the foreman under section 39 of the
Act. Under the existing provisions contained in section 13 of the Act, no foreman other
than a firm or other association of individuals or a company can commence or conduct
chits, the aggregate amount of which at any time exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees.
Where the foreman is a firm or other association of individuals, the aggregate chit amount
shall not exceed twenty-five thousand rupees for every partner or individual, or as the case
may be, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees. Where the foreman is a company, the
aggregate chit amount of the chits conducted by it, shall not, at any time, exceed ten times
the net owned funds of the company defined in the Explanation to that section.

4, The constitutional validity of, inter alia, sections 6 and 13 of the Chit Funds
Act, 1982, came up for consideration of the Supreme Court of India in Shriram Chits and
Investments (P) Limited Vs. Union of India and others. (AJR 1993 SC 2063). The Court
held that the restriction in sub-section (3) of section 6 was neither arbitrary nor
unreasonable and also upheld the constitutional validity of the Act and dismissed Civil
Appeal No. 448 of 1989. The Supreme Court, did not find that the limits put in section 13
of the Act were violative of article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. They further observed that
in any case, such limits were in the interests of the subscribers and in view of the inflation
in the country, the appropriate authorities, in case a demand was so raised, from time to
time increase the limits. However, they did not find it necessary to give any direction in
this behalf.

5. In the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case, the
Central Government invited suggestions from the concerned State Governments and
Union ¢erritories and from the All India Association of Chit Funds on the proposal, inter
alia, to amend sections 6 and 13 of the Chit Funds Act, 1982. After having considered the
suggestions and in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, it is proposed to—

(a) enhance the ceiling on discount to be foregone by a prized subscriber from
thirty per cent. specified in sub-section (3) of section 6 of the Act to forty per cent.;

(b) amend sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 13 of the Act to enhance,—

(i) the aggregate chit amount commenced or conducted by a foreman
other than a firm or other association of individuals or a company or co-operative
society, from twenty-five thousand rupees to one lakh rupees; and

(ii) the ceiling of aggregate chit amount of the chits conducted by the
firm or other association where the number of partners of the firm or the indi-
viduals is not less than four, from one lakh rupees to six lakhs rupees and in
any other case from ceiling of twenty-five thousand rupees calculated with
respect to each partner or individual to one lakh rupees.


6. Section 20 of the Chit Funds Act, 1982 provides for security to be given by a
foreman. Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of the said Act, provides that every foreman shall, for
proper conduct of the chit, deposit in an approved bank an amount equal to the chit amount
in the name of the Registrar. It is proposed to substitute said clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 20 so as to provide that the said deposit in the name of the Registrar shall be an
amount equal to fifty per cent. of the chit amount in cash in an approved bank and balance
fifty per cent. of the chit amount in the form of bank guarantee.

7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects,
YASHWANT SINHA.
New DELHI;
The 21st November, 2000.


EXTRACTS FROM THE एम्रा Funps Act, 1982
(40 oF 1982)

* * * * *
6. (1) * * * * *
(3) The amount of discount referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (/) shall not exceed.
thirty per cent. of the chit amount.

* * * * *

13. (/) No foreman, other than a firm or other association of individuals or a company
or co-operative society, shall commence or conduct chits, the aggregate chit amount of
_ which at any time exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees.

(2) Where the foreman is a fim or other association of individuals, the aggregate
chit amount of the chits conducted by the firm or other association shall not at any time
exceed,—

(a) where the number of partners of the firm or the individuals constituting the
association is not less than four, a sum of rupees one lakh;

(6) in any other case, a sum calculated on the basis of twenty-five thousand
rupees with respect to each such partner or individual.

* * * * *

CHAPTER IIL
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF FOREMAN
20. (/) For the proper conduct of the chit, every foreman shall, before applying for a
previous sanction under section 4,-—

(a) deposit in an approved bank an amount equal to the chit amount in the
name of the Registrar; or

* * * * *

Form of chit
agreement

Aggregate
amount of
hits.

Security to be
given by
foreman.