AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No, LXXX of 2001

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (PREVENTION) BILL, 2001
A
BILL

to provide for preventing the growing menace of domestic violence and in particular,
to empower the courts to grant protection orders to victims of such violence and
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Wuereas domestic violence operating as a severe form of oppression of women is
on the increase;

Anp therefore it is necessary to recognise the right of women to protection
against violence and to reside in their shared household and towards that end to put
into place a co-ordinated and integrated system of response.

Bg it enacted by the Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:

CHAPTERI
1. (J) (०) This Act may be called the Domestic Violence (Prevention) Act, 2001.
(b) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:

(a) “accredited service provider” means Governmental, non-governmental,
voluntary and charitable associations or institutions providing shelter, homes,
counseling, legal, financial, medical or other assistance to victims of domestic
violence and are registered with the appropriate Government under the provisions
of this Act;

Short title
and extent.

Definitions


2

(5) “appropriate Government” means the Central Government, the State
Government, or the Government of a Union Territory, as the case may be;

(c) “child” includes any biological, adopted, step or foster child or any
other minor, who is below the age of eighteen years, in the care or under the
guardianship of the respondent;

(d) “court” means any court established under the provisions of the Family
Courts Act, 1984 or where no such court exists, the principal civil court of original
jurisdiction or any court or lok adalat which the appropriate Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify as a court competent to deal with all or
any of the matters specified hereunder and includes any court in which a petition
may be made under section 8 of the Act.

(e) “domestic relationship” means a relationship between two persons who
live or have, at any point of time, lived together in the shared household, in any of
the following ways:

(i) they are or were married to each other, including marriage according
to any law, custom, religion or usage;

(ii) the cohabit or have at some stage cohabited together in a common
law marriage;

(iii) they are related by consanguinity, marriage, or through a
relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption or are family members living
together as a joint family;

(0 “domestic violence” means any act, omission or conduct which is of
such a nature as to harm or injure or has the potential of harming or injuring the
health, safety or well-being of the person aggrieved or any child in the domestic
relationship and includes physical abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and mental abuse
and economic abuse;

Explanations: For the purposes of this definition,

() “physical abuse or a threat of physical abuse” include any action
or conduct which is of such a nature as to cause bodily pain, harm
or danger to life, limb, or health or impair the health or development
of the person aggrieved, and includes assault, criminal intimidation
and use of criminal force.

(i) “sexual abuse or a threat of sexual abuse” include any conduct of
a sexual nature that abuses, humiliates, degrades or otherwise
violates the dignity of the person aggrieved and includes sexual
intercourse against the will or without the consent of the person
aggrieved and refusal to co-operate in the contraception when the
person aggrieved may reasonably require:

Provided that where the person aggrieved is below the age of sixteen, any
sexual intercourse whether or not against her will or against her consent
shall amount to sexual abuse.

(iii) “sexual abuse of a child” include any action or conduct of a sexual
nature that abuses harms or violates a child in a domestic
relationship.

(iv) “verbal and mental abuse” includes:—

(a) “insults, ridicule, humiliation, or name calling, specially with
regard to not having a child or a male child: or

(b) repeated threats to cause physical pain to any person in whom
the person aggrieved is interested.

— of 1984.

20

30

35

40

45


15

20

25

30

35

40

45

(५) “economic abuse” includes :--

(a) deprivation or threatened deprivation of any or all economic or
financial resources to which the person aggrieved is entitled under law or
custom whether payable under an order of court or otherwise or which the
person aggrieved requires out of necessity, including but not limited to
household necessities for the person aggrieved and her children, if any,
stirdhan, payment of rental related to the shared household; or

(4) disposal or threatened disposal of household effects, any alienation
of assets whether moveable or immovable, valuable, shares, securities,
bonds, etc, or other property in which the person aggrieved has an interest
or is entitled to use by virtue of the domestic relationship or which may be
reasonably required by the person aggrieved or her children; or

(c) prohibiting or restricting continued access to resources or facilities
which the person aggrieved is entitled to use or enjoy by virtue of the
domestic relationship;

(g) “monetary relief” means monetary relief which a court may order
under Section 6 of this Act;

(h) “person aggrieved” means any woman or child who is or has been
in a domestic relationship with the respondent and who has been subjected
to acts of domestic violence;

(i) “petitioner” means any person who makes a petition under Section
8 of this Act;

(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(k) “protection officer” means an officer appointed under Section 21
by the State Government in relation to or for the purpose of this Act.;

(7) “protection order” means order granted in terms of Section 5;
(m) “residence order” means an order granted in terms of Section 7;

(n) “respondent” means any person who is or has been in a domestic
relationship with the person aggrieved or a person who is aiding such a
person in committing or threatening to commit domestic violence and against
whom the person aggrieved has sought or has obtained a protection order;

(०) “shared household” means a household where the person
aggrieved and the respondent live or have, at any stage, lived together
while in a domestic relationship and includes property owned jointly or by
either the person aggrieved or the respondent or property, including
tenements, in respect of which either the person aggrieved or the respondent
or both jointly have any right, title, interest or equity and includes property
which may belong to the relations of the person aggrieved or the respondent
or the joint family of which the respondent is a member.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF AN AGGRIEVED PERSON

3. (J) Notwithstanding any thing contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every aggrieved person shall have the right to reside in the shared household.

(2) The aggrieved, person if in occupation of the shared household shall

have a right not to be evicted or excluded from the same or any part of it by the
respondent save in accordance with the procedure established by the law.

Right to
teside in a
shared
household and
the right to
protection
against
violence.


Duty to

(3) The aggrieved person if not in occupation of the shared household,
shall have right to enter into and occupy the same.

(4) Notwithstanding any think Contained in any other law for the time
being in force, every aggrieved person shall have to obtain protection against
domestic violence under this Act in the form of a protection order.

4. A police officer or a protection officer who has received a complaint of domestic

inform person violence or is otherwise present at the scence of an incident of domestic violence or

aggrieved of

right.

Protection
order.

when the incident of domestic violence is reported to him, shall—

(a) Inform the person aggrieved of her right to apply for and obtain a
protection order, an order for monetary relief and/or a residence order under the
provisions of this Act.

(8) Inform the person aggrieved of the services of accredited service
providers, and

(c) Inform the person aggrieved of her right to free legal services under the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987:

Provided that nothing in this Act shall be construed in any manner as to relieve a
police officer from his duty to proceed in accordance with law upon receipt of
information as to the commission of a congnisable offence.
CHAPTER IIL
ORpERs ETC.
5. (7) The court may pass a protection order prohibiting the respondent from:
(i) committing any act of domestic violence;
(ii) aiding and abetting in the commission of acts of domestic violence;

(iii) entering the place of employment of the person aggrieved or, if person
aggrieved is a child, its school, or any other place frequent by the person
aggrieved;

(iv) entering the residence of the person aggrieved;

(v) attempting to communicate in any form whatsoever with the person
aggrieved, including personal, oral or written, electronic or telephonic contact;

(vi) committing any other act as specified in the protection order;

(vii) alienating any assets, operating bank lockers or bank account used or
held or enjoyed by both parties, either singly or jointly, including her stridhan;

(viii) causing violence to the dependants, other relatives, and persons who
give the person aggrieved assistance from domestic violence.

(2) The court may impose any additional conditions which it deems reasonably

necessary to protect and provide for the safety of person aggrieved or any child,
including but not limited to police protection when the person aggrieved visits a specified
place to supervise the collection of personal property and regular police supervision.

(3) The court shall, in all cases where it has passed a protection order under this

section, order that a copy of such order be given to the protection officer incharge of
the area.

(4) A copy of the protection order shall be served on the respondent by the police

and a copy shall be forwarded to the Station House Officer of the police station in
whose jurisdiction the person aggrieved and the Respondent resides.

20

25

30

35


6. (1) The court may direct the respondent to pay monetary relief to meet the Monetary
expenses incurred and losses suffered by the person aggrieved and any child as a Relief
result of the domestic violence and including not limited to:—

(i) loss of earnings;
5 (ii) medical expenses;
(iii) maintenance for the person aggrieved as weil as her child, if any;

(iv) loss caused due to the destruction, damage or removal of any property
from the control of the person aggrieved;

(0) compensation for the domestic violence inflicted upon the person
10 aggrieved.

(2) Copies of an order for monetary relief shall be served on the concerned
protection officer and the respondent by the police.

(3) The respondent shall pay monetary relief to the person aggrieved within the
date specified in the order made in terms of sub-section (a) and in accordance with the
15 terms thereof;

(4) The protection officer may, upon the failure on the part of the respondent to
make payment in terms of sub-clause (c), by an order, direct an employer or a debtor of
the respondent, to directly pay to the person aggrieved or to deposit with him a portion
of the wages or salaries or debt due to or accrued to the credit of the respondent, which

20 amount may be adjusted towards the monetary relief payable by the respondent.

(5) An order made under this section may, at any time, be altered, modified, varied
or revoked on an application by either the person aggrieved or the respondent, provided
the court is satisfied that there is a change of circumstances that requires such alteration,
modification, variation or revocation.

25 7. (1) The court may pass a residence order to:— Residence
ler.
(i) enforce the entitlement of the person aggrieved to remain in occupation
as against the respondent;

(ii) require the respondent to permit person aggrieved to enter and remain
in the shared household or part thereof;

30 (iii) prohibit, suspend or restrict the exercise by the respondent of his right
to occupy the shared household;

(iv) restrain the respondent from dispossessing the person aggrieved from
the shared household;

(v) restrain the respondent from alienating or disposing the shared household
35 or encumbering the same;

(vi) restrain the respondent from renouncing his rights in the shared
household except in favour of the person aggrieved; or

(vii) direct the respondent to secure alternate accommodation for the person
aggrieved or to pay rent for the same, if for sufficient reasons, the court is of the
40 opinion that it will be harmful or injurious for the person aggrieved to live with the
respondent in the shared household, having regard to the circumstances of the
case.

(2) While making an order under this section, the court may impose on the

respondent obligations relating to the discharge of rent 0: other payments, having
45 regard to the financial needs and resources of the parties.


Petition

Particulars of
the petition.

Petition ty
next friend of
a protection
officer.

Orders during
court recess.

Relief in other
suits and legal
proceedings.

Power to
grant interim
and ex-parte
orders,

8. Any person aggrieved may apply to the court for appropriation relief against
domestic violence in a prescribed form.

9. Ordinarily, the petition, accompanied by an affidavit shall contain the following
particulars:—

(a) the facts on which the petition is based;

(09) particulars of the person aggrieved and the respondent;

(c) the nature of relief sought whether, a protection order, residence order
and or an order for monetary relief; and

(a) the name of the police station at which the person aggrieved is likely to
report any breach of the order.

10. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law in force, a petition may be
brought by any other person on behalf of aggrieved person if he authorises such other
person in writing to that effect:

Provided that such written authorisation shall not be necessary in circumstances
where the petitioner is an accredited service provider or a protection officer or where
the person aggrieved is:—

(a) a minor;

(0) suffering from a mental disorder of such nature and to such an extent
that she cannot reasonably be expected to apply by herself;

(c) unconscious or otherwise physically incapable due to the acts of domestic
violence;

(d) confined by the respondent or any other person, or is unable to approach
the court herself for any reason whatsoever;

(e) an accredited service provider or a protection officer shall be entitled to
appear before the court and address the same if such accredited service provider
is a petitioner or where the petitioner authorises the accredited service provider.

11. A petition under Section 8 of this Act may be brought before the court at
anytime:

Provided that when a petition is made at a time outside ordinary court hours or on
a day that is not an ordinary court day when the court is not in session, the Duty
Magistrate shall pass the necessary protection orders as provided in Sections 5, 6 and
7 of this Act and the same may be confirmed by the court upon resumption of work
within 72 hours:

Provided further that if no duty Magistrate is available the protection officer shall
entertain such a petition and shall, if he is satisfied, pass a protection order subject to
confirmation within 48 hours by the court.

12. (7) Relief available against domestic violence, under this Act, may also be
sought in any legal proceeding, civil or criminal, affecting the person aggrieved and the
respondent whether or not such proceeding was initiated before the commencement of
this Act.

(2) During the pendency of investigations in relation to commission of offences
mentioned in the First Schedule of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a competent
court may upon a petition in that behalf grant the orders mentioned in Sections 5, 6 and
7 of this Aci, as a condition of release on bail of the respondent.

(3) Such order may be sought in addition to and along with any other relief that
the person aggrieved may pray for in such suit or legal proceeding, civil or criminal.

13. (/) In any proceeding before it under this Act, the court may pass such interim
orders as it deems just and proper.

20

30

35

40

45


10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

(2) If a court is satisfied that a petition prima facie discloses that the respondent
is committing, or has committed an act domestic violence or that there is an imminent
likelihood that the respondent may commit an act of domestic violence, it may grant an
ex parte order under section 5, 6 and/or 7 against the respondent in a form as may be
prescribed under the rules.

14, The court shall not refuse to grant a protection order merely on the basis
that:

(a) only a single act of domestic violence has been committed or a single
threat has been made by the respondent or on the basis that the acts or threats if
viewed in isolation, appear to be minor or trivial.

(9) The person aggrieved had not complained of the acts of domestic violence
and had condoned the same.

15, Notwithstanding any thing contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the court may, at any stage of the hearing of the petition for protection order,
grant temporary custody of any child or children to the person aggrieved and specify,
if necessary, arrangements for visitation by the respondent:

Provided that in any case where a complaint of sexual abuse of a child has been
made, and the court is prima facie satisfied that such allegation is true, the court shall
grant custody to the person aggrieved and no such order for arrangements for visitation
by the respondent shall be made.

16. The court shall issue notice to the respondent to show cause within the time
as may be prescribed why an order under Sections 5, 6 and 7 should not be granted or
if granted under Section 13 why the same should not be confirmed.

17. (7) An order under Sections 5, 6 and 7 shall operate for a period of two years
and may, on application by the person aggrieved by extended for a further period.

(2) An order made under this section may, for exceptional circumstances to be
recorded in writing, be altered, modified, varied or revoked on an application by either
the person aggrieved or the respondent provided the court is satisfied that there is a
change of circumstances that requires such alteration, modification, variation or
revocation.

18. Notwithstanding anyting contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in any other law, an appeal shall lie from every
judgment or order of the court, not being on interlocutory order, to the High Court both
on facts and law.

CHAPTERIV
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

19, Notwithstanding anything in IPC a breach of an order made under Sections 5,
6, 7, 13 and 16 shall be an offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend upto three years or with fine which may extend upto Rupees twenty thousand or
with both.

20. (1) The offence under Section 19 shall be cognizable and non-bailable.

(2) The court may conclude the commission of an offence under Section 19 upon
the sole testimony of the person aggrieved.

21. The court passing an order under Sections 5, 6, 7 or 13 shall have the power
to try offences punishable under this Act.

22. If any police officer refuses or without sufficient cause is unable to arrest the
respondent upon a complaint of an offence under Section 19 made by the person

Single acts or
condonation

Custody of
children.

Notice show
cause,

Confirmation,
variation or
revocation of
order.

Appeal.

Breach of a
order.

Cognisance
and Proof.

Powers of the
court in
relation to
offence.

Offences by
police officer.


Appointment
of Protection
Officers.

Powers of
Protection
Officers.

Duties and
Functions of
Protection
Officers.

aggrieved in the prescribed format, he shall, on conviction, on a complaint made by the
person aggrieved, be punished with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

Provided that no Court shall take cognisance of an offence under this section
unless so authorised by a general or special order with the permission of the State
Government.

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OFFICERS

23. The State Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
such number of Protection Officers in each district as it may consider necessary, to
assist the court in the discharge of its duties under this Act.

24, A Protection Officer shall exercise the power conferred on him by or under
this Act and shall be entitled tq appear in any proceedings under this Act.

For the purposes of exercising such powers and performing such duties a
Protection Officer may, at any time, enter and inspect:—

(a) any shared household in respect of which a complaint of domestic
violence has been received; and

(5) any premises from where the stridhan or other property of the person
aggrieved is to be recovered.

25. (7) The Protection Officer shall be under the control of the Court, and shall
perform duties imposed on him by the Court and by this Act.

(2) It shall be the duty of a Protection Officer to assist the Court in the investigation
of complaints relating to domestic violence.

(3) In addition to the above the Protection Officer shall perform the following
functions:—

(i) make a Domestic Incident Report in the prescribed form upon receipt of a
complaint of domestic violence,

(ii) inform the person aggrieved of her right to apply to the court for a
protection order, monetary relief and/or a residence order under the provisions of
this Act.

(iii) assist the person aggrieved in obtaining a protection order from the
Court.

(iv) ensure that the monetary relief deposited by the respondent is made
available to the person aggrieved at the earliest.

(०) co-ordinate the activities of the accredited service providers operating
in his area.

(4) The protection officer shall make best efforts to ensure that the activities of
the police and the accredited service providers are so co-ordinated as to ensure that a
person aggrieved:—
हि (i) has easy access to information about accredited service providers,
including short stary homes in the area that may provide her with support and
help that she may require and enable access to services of the accredited service
providers;

(ii) is easily able to access transportation to an alternative residence or a
safe place of shelter if the person aggrieved so requires;

(iii) is able to avail of transportation to the nearest hospital or medical
assistance for the treatment of injuries if such assistance is required;

15

20

25

30

35

40

45


20

25

30

35

40

45

9

(iv) is able to obtain assistance in the collection of her belongings, including
stridhan, with the assistance of the police;

(¥) is able to access tne Court for orders under this Act;

(vi) has access to every possible assistance in the service of exparte orders
to the respondent, and enforcement of any orders that may have been made by
the court under this Act.

(5) A Protection Officer may, by an order in writing, authorise an accredited service
provider to exercise any or all of his functions provided however that such order must
clearly specify the purpose for which it is being made, in respect of whom/what the
order shall operate and the period for which it shall operate, as provided in the prescribed
form.

(6) Notwithstanding anything in any law, the protection officer may, subject to
confirmation by a court within 48 hours, by an order;

(4) direct a bank or a financial institution to suspend transactions in respect
of any bank account or locker; or

(ii) prohibit a co-operative society or a registry or any authority or an
individual or a company from registering a transfer of any share, right or interest
in any movable or immovable property.

CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

26. (/) Jurisdiction to grant a protection order and/or try offences under this Act
lies with any court, within whose jurisdiction:—

(7) the person aggrieved permanently or temporarily resides, carries on
business or is employed; or

(ii) the respondent resides, carries on business or is employed; or
(iii) the cause of action arose.
(2) Any order made herein under shall be enforceable throughout India.

27. Unless the court is satisfied to the contrary, proceedings under this Act shall
be held in camera.

Provided however that the protection officer or an accredited service provider
may be permitted to attend the same.

Provided further that the person aggrieved may be accompanied by her relatives
or friends,

28. A person aggrieved shall not be disentitiled or barred from claiming relief
under any other law merely because she has sought protection under this Act and has
initiated proceedings hereunder.

29. The provisions of this Act and of any rules made hereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law in force.

30. The court may at any stage of the hearing on the petition for a protection
order direct the respondent to undergo singly or, at the option of the person aggrieved,
jointly with the person aggrieved mandatory counseling with any accredited service
provider.

31. No suit, persecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any accredited

service provider or protection officer or police officer for anything which is in good
faith done or purported to be done by or under this Act.

Jurisdiction.

In camera
Proceedings.

Other relief
not barred.

Non obstante
clause.

‘Counseling.

Protection of
actions taken
in good faith,


Procedure.

Duty of
Gbvernment
to ensure
effective
implementa-
tion of the
Act.

Power to make
Rules.

10

32. (1) Except as otherwise stated in this Act, proceedings regarding the issuance
of orders and trial of offences as provided in this Act shall be governed respectively by
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 as the case
may be.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (a) shall prevent the court from laying down its own
procedure with a view to prevent the person aggrieved from being subjected to domestic
violence or to arrive at the truth of the facts alleged by one party and denied by the
other.

33. The Government of India, as well as the State Government, shall ensure that:—

(a) the Act and the contents thereof receive wide publicity in the television,
radio and the print media;

(9) the Government officers, the police and the members of the judicial
services are given periodic sensitisation and awareness training on the issues
addressed by this Act; and

(c) effective protocols are formulated by concerned ministries dealing with
health, prosecutions and welfare to address issues of domestic violence and that
the same are preiodically revised.

34. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for:—

(i) prescribing the fomat in which the forms, petitions, orders, directions
and reports under this Act would have to be made;

(ii) maintaining a register of accredited service providers;

(iii) rules and procedure for the appointment and co-ordination of protection
officers and their duties, tasks and responsibilities;

(iv) powers of protection officers;

(v) rules and procedure for appointment of officers to assist protection
officers appointed under this Act;

(vi) method and manner of deposit, recovery and payment of monetary
relief;

(vii) rules of procedure for proceedings under this Act; and

(viii) any other matter in connection with or in relation to this Act.

20

25

30


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In all patriarchal societies, domestic violence has been used as a most powerful
instrument for suppressing rights of women as equal partners in the family structure. It
assumes different forms and expressions during different periods of history and varies
according to region as well as religious and customary practices. It is accepted as an
intrinsic part of patriarchal ideology without much challenge from any component of
this system, which is based on discrimination against women, and denial of their
fundamental rights as human beings.

Violence whether domestic or otherwise, by definition, implies force and cruelty
both physical as well as mental and is applied from position of power. However in case
of domestic violence because of inherent inequality, upon which the family structure is
based, it acquires social sanction and women are expected to suffer the pain silently,
without even questioning. In fact, the more she suffers, her status goes up within the
society, the classic example being that of burning the widow on her husband’s pyre and
then defying her as ‘Sati’, building temples for her and worshipping her for centuries to
come.

The issue of domestic violence is also closely linked to the understanding of
women’s question by the official agencies like the police, the judiciary and the policy
makers.

The different forms of domestic violence and the continuing inequality within
family are a reflection of wider processes going on in the society including a general
increase in violence, social impact of processes of liberation.

To see domestic violence only in terms of man-woman relationship or non-
relationship would be to miss out the essence of the problem, i.e. the institutionalised
nature of female second class citizenship in this society. The role of ideology, the
systematic propagation of woman as victim, woman as burden syndrome is equally a
part of this institutionalisation.

It is imperative to put an end to such almost institutionalized violence against
women by making specific law against it for the development of a free, democratic and
equitable society.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI SARALA MAHESHWARI
31-8-2001


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the
purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of Legislative Power is of normal character.

12


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for preventing the growing menace of domestic violence and in particular, to
empower the courts to grant protection orders to victims of such violence and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Shrimati Sarala Maheshwari, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3699RS—26-11-2001.

FU