1
Bill No. LXXXVIII of 2022
THE  SARV A  DHARMA TEMPLE BILL,  2022
A
BILL
to provide for the erection and management of a temple of all religions under one roof to
perpetuate the ideals of the Constitution of India which establishes India as a secular
State and for the purpose of creating awareness, tolerance towards, and honour,
respect, preservation, growth and spread of spiritual knowledge of all
religions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sarva Dharma Temple Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON 9 TH D ECEMBER, 2022
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) ‘‘Temple’’ means the Sarva Dharma Temple established under section 3;
(b) ‘‘Trust’’ means the Sarva Dharma Temple Trust established under section 4;
and
(c) ‘‘Trustees’’ means the Trustees of the Sarva Dhama Temple as specified in
section 6.
3. (a) There shall be established a temple to be known as the Sarva Dharma Temple
with such structure as specified in the Schedule.
(b) The location of the Temple shall be on the banks of the river Hooghly in the city of
Kolkata, State of West Bengal.
4. There shall be a Trust, namely, the Sarva Dharma Temple Trust to be established
under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 for the purpose of erection and management of the Temple.
5. The objects of the Trust shall be:—
(a) to erect and maintain suitable buildings, structures and parks on the banks
of the river Hooghly in the city of Kolkata, State of West Bengal;
(b) to acquire lands, buildings and other properties for the purposes of the
Trust; and
(c) to raise and receive funds for the purposes of the temple.
6. (1) The Trustees of the Temple shall be the following, namely:—
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson;
(b) the Union Minister in-charge of Culture;
(c) the Leader of Opposition recognized as such in the House of the People or
where there is no such Leader of Opposition, the Leader of the single largest opposition
party in that House;
(d) the Governor of the State of West Bengal;
(e) the Chief Minister of the State of West Bengal; and
(f) three eminent persons to be nominated by the Central Government.
(2) The trustees shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession by the name of
the ‘‘Trustees of the Sarva Dharma Temple’’ and a common seal, and in that name shall sue
and be sued, and shall have power to acquire and hold property, to enter into contracts and
to do all acts necessary for, and consistent with, the purposes of this Act.
7. The Trustees nominated under clause (f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4 shall be
Trustees for a period of five years, and shall be eligible for re-nomination.
8. All the funds and property, whether movable or immovable, which may hereafter be
given, bequeathed or otherwise transferred for the purposes of the Temple or acquired for
the said purposes shall vest in the Trustees.
9. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide grants to the Trust of such sums of money as the Central Government
may think fit, for the purposes of this Act.
10. (1) For the purposes of managing the affairs of the Trust, the Trustees may by
passing a resolution at a meeting, appoint a committee of management, and entrust to it
such powers, duties and functions, under such directions and limitations, as may be defined
by such resolution.
Definitions.
Establishment
of the Sarva
Dharma
Temple.
Establishment
of Sarva
Dharma
Temple Trust.
Objects of the
Trust.
2 of 1882
Composition
of the
Trustees of
the Temple.
Term of office
of nominated
Trustees.
Property
vested in
Trustees.
Power of
Trustees to
appoint
committee of
management.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The Trustees may appoint any person as members of the committee of
management, whether such person are Trustees or not, and may, from time to time, very or
rescind any resolution passed by it under this section.
11. The Trust shall meet at least once in a year to approve the audited accounts of the
Trust and shall transact such other business as may be considered necessary.
12. No act of the Trustees shall be deemed to be invalid merely by reason any
vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the body of Trustees.
13.  ( 1) The accounts of the Trust shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Trust to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Trust under This Act, shall, have the same
rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts  and,
in particular shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Trust.
(3) The account of the Trust as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General or
any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon
shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Trust and the Central
Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the objects of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for:—
(a)  the manner in which funds belonging to the Temple shall be kept deposited
or invested;
(b)  the mode of authentication of orders for payment of money by the Trustees;
(c)  the form in which accounts shall be kept by the Trustees and the audit and
publication of such accounts;
 (d) the laying out, erection, improvement, maintenance and management of the
Temple and the care and custody of the properties thereof;
(e)  the condition under which the public shall have access to the Temple or
particular parts thereof and the regulation of the conduct of persons entering the
precincts of the Temple; and
(f)  the preservation of, and the prevention of injury to or interference with, any
property vested in the Trustees and the prevention of persons from trespassing into
any particular part of the Temple.
(3) A rule made under this section may provide that a breach of any rule made under
clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section ( 2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
one hundred rupees.
Power to
approve
audited
account.
Validity of
acts of
Trustees not
to be
questioned by
reason of
vacancy, etc.
Accounts and
audit.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
15. The Trustees may make regulations consistent with this Act for all or any of the
following purpose, namely:—
(a) the manner in which meetings of the Trustees shall be convened, the quorum
for the transaction of any business threat and the procedure at such meetings;
(b) the manner in which a majority decision of the Trustees shall be obtained by
circulation to the Trustees of the matter requiring decision;
(c)  the term of office of members of the committee of management, their powers
and duties, and the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which such
powers and duties may be exercised; and
(d)  the appointment of such officers and servants as may be necessary for the
purpose of the Trust, and their terms and conditions of service.
16. Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Power of
Trustees to
make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20

THE  SCHEDULE
[See section 3(a)]
Structure of the Sarva Dharma Temple
1. The Temple shall be octagon-shaped, each of the eight symmetrical lines will have
an entry to each of the religions in the following manner:—
(i) Line one Hindu
(ii) Line two Christian
(iii) Line three Islam
(iv) Line four Sikhism
(v) Line five Buddhism
(vi) Line six Judaism
(vii) Line seven Zoroastrian
(viii) Line eight Other Spiritual Philosophy.
2. The center of the octagon shaped temple building shall be an octagon shaped
room depicting pure awareness, a space within space which is free from all beliefs which is
just "is".
3. The Temple shall provide equal space to all religious beliefs, which shall house the
spiritual aspects of that religion.
4. The Temple complex shall have a Library consisting of books of all religions.
5. The temple complex also shall have an auditorium to screen religious texts of all
religions, in their specified allotted time.
6. Space shall be allotted to each religion to conduct short term courses in spiritual
training.
7. The Temple shall hold annual religious functions among all religions to bring
communal harmony and spread religious and spiritual awareness and respect towards all
religion.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The noble object and reason for the need of the Sarva Dharma Temple is enshrined in
the Preamble of our great Constitution.
2.  In the spirit of India being a secular State, it is proposed that there shall be the Sarva
Dharma Temple or Temple of all Religions which shall house all religions under one roof.
3. By the erection of this unique Temple, the nation shall bring people from all religions
under one platform which will help prevent misinformation about each other's religion and
increase mutual respect.
4. The Temple to be erected on the banks of the river Hooghly or the holy Ganges in the
city of Kolkata will bring all the more meaning as Bengal has given birth to great spiritual
thinkers such as Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Swami Vivekananda, Paramahamsa Yogananda,
Swami Pranavanandaji Maharaj founder of Bharat Sevashram Sangha. It is also Mother
Teresa's Karma Bhumi, not to mention many great Muslims saints lived in this great city.
5. The growing false perception and fake propaganda news being circulated around
the world against India being intolerable towards other religions, needs to be defeated. This
temple is the need of the hour to clean India's secular image. The need is, therefore, to
recognize India's great spiritual culture and heritage and its age old tradition of acceptability
of all religious beliefs.
6. The Temple will bring forth the fact that India upholds and cherishes it's secular
status dearly and will permanently stop false propaganda by foreign forces against India's
great secular status which is our pride.
Hence, this Bill.
SHANTA  CHHETRI.
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the Sarva Dharma Temple Trust to erect and maintain
suitable buildings, structures and parks on the banks of the river Hooghly in the city of
Kolkata, State of West Bengal; to acquire lands, buildings and other properties for the
purposes of the Trust; and to raise and receive funds for the purposes of the Temple. Clause 9
provides for making grants to the Trust by the Central Government after the appropriation by
Parliament by law for the purpose of the Act.
2. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and recurring
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is difficult to estimate the
amount required for the purpose as it would depend upon the decisions of the Trust.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.  Clause 15 empowers the Trustee to make regulations to carry out
defined objectives.  The rules and regulations will relate to matters of details only, and as
such, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the erection and management of a temple of all religions under one roof to
perpetuate the ideals of the Constitution of India which establishes India as a secular
State and for the purpose of creating awareness, tolerance towards, and honour,
respect, preservation, growth and spread of spiritual knowledge of all
religions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Shanta Chhetri, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1821RS(S3)—12.12.2022.