AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
Bill No. LXXXVI of 2022
THE NATIONAL JUDICIAL COMMISSION BILL, 2022
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
 CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
S
ELECTION FOR APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES AND THEIR TRANSFER
3. Reference to Commission for filling up of vacancies.
4. Procedure for selection of Judge of Supreme Court.
5. Procedure for selection of Judge of High Court.
6. Power of President to require reconsideration.
7. Procedure for transfer of Judges.
8. Procedure to be followed by Commission in discharge of its functions.
CHAPTER III
J
UDICIAL STANDARDS TO BE FOLLOWED BY JUDGES
9. Judicial standards.
CHAPTER IV
DECLARATION OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES BY JUDGES
10. Declaration of assets and liabilities.
11. Making available document or information in relation to a declaration of assets and
liabilities of Judges on website.
12. Maintenance of records.
 CHAPTER V
M
AKING OF COMPLAINT
13. Complaints.
\\server-3\F\BILL 2022\RS\1809RS

14. Manner of making of complaint.
15. Reference to Scrutiny Panel.
CHAPTER VI
COMPLAINTS SCRUTINY PANEL
16. Constitution of Complaints Scrutiny Panel.
17. Composition of Scrutiny Panel.
18. Functions of Scrutiny Panel.
19. Procedure of Scrutiny Panel.
20. Powers relating to scrutiny of complaints.
21. Provision for officers and other employees of Scrutiny Panel.
CHAPTER VII
A. P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF JUDICIAL COMMISSION IN THE MATTER OF INQUIRY OF COMPLAINTS
AND PROCEDURE FOR THE SAME.
22. Procedure for complaints received by the Commission.
23. Records of complaints forwarded to Scrutiny Panel.
24. Procedure for complaints against the Chief Justice of India.
25. Procedure for proceedings following change in composition of the Commission.
B. C
ONSTITUTION OF INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS AND PROCEDURE FOR
INVESTIGATION
26. Investigation by investigation committee.
27. Powers of the Commission and investigating committee.
28. Search and seizure by investigation committee.
29. Assistance to investigation committee by Government agencies.
30. Ex parte investigation.
31. Investigation into act or conduct of certain other persons in certain cases.
32. Submission of report by investigation committee.
 C. I
NQUIRY PROCEDURE OF INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
33. Procedure in inquiries by investigation committee.
34. Investigation committee to have power to regulate its own procedure.
35. Central Government to appoint an advocate to conduct cases against Judge.
D. S
TAFF OF COMMISSION
36. Staff of the Commission.
E. PENAL TIES ON CONCLUSION OF INQUIRY
37. Stoppage of assigning judicial work in certain cases.
38. Procedure on receipt of report of investigation committee.
39. Advice to President for removal of Judge.
40. Filing of complaints against complainant in certain cases.
(ii)
 C
LAUSES

F. OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO INQUIRY
41. Proceedings before the Commission to be judicial proceedings.
42. Power to call for assistance.
43. Confidentiality in complaint procedure.
44. Keeping identity of complainant confidential.
45. No action for contempt to lie in certain cases.
46. Investigation and inquiry by the Commission not to affect criminal liability.
47. All records, documents, etc., related to complaint, scrutiny, investigation and
inquiry to be confidential.
48. Protection of action taken in good faith.
CHAPTER VIII
P
ROCEDURE FOR PRESENTATION OF AN ADDRESS FOR REMOV AL OF A JUDGE
49. Laying of advice of the Commission before Parliament.
50. Motion for removal of a Judge.
51. Investigation into misbehaviour or incapacity of Judge by investigation
committee for removal of Judges.
52. Consideration of report and procedure for presentation of an address for removal
of Judge.
53. Power of Joint Committee to make rules.
CHAPTER IX
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
54. Intentional insult or interruption to the Commission.
55. Penalty for violation of confidentiality in complaint procedure.
56. Power of the Commission to try certain cases.
57. Punishment for frivolous and vexatious complaints.
58. Offences by companies.
59. Offences by societies or trusts.
60. Appeal to Supreme Court.
61. Power of Central Government to make rules.
62. Power to remove difficulties.
63. Power of the Commission of make regulations.
64. Repeal and savings.
THE SCHEDULE.
(iii)
 C
LAUSES

1
Bill No. LXXXVI of 2022
THE NATIONAL JUDICIAL COMMISSION BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to regulate the procedure to be followed by the National Judicial Commission for
recommending persons for appointment as the Chief Justice of India and
other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges
of  High Courts  and   for  their transfers  and  to  lay down  judicial
standards  and provide for accountability of Judges, and establish
credible and expedient mechanism for investigating into individual
complaints for misbehavior or incapacity of a judge of the
Supreme Court or of a High Court and to regulate the
procedure for such investigation; and for the
presentation of  an address by  Parliament
to the President in relation to proceeding
for removal of a Judge and for matters
connected therewith or
 incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1)  This Act may be called the National Judicial Commission Act, 2022.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "assets" includes immovable and movable property;
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) "immovable property" includes the land and any building or other
structure attached to the land or permanently fastened to anything which is
attached to the land, and tenancies, lease holds or any other interest in immovable
property;
(ii) "movable property" includes any other property which is not
immovable property as also corporeal and incorporeal property of every
description and household goods and personal effects of the value of each
item of more than fifty thousand rupees;
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Council of States;
(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission;
(d) "Commission" means the National Judicial Commission referred to in article
124A of the Constitution;
(e)  "competent authority" means in relation to,—
(i)  the Judge of the High Court, the Chief Justice of that High Court;
(ii)  the Chief Justice of the High Court, the Chief Justice of India;
(iii)  the Judge of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice of India;
(iv)  the Chief Justice of India, the President of India;
(f) "High Court" means the High Court in respect of which recommendation for
appointment of a Judge is proposed to be made by the Commission;
(g) "incapacity" means physical or mental incapacity which is, or is likely to be,
of a permanent character;
(h) "investigation committee" means the investigation committee constituted
under section 26;
(i) "inquiry" means an inquiry for proof of misbehaviour or incapacity;
(j)  "Judge" means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and includes
the Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of a High Court;
(k) "judicial standards" means the values of judicial life specified in section 9,
and the Schedule;
(l) "liabilities" includes financial guarantees given and all loans raised from any
bank, financial institution or any other source;
(m) "Member" means a Member of the Commission and includes its Chairperson;
(n)  "misbehaviour" means,—
(i) conduct which brings dishonour or disrepute to the judiciary; or
(ii) wilful or persistent failure to perform the duties of a Judge; or
(iii) wilful abuse of judicial office; or
(iv) corruption or lack of integrity which includes delivering judgments
for collateral or extraneous reasons, making demands for consideration in cash
or kind for giving judgments or any other action on the part of the Judge which
has the effect of subverting the administration of justice; or
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(v) committing an offence involving moral turpitude; or
(vi) failure to furnish the declaration of assets and liabilities in
accordance with the provisions of this Act; or
(vii) willfully giving false information in the declaration of assets and
liabilities under this Act; or
(viii) wilful suppression of any material fact, whether such fact relates to
a period before assumption of office, which would have bearing on his integrity;
or
(ix) wilful breach of judicial standards;
(o)  "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(p) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(q) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Commission under the
Constitution of India and this Act;
(r) "Scrutiny Panel" means the Complaints Scrutiny Panel constituted under
section 16 for the scrutiny of complaints; and
(s) "Speaker" means the Speaker of the House of the People.
CHAPTER II
S
ELECTION FOR APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES AND THEIR TRANSFER
3. (1)  The Central Government shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of
coming into force of this Act, intimate the vacancies existing in the posts of Judges in the
Supreme Court and in a High Court to the Commission for making its recommendations to
fill up such vacancies.
(2)  The Central Government shall, six months prior to the date of occurrence of any
vacancy by reason of completion of the term of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court, make a reference to the Commission for making its recommendation to fill up such
vacancy.
(3)  The Central Government shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of
occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death or resignation of a Judge of the Supreme
Court or of a High Court, make a reference to the Commission for making its recommendations
to fill up such vacancy.
4. (1)  The Commission shall recommend for appointment the senior-most Judge of
the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of India if he is considered fit to hold the office:
Provided that a member of the Commission whose name is being considered for
recommendation shall not participate in the meeting.
(2)  The Commission shall, on the basis of ability, merit and any other criteria of
suitability as may be specified by regulations, recommend the name for appointment as a
Judge of the Supreme Court from amongst persons who are eligible to be appointed as such
under clause (3)  of article 124 of the Constitution.
5. (1)  The Commission shall recommend for appointment a Judge of a High Court to
be the Chief Justice of a High Court on the basis of inter se seniority of High Court Judges
and ability, merit and any other criteria of suitability as may be specified by regulations.
(2)  The Commission shall seek nomination from the Chief Justice of the concerned
High Court for the purpose of recommending for appointment a person to be a Judge of that
High Court.
Reference to
Commission
for filling up of
vacancies.
Procedure for
selection of
Judge of High
Court.
Procedure for
selection of
Judge of
Supreme
Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

4
(3) The Commission shall on the basis of ability, merit and any other criteria of
suitability as may be specified by regulations, nominate name for appointment as a Judge of
a High Court from amongst persons who are eligible to be appointed as such under clause
(2)  of article 217 of the Constitution and forward such names to the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court for his views.
(4)  Before making any nomination under sub-section (2)  or giving his views under
sub-section (3), the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court shall consult two senior-
most Judges of that High Court and such other Judges and Bar of that High Court as may
be specified by regulations.
(5) After receiving views and nomination under sub-sections ( 2)  and ( 3), the
Commission may in compliance of the mandate of clause (1)  of article 124C of the Constitution
recommend for appointment the person who is found suitable on the basis of ability, merit
and any other criteria of suitability as may be specified by regulations.
6. The President shall, on the recommendations made by the Commission, appoint the
Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the Chief
Justice of a High Court or the Judge of a High Court:
Provided that the President may, if considers necessary, require the Commission to
reconsider, either generally or otherwise, the recommendation made by it:
Provided further that if the Commission makes recommendation with or without
modifications after reconsideration, the President shall make appointment accordingly.
7. The Commission shall recommend for transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges of
High Courts from one High Court to any other High Court, as per the procedure specified by
regulations.
8. The Commission shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may direct
and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings, as it may specify by regulations.
CHAPTER III
J
UDICIAL STANDARDS TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE JUDGES
9. (1)  Every Judge shall continue to practice universally accepted values of judicial
life as specified in the Schedule to this Act.
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision,
no Judge shall—
(a) contest the election to any office of a club, society or other association or
hold such elective office except in a society or association connected with the law or
any court;
(b) have close association or close social interaction with individual members
of the Bar, particularly with those who practice in the same court in which he is a
Judge;
(c) permit any member of his immediate family, who is a member of the Bar, to
appear before him or associated in any manner with a cause to be dealt with by him;
(d) permit any member of his family, who is a member of the Bar, to use the
residence in which the Judge actually resides or use other facilities provided to the
Judge, for professional work of such member;
(e) hear and decide a matter  in which a member of his family, or his close relative
or a friend is concerned;
Power of
President to
require re-
consideration.
Procedure for
transfer of
Judges.
Procedure to
be followed by
Commission
in discharge
of its
functions.
Judicial
standards.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(f) enter into public debate or express his views in public on political matters
or on matters which are pending or are likely to arise for judicial determination by
him:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to,—
(i) the views expressed by a Judge in his individual capacity on issues of public
interest during discussion in private forum or academic forum so as not to affect his
functioning as a Judge;
(ii)  the views expressed by a Judge relating to administration of court or its
efficient functioning;
(g)  make unwarranted comments against conduct of any constitutional or
statutory authority or statutory bodies or statutory institutions or any chairperson or
member or officer thereof, in general, or at the time of hearing matters pending or likely
to arise for judicial determinations;
(h) give interview, to the media in relation to any of his judgment delivered, or
order made, or direction issued, by him, in any case adjudicated by him;
(i) accept gifts or hospitality except from his relatives;
(j) hear and decide a matter in which a company or society or trust in which he
holds or any member of his family holds shares or interest, unless he has disclosed
his such holding or interest, and no objection to his hearing and deciding the matter
is raised;
(k) speculate in securities or indulge in insider trading in securities;
(l) engage, directly or indirectly, in trade or business, either by himself or in
association with any other person:
Provided that the publication of a legal treatise or any activity in the nature of a
hobby shall not be construed as trade or business for the purpose of this clause;
(m) seek any financial benefit in the form of a perquisite or privilege attached to
his office unless it is clearly available or admissible;
(n)  hold membership in any organisation that practices invidious discrimination
on the basis of religion or race or caste or sex or place of birth;
(o)  have bias in his judicial work or judgments on the basis of religion or race or
caste or sex or place of birth.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "relative" means—
(i) spouse of the Judge;
(ii) brother or sister of the Judge;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the Judge;
(iv) brother or sister of either of the parents of the Judge;
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the Judge;
(vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the Judge;
(vii) nephew or niece;
(viii) cousin brother or cousin sister; and
(ix) spouse of the person referred to in clauses ( ii)  to (viii) .
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
CHAPTER IV
DECLARATION OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES BY JUDGES
10. (1)  Every Judge shall make a declaration of his assets and liabilities in the manner
as provided by or under this Act.
(2)  A Judge shall, within thirty days from the date on which he makes and subscribes
an oath or affirmation to enter upon his office, furnish to the competent authority the
information relating to—
(a)  the assets of which he, his spouse and his dependent children are, jointly or
severally, owners or beneficiaries;
(b) his liabilities and that of his spouse and his dependent children.
(3)  A Judge holding his office as such, at the time of the commencement of this Act,
shall furnish information relating to such assets and liabilities, as referred to in sub-section (2)
to the competent authority within thirty days of the coming into force of this Act.
(4)  Every Judge shall file with the competent authority, on or before the 31st July of
every year, an annual return of such assets and liabilities, as referred to in sub-section (2),
as on the 31st March of that year.
(5)  The information under sub-section ( 2)  or sub-section ( 3)  and annual return
under sub-section ( 4)  shall be furnished in such form and in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "dependent children" means sons
and daughters who have no separate means of earning and are wholly dependent on the
Judge for their livelihood.
11. The competent authority shall exhibit the document or information in relation to a
declaration of assets and liabilities of Judges,—
(a)  in the case of Judges and Chief Justices of the High Courts, on the website
of the High Court in which such Judges and Chief Justice are serving;
(b) in the case of Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justice of India, on the
website of the Supreme Court.
12. The competent authority shall keep the documents or information forms containing
the details of the assets and liabilities and other particulars in relation thereto filed by the
Judges in its safe custody for such period as may be decided by the Commission and make
available to it, as and when, on demand.
CHAPTER V
M
AKING OF COMPLAINT
13. Any person making an allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity in respect of a
Judge may file a complaint in this regard to the Commission.
14. The complaint under section 13 shall—
(a) be in such form and filed in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) set forth particulars of the misbehaviour or incapacity which is the subject
matter of allegation;
(c) be verified at the foot of the complaint by the complainant and shall specify,
by reference to the numbered paragraphs of the complaint, what he verifies of his own
knowledge and what he verifies upon information and shall refer to the source of the
information.
Declaration of
assets and
liabilities.
Making
available
document or
information
in relation to
a declaration
of assets and
liabilities of
Judges on
website.
Maintenance
of records.
Complaints.
Manner of
making of
complaint.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

S3\F\BILL 2022\RS\40RS
15. Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the Commission shall refer all such
complaints to the appropriate Scrutiny Panel constituted under Chapter VI for scrutiny.
CHAPTER VI
COMPLAINTS SCRUTINY PANEL
16. There shall be constituted a panel to be called "Complaints Scrutiny Panel" in the
Supreme Court and in every High Court to scrutinise the complaints against a Judge received
under this Act.
17. (1)  The Scrutiny Panel in the Supreme Court shall consist of a former Chief Justice
of India and two Judges of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the Commission.
(2)  The Scrutiny Panel in every High Court shall consist of a former Chief Justice of
that High Court and two Judges of that High Court to be nominated by the Commission in
consultation with the Chief Justice of that High Court.
18. (1)  If the Scrutiny Panel, after scrutiny of the complaint referred to it for scrutiny
under section 15, and after making scrutiny of the complaint, as it deems appropriate, is
satisfied that—
(a) there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the Judge, it shall, after
recording reasons therefore, submit a report on its findings to the Commission, within
three months of receipt of such complaint, for making inquiry against the Judge in
accordance with the provisions of this Act; and
(b) the complaint is frivolous or vexatious, or is not made in good faith, or only
with a view to scandalize or intimidate a judge or there are not sufficient grounds for
inquiring into the complaint, or the complaint relates only to the merits of the judgment
or a procedural order, and, then, it shall after recording reasons therefore submit a
report on its findings to the Commission, within three months of receipt of such
complaint, for further action in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2)  The Commission on considering the report of the Scrutiny Panel under clause (b)
of sub-section (1)  above may treat the matter as closed or if it found that there are sufficient
grounds for inquiring into the complaint, reasons recorded, order inquiry against the Judge
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(3)  If the complaint is found frivolous or vexatious or is not made in good faith or only
with a view to scandalize or intimidate a Judge, the Commission may take further action in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(4)  The scrutiny of complaints under this section by the Scrutiny Panel shall be held
in camera.
19. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Scrutiny Panel shall have power to
regulate its own procedure in scrutinising the complaints referred to it for scrutiny under
section 15.
20. The Scrutiny Panel shall, while scrutinising the complaints forwarded to it for
scrutiny under section 15, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 and in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
Reference to
Scrutiny
Panel.
Constitution
of Complaints
Scrutiny
Panel.
Composition
of Scrutiny
Panel.
Functions of
Scrutiny
Panel.
Procedure of
Scrutiny
Panel.
5 of 1908
Powers
relating to
scrutiny of
complaints.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
7

8
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or other documents;
and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
21. (1) The Chief Justice of India shall, determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist the Scrutiny Panel referred to in sub-section
(1)  of section 17 in the discharge of its functions and provide the Scrutiny Panel with such
officers and other employees as he may think fit.
(2)  The Chief Justice of the High Court shall, determine the nature and categories of
the officers and other employees required to assist the Scrutiny Panel referred to in sub-
section (2)  of section 17 in the discharge of its functions and provide the Scrutiny Panel
with such officers and other employees as he may think fit.
CHAPTER VII
A. P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF JUDICIAL COMMISSION IN THE MATTER OF INQUIRY OF
COMPLAINTS AND PROCEDURE FOR THE SAME
22. The Commission shall, within three months of the receipt of a complaint relating to
misbehaviour of—
(a) an individual Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court,
refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny Panel of the Supreme Court to scrutinise and
report thereon;
(b) an individual Judge of a High Court, refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny
Panel of the High Court in which such Judge is acting as such, to scrutinise and
report thereon.
(c) the Chairperson of the Commission, the Commission without the Chairperson
shall nominate another Judge or a retired Chief Justice of India in his place as a
member of the Commission for the limited purpose of the inquiry.
(d) a judge of the Supreme Court who is a member of the Commission without
that member shall nominate another Judge of the Supreme Court in his place as a
member of the Commission for the limited purpose of the inquiry.
23. The Commission shall maintain a record of the complaints referred to the Scrutiny
Panel.
24. A complaint against the Chief Justice of India shall not be referred to the Scrutiny
Panel for scrutiny but shall be scrutinised by the Commission, without the Chief Justice of
India.
25. After the commencement of the proceedings relating to a complaint against a
Judge, if any change arises in the composition of the Commission due to retirement,
resignation or elevation or any other reason, the proceedings of the Commission shall
continue from the stage from which it was pending before such change and the Chairperson
of the Commission shall make such incidental changes, as he deems necessary, to continue
the proceedings.
B. C
ONSTITUTION OF INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS AND PROCEDURE
FOR INVESTIGATION
26. (1)  The Commission, shall for the purpose of inquiry for misbehaviour by a Judge,
constitute an investigation committee, by whatever name called, to investigate into the
complaint in respect of which the Commission found necessary under sub-sections (c)  and
(d)  of section 22 or section 24 or the Scrutiny Panel has recommended in its report under
Provisions for
officers and
other
employees of
Scrutiny
Panel.
Procedure for
complaints
received by
the
Commission.
Records of
complaints
forwarded to
Scrutiny
Panel.
Procedure for
complaints
against the
Chief Justice
of India.
Procedure for
proceedings
following
change in
composition
of the
Commission.
Investigation
by
investigation
committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
clause ( a)  of sub-section ( 1)  of section 18  for making inquiry against the Judge in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2)  The composition and tenure of the investigation committee shall be such as may
be decided by the Commission:
Provided that the number of the investigation committees, in no case, at a time, shall
exceed three:
Provided further that the Commission may, having regard to the nature of misbehaviour
of a Judge, may constitute different investigation committees for inquiry into different
complaints.
27. The Commission, shall, for the purpose of proceedings under this Act and the
investigation committee, while conducting any investigation under this Chapter, have all
the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and in
particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or other documents;
and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
28. (1)  If the investigation committee has reason to believe that any documents
which, in its opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any preliminary investigation or
inquiry, are secreted in any place, it may authorise any officer subordinate to it, or any
officer of an agency referred to in section 42, to search for and to seize such documents.
(2)  If the investigation committee is satisfied that any document seized under sub-
section (1)  would be evidence for the purpose of any investigation and that it would be
necessary to retain the original document in its custody, it may so retain the said document
till the completion of such investigation or retain a copy of such document, as it may deem
fit.
(3)  The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to searches shall,
so far as may be, apply to searches under this section subject to the modification that sub-
section (5)  of section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if, for the word "Magistrate",
wherever it occurs, the words "investigation committee or any officer authorised by it"
were substituted.
29. The investigation committee shall be entitled to make a request to the Commission
for assistance to it and the Commission may invoke its powers in this behalf under section
42 of this Act.
30. If a Judge, to whom notice is issued by the investigation committee referred to in
section 26, refuses to appear before it or does not co-operate with it in conducting
investigation, then, the investigation committee may proceed ex parte.
31. The investigation committee may cause investigation into any act or conduct of
any person, other than the Judge concerned, in so far as it considers necessary so to do for
the purpose of its investigation into any allegations made against a Judge and shall give
such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and to produce evidence in his
defence.
5 of 1908
Powers of the
Commission
and
investigation
committee.
Search and
seizure by
investigation
committee.
Assistance to
investigation
committee by
Government
agency.
Ex parte
investigation.
Investigation
into act or
conduct of
certain other
persons in
certain cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2 of 1974

10
32. The investigation committee, after completion of the inquiry in respect of a
complaint, shall submit its findings to the Commission.
C. INQUIRY PROCEDURE OF INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
33. (1)  The investigation committee shall frame definite charges against the Judge on
the basis of which the inquiry is proposed to be held.
(2)  Every such inquiry shall be conducted in camera by the investigation committee.
(3)  The charges framed under sub-section (1)  together with the statement of grounds
on which each such charge is based shall be communicated to the Judge and he shall be
given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a written statement of defence within such
time as may be specified by the investigation committee.
(4)  The investigation committee shall hold every such inquiry as expeditiously as
possible and in any case complete the inquiry within a period of six months from the date of
receipt of the complaint:
Provided that the Commission shall complete the inquiry by a further period of six
months.
34. Save as otherwise provided, the investigation committee shall have power to
regulate its own procedure in making the inquiry and shall give reasonable opportunity to
the Judge of cross examining witnesses, adducing evidence and of being heard in his
defence.
35. The Central Government may, if requested by the investigation committee, appoint
an advocate to conduct the cases against the Judge.
D. S
TAFF OF COMMISSION
36. (1)  The Commission shall, for the purpose of performing its functions under
this Act, appoint a Secretary and such other officers, staffs and employees possessing
such qualifications, as specified by regulations from time to time.
(2)  The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary, officers, staffs and employees
referred to in sub-section (1)  shall be as specified by regulations from time to time.
(3)  The Commission shall provide such number of its officers and other employees to
assist the investigation committee as the Commission considers appropriate having regard
to the nature of investigation in a case.
E. P
ENALTIES ON CONCLUSION OF INQUIRY
37.  During the pendency of the inquiry by the investigation committee, the
Commission may recommend stoppage of assigning judicial work including cases assigned
to the Judge concerned if it appears to the Commission that it is necessary in the interest of
fair and impartial scrutiny of complaints or investigation or inquiry.
38. (1)  If the Commission on receipt of the report from the investigation committee is
satisfied that—
(a) no charges have been proved, it shall dismiss the complaint and matter be
closed and no further action shall be taken against the Judge and the complainant
shall be informed accordingly; and
(b) all or any of the charges have been proved but the Commission is of the
opinion that the charges proved do not warrant removal of the Judge, it may, by order,
issue advisories or warnings.
Submission of
report by
investigation
committee.
Investigation
committee to
have power to
regulate its
own
procedure.
Central
Government
to appoint an
advocate to
conduct cases
against judge.
Staff of the
Commission.
Stoppage of
assigning work
in certain
cases.
Procedure on
receipt of
report of
investigation
committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Procedure in
inquiries by
investigation
committee.

11
(2)  Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), if the
Commission, on receipt of the report from the investigation committee is satisfied that there
has been a prima facie commission of any offence under any law for the time being in force
by a Judge, it may recommend to the Central Government for prosecution of the Judge in
accordance with the law for the time being in force.
(3)  In a case where an inquiry or investigation against the Judge has been initiated
and such Judge has demitted office during such inquiry or investigation, such inquiry or
investigation may be continued if the Commission is of the opinion that the misbehaviour
is serious in nature and requires to be inquired into or investigated and the Commission
may after conclusion of inquiry forward its findings to the Central Government to take
further action in the matter under relevant law for the time being in force.
39. If the Commission is satisfied that all or any of the charges of misbehavior or
incapacity of a Judge have been proved and that they are of serious nature warranting his
removal, it shall request the Judge to voluntarily resign and if he fails to do so, then, advise
the President to proceed for the removal of the Judge and the President shall refer the matter
to Parliament.
40. If the Scrutiny Panel refers a case to the Commission under sub-section (b)  of
section 18, the Commission shall consider the matter further and if it concurs with the
conclusion of the Scrutiny Panel, it may authorise the filing of a criminal complaint against
the original complainant before a competent court.
F. O
THER PROVISIONS RELATING TO INQUIRY
41. All proceedings under this Act shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, and the Commission shall be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
42.The Commission shall be entitled to take assistance of such officers of the Central
Government or State Government or any agency thereof or authority as it deems fit.
43. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the complainant and every person who participates in the scrutiny or investigation or
inquiry as a witness or as a legal practitioner or in any other capacity, whether or not he
seeks confidentiality about his name, shall undertake to the Commission or Scrutiny Panel
or investigation committee that he shall not reveal his own name, the name of the Judge
complained against, the contents of the complaint or any of the documents or proceedings
to anybody else including the media without the prior written approval of the Commission:
Provided that the Commission may, if it considers appropriate, authorise any person
to apprise the media or press in respect of matters relating to complaint, scrutiny or
investigation or inquiry, as the case may be.
44. The Commission or the Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee may, at the
request of a complainant, direct that the complainant be accorded such protection, as it
deems appropriate, including keeping his identity confidential, from everybody and also
the Judge against whom the complaint is made.
45. After the commencement of scrutiny of complaints under this Act, no action for
contempt of court shall lie or shall be proceeded with in respect of the allegations, which are
the subject matter of the investigation or inquiry.
46. Any scrutiny, investigation or inquiry pending before the Scrutiny Panel or
investigation committee or Commission shall not affect the criminal liability in respect of
such allegations which are the subject matter of the investigation or inquiry.
Advice of
President for
removal of
Judge.
Filing of
complaints
against
complainant
in certain
cases.
45 of 1860
2 of 1974
Proceedings
before the
Commission
to be judicial
proceedings.
Power to call
for assistance.
Confidentiality
in complaint
procedure.
Keeping
identity of
complainant
confidential.
No action for
contempt to
lie in certain
cases.
Investigation
and enquiry by
the
Commission
not to affect
criminal
liability.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
47. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005 or any
other law for the time being in force, all papers, documents and records of proceedings
related to a complaint, preliminary investigation and inquiry shall be confidential and shall
not be disclosed by any person in any proceeding except as directed by the Commission:
Provided that the findings of the investigation committee and the orders passed by
the Commission under clause (b)  of sub-section (1)  of section 38 shall be made public.
48. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairperson or
any member of the Commission, Scrutiny Panel, investigation committee or against any
officer or employee, agency or person engaged by such committees or panel for the purpose
of conducting scrutiny or investigation or inquiry in respect of anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
CHAPTER VIII
P
ROCEDURE FOR PRESENTATION OF AN ADDRESS FOR REMOVAL OF A JUDGE
49. The President, on receipt of advice under section 39, shall cause the findings of
the Commission along with the accompanying materials to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament.
50. On laying of the advice of the Commission along with the accompanying material,
the Central Government may move a motion in either House of Parliament for taking up the
said advice for consideration by the House.
51. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 49 or section 50, if a notice is
given of a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of a
Judge signed,—
(a)  in the case of a notice given in the House of the People, by not less than one
hundred members of that House;
(b)  in the case of a notice given in the Council of States, by not less than fifty
members of that; and
(c)  Council, then, the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Chairman may, after
consulting such persons, if any, as he thinks fit and after considering such materials,
if any, as may be available to him, either admit the motion or refuse to admit the same.
(2)  If the motion referred to in sub-section (1)  is admitted, the Speaker or, as the case
may be, the Chairman shall keep the motion pending and the matter shall be referred to the
Commission for constitution of an investigation committee under section 26.
(3)  The Commission, after receipt of reference under sub-section ( 2), constitute an
investigation committee under section 26 and the investigation committee shall conduct an
inquiry in accordance with the provisions contained under Chapter VII and submit its
report to the Commission for being submitted to the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may
be, for consideration.
(4)  Where it is alleged that a Judge is unable to discharge the duties of his office
efficiently due to any physical or mental incapacity and the allegation is denied, the
investigation committee may arrange for the medical examination of the Judge by such
Medical Board as may be appointed for the purpose by the Speaker or, as the case may be,
the Chairman.
(5)  The Medical Board shall undertake such medical examination of the Judge as may
be considered necessary and submit a report to the investigation committee stating therein
whether the incapacity is such as to render the Judge unfit to continue in office.
All records,
documents
etc. related to
complaint,
scrutiny,
investigation
and enquiry to
be
confidential.
22 of 2005
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Laying of
advice of
Commission
before the
Parliament.
Motion for
removal of a
Judge.
Investigation
into
misbehaviour
or incapacity
of Judge by
investigation
committee for
removal of
Judges.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(6)  If the Judge refuses to undergo medical examination considered necessary by the
Medical Board, the Board shall submit a report to the investigation committee stating
therein the examination which the Judge has refused to undergo, and the investigation
committee may, on receipt of such report, presume that the Judge suffers from such physical
or mental incapacity as is alleged in the motion referred to in sub-section (1) .
52. (1)  If the report of the investigation committee contains a finding that the Judge
is not guilty of any misbehaviour or does not suffer from any incapacity, then, no further
steps shall be taken in either House of Parliament in relation to the report and the motion
pending in the House or the Houses of Parliament shall not be proceeded with.
(2)  If the report of the investigation committee contains a finding that the Judge is
guilty of any misbehaviour or suffers from any incapacity, then, the motion referred to in
section 50 shall together with the report of the investigation committee, be taken up for
consideration by the House or the Houses of Parliament in which it is pending.
(3)  If the motion is adopted by each House of Parliament in accordance with the
provisions of clause (4)  of article 124 or, as the case may be, in accordance with that clause
read with article 218 of the Constitution, then, the misbehaviour or incapacity of the Judge
shall be deemed to have been proved and an address praying for the removal of the Judge
shall be presented in the prescribed manner to the President by each House of Parliament in
the same session in which the motion has been adopted.
53. (1)  There shall be constituted a Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained for the purpose of making rules to
carry out the purposes of this Chapter.
(2) The Joint Committee shall consist of fifteen members of whom ten shall be nominated
by the Speaker and five shall be nominated by the Chairman.
(3) The Joint Committee shall elect its own Chairman and shall have power to regulate
its own procedure.
(4)  Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Joint
Committee may make rules to provide for the following, among other matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of transmission of a motion adopted in one House to the other
House of Parliament;
(b) the manner of presentation of an address to the President for the removal of
a Judge;
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to the members of the Committee
and the witnesses who may be required to attend meetings of such Committee;
(d) the facilities which may be accorded to the Judge for defending himself; and
(e)  any other matter which has to be, or may be, provided for by rules or in
respect of which provision is, in the opinion of the Joint Committee, necessary.
(5)  Any rules made under this section shall not take effect until they are approved
and confirmed both by the Speaker and the Chairman and are published in the Official
Gazette, and such publication of the rules shall be conclusive proof that they have been
duly made.
CHAPTER IX
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
54. (1) Whoever intentionally insults, or causes any interruption, to the Scrutiny
Panel or investigation committee or Commission while the Commission or Scrutiny Panel or
investigation committee or any of their members is doing scrutiny or conducting any
Intentional
insult or
interruption
to the
Commission.
Power of Joint
Committee to
make rules.
Consideration
of report and
procedure for
presentation
of an address
for removal
of Judge.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
investigation or inquiry under this Act, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(2)  The provisions of sub-section (2)  of section 199 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall apply in relation to an offence referred to in sub-section (1)  as they
apply in relation to an offence referred to in sub-section (2)  of the said section 199, subject
to the modification that no complaint in respect of such offence shall be made by the Public
Prosecutor except with the previous sanction of the Commission.
55. If any complainant or other person, who participates in the scrutiny or investigation
or inquiry as a witness or as a lawyer or in any other capacity, contravenes the provisions
of section 43 or section 44 or section 47, shall be liable for punishment with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees, or with both.
56. When any such offence as is described in sub-section (1) of section 54 is committed,
in the view, or, in the presence, of the Commission, then the said Commission, may cause the
offender to be detained in custody and may at any time on the same day take cognizance of
the offence and after giving the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause as to
why he should not be punished under this section, try such offender summarily so far as
may be in accordance with the procedure specified for summary trials under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, and sentence him to simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
57. (1)  Any person who makes a complaint which is found, after following the
procedure under this Act to be frivolous or vexatious or made with an intent to scandalise
or intimidate the Judge against whom such complaint is filed, shall be punishable with
simple imprisonment which may extend to one year and also with fine which may extend to
fifty thousand rupees.
(2)  The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(3)  No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the complaint
under this section in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act.
58. (1)  Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that where a company has different establishments or branches or different
units in any establishment or branch, the concerned Head or the person in-charge of such
establishment, branch or unit nominated by the company as responsible shall be liable for
contravention in respect of such establishment, branch or unit:
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
Penalty for
violation of
confidentiality
in complaint
procedure.
2 of 1974
Power of the
Commission
to try certain
cases.
2 of 1974
Punishment
for frivolous
and vexatious
complaints.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
2 of 1974

15
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
59. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or trust,
every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the society or trust for the conduct of the business of the society or the
trust, as well as the society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part
of any director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer of the society or trust, such
director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
(a)  "society" means anybody corporate registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 and, "trust" means anybody registered under the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882; and
(b)  "director", in relation to a society or trust, means a member of its governing
board other than an ex-officio member representing the interests of the Central or
State Government or the appropriate statutory authority.
60. Any person convicted on a trial held under sub-section ( 1) of section 57 may,
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, appeal,
within sixty days of order of such conviction, to the Supreme Court.
61. (1)  The Central Government may make rules, to carry out the provisions of this
Act, other than the provisions contained under Chapter VIII.
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules
made under this section may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which, information is to be furnished or, annual
return to be filed, under section 10;
(b) the form and manner in which complaint shall be filed under section 14;
(c) other matters in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel shall, for the purpose of
scrutiny of complaint, have powers of a civil court under section 20;
(d) other matters in respect of which the Commission shall, for the purpose of
inquiry or investigation of complaint have powers of a civil court under clause (f)  of
section 27;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in
respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
(3)  Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
Offences by
societies or
trusts.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
30
35
40
45
25

16
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
62. (1)  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, after consultation with the Commission, by an order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2)  Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
63. (1)  The Commission may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations
consistent with the Constitution of India, this Act, and the rules made thereunder, to carry
out the provisions of this Act.
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a)  the criteria of suitability with respect to appointment of a Judge of the
Supreme Court under article 124C of the Constitution and sub-section (2)  of section
4 of this Act;
(b)  other procedure and conditions for selection and appointment of a Judge of
the Supreme Court under article 124C of the Constitution;
(c)  the criteria of suitability with respect to appointment of a Judge of the High
Court under Article 124C of the Constitution and sub-section (3)  of section 5 of this
Act;
(d)  other Judges who may be consulted with the Chief  Justice and manner and
mode of consultation with the bar under article 124C of the Constitution and sub-
section (4)  of section 5 of this Act;
(e)  the manner of eliciting views of the Governor and the Chief  Minister under
clause (b)  of article 124B of the Constitution;
(f)  other procedure and conditions for selection and appointment of a Judge of
the High Court under article 124B and 124C of the Constitution and sub-section (3)  of
section 5 of this Act;
(g)  the procedure for transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges from one High
Court to any other High Court under clause (c)  of article 124B and clause (2)  of article
124C of the Constitution;
(h)  the procedure to be followed by the Commission in the discharge of its
functions under clause (2)  of article 124C of the Constitution;
(i)  the rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at the meetings
of Commission, including the quorum at its meeting under clause (2)  of article 124C of
the Constitution and section 8 of this Act;
(j)  any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations
or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
64. (1)  The Judges (Inquiry)  Act 1968, and National Judicial Appointments
Commission Act, 2014 are hereby repealed.
(2)  Notwithstanding the repeal of the Judges (Inquiry)  Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred
to as the repealed Act)  the rules made by the Joint Committee under section 7 of the
repealed Act shall continue to be in force until rules are framed under section 53 of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of the
Commission
to make
regulations.
51 of 1968
40 of 2014
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Repeal and
savings.

17
(3)  Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to
have been done or taken including any order or notice made or issued or any inquiry
initiated under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken or initiated under the corresponding
provisions of this Act.
(4)  The mention of particular matters in sub-sections (2)  and (3)  shall not be held to
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with
regard to the effect of repeal.
————
10 of 1897
5

THE  SCHEDULE
[See section 9(1)]
JUDICIAL STANDARDS
1. Norms, including punctuality and commitment to work, guidelines and conventions
essential for the conduct and behaviour of Judges, being pre-requisite for an
independent, strong and respected judiciary, having integrity and detachment and impartial
administration of justice as reflected in the Restatement of V alues already adopted by the
Conference of Chief Justices held in 1999 shall be practiced by every Judge.
2. All times be conscious that he is under the public gaze and not do any act or
omission which is unbecoming of the high office he occupies and the public esteem in
which that office is held.
3.  A degree of aloofness consistent with the dignity of his office shall be practiced by
every Judge.
4. Judgments should speak for themselves.
18

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed under clause (2)  of article 124 and the
Judges of the High Courts are appointed under clause (1)  of article 217 of the Constitution,
by the President. The Ad-hoc Judges and retired Judges for the Supreme Court are
appointed under clause (1)  of article 127 and article 128 of the Constitution respectively.
The appointment of additional Judges and acting Judges for the High Court is made under
article 224 and the appointment of retired Judges for sittings of the High Courts is made
under article 224A of the Constitution. The transfer of Judges from one High Court to
another High Court is made by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of
India under clause (1)  of article 222 of the Constitution. The inquiry for misbehavior,
misconduct and misdemeanor of Judges is conducted under the Judges (Inquiry)  Act 1968.
2. The Supreme Court in the matter of the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record
Association Vs. Union of India in the year 1993, and in its Advisory Opinion in the year 1998
in the Third Judges case, had interpreted clause (2)  of article 124 and clause (1)  of article
217 of the Constitution with respect to the meaning of "consultation" as "concurrence".
Consequently, a Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges to the Supreme
Court and High Courts was formulated, and is being followed for appointment.
3. Independence of judiciary is a basic feature and part of basic structure of the
Constitution of India, as declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Transparency and
accountability in the matter of appointment of the judges of the High Courts and Supreme
Court is very much linked to this concept. It is widely accepted that the prevailing collegium
system needs to be revisited in this regard.
4. Accordingly, the Constitution (Ninety Ninth Amendment)  Act, 2014 was enacted
added by section to amend the relevant provisions of the Constitution and for setting up a
National Judicial Appointments Commission. The Act inserted new articles 124A, 124B and
124C after article 124 of the Constitution to provide for the composition and the functions
of the proposed National Judicial Appointments Commission. The National Judicial
Appointments Commission Act, 2014 (Act No. 40 Of 2014)  was also enacted inter alia
regulate the procedure to be followed by the National Judicial Appointments Commission
for recommending persons for appointment as the Chief Justice of India and other Judges
of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts and for their
transfers etc. However, these Acts were held to be unconstitutional by the Hon'ble Supreme
court of India in the judgment in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Advocates
Association Vs. Union of India (2016) .
5. After review of the relevant constitutional provisions, the pronouncements of the
Supreme Court and consultations with eminent Jurists, it is felt that a new broad based
National Judicial Commission should be established for making recommendations for
appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. The said Commission would
provide a meaningful role for the judiciary and all other important stakeholders including
the Bar to present their view points and make the participants accountable, while also
introducing transparency in the selection process. The Commission shall have independent
and autonomy under the constitution and comprehensive powers for selection of judges to
the High Courts and Supreme Court, transfer of judges of the High Courts and inquiry for
misbehavior, misconduct and such misdemeanor of the judges.
6. The Constitution (Amendment)  Bill, 2022 set to be introduced in the Parliament
along with the instant Bill, enables amendment of relevant provisions of the Constitution
and for setting up a National Judicial Commission with comprehensive powers and in the
light of judgment in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Advocates Association Vs. Union
of India.
7. The present Bill, namely the National Judicial Commission Bill, 2022 inter alia
provides for the time frame to initiate the process of filling up of vacancies in the Supreme
19

20
Court and High Courts and the procedure for selection of Chief Justice of India, Chief
Justice of High Courts and Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. It further
provides that the President may, if necessary, require the Commission to reconsider the
recommendation. However, if the Commission makes unanimous recommendations on such
reconsideration, then the President shall make the appointment accordingly.
8. Further, this Bill provides that the National Judicial Commission may make regula-
tions inter alia specifying the criteria of suitability with respect to the appointment of
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts, the procedure and conditions for selection
and appointment of Judge of the Supreme Court and High Court, the procedure for transfer
of Judges from one High Court to another High Court and the procedure to be followed by
the Commission in the discharge of its functions. It also provides for detailed mechanism
for inquiry into misbehavior, misconduct and such misdemeanor of the judges. It further
provides for consequential repeal of the Judges (Inquiry)  Act, 1968 and National Judicial
Appointments Commission  Act, 2014.
9. The Bill, thereby seeks to regulate the procedure to be followed by the National
Judicial Commission for recommending persons for appointment as the Chief Justice of
India and other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges of High
Courts and for their transfers and to lay down judicial standards and provide for accountability
of Judges, and establish credible and expedient mechanism for investigating into individual
complaints for misbehavior or incapacity of a judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court
and to regulate the procedure for such investigation; and for the presentation of an address
by Parliament to the President in relation to proceeding for removal of a Judge and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. It facilitates to broad base the appointment
of Judges in the Supreme Court and High Courts, enables participation of judiciary and
other important stakeholders and ensures greater transparency, accountability and objectivity
in the appointment of the Judges in the Supreme Court and High Courts, transfer of the
judges of High Courts and better administration of justice.
Hence, this Bill.
BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 36 of the Bill inter alia provides for appointment of the Secretary and other
officers, staff and employees of the National Judicial Appointments Commission. Clause 53
of the Bill inter alia provides for payment of travelling and other allowances payable to the
Members of the Joint Committee of the Houses of Parliament constituted to make rules and
witnesses who may be required to attend meetings of such committee.
2. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is, therefore, not possible to ascertain the expenditure so involved.
21

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 61 of the Bill inter alia empowers the Central Government to make rules, to
carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Clause 63 of the Bill confers power
upon the National Judicial Commission to make regulations consistent with the Act and the
rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of
which the rules and regulations may be made are generally matters of procedure and
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
22

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the procedure to be followed by the National Judicial Commission for
recommending persons for appointment as the Chief Justice of India and
other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges
of  High Courts  and   for  their transfers  and  to  lay down  judicial
standards  and provide for accountability of Judges, and establish
credible and expedient mechanism for investigating into individual
complaints for misbehavior or incapacity of a judge of the
Supreme Court or of a High Court and to regulate the
procedure for such investigation; and for the
presentation of  an address by  Parliament
to the President in relation to proceeding
for removal of a Judge and for matters
connected therewith or
 incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1809RS(S3)—12.12.2022.