THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2)  It shall come into force, at once.
2. In article 16 of the Constitution, after clause ( 4), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
''(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special
provision for employment by way of self employment or by Providing reservation in
the matter of employment in favour of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
for the identified Backward Classes of citizens, in any enterprise in private sector, joint
sector or co-operative sector or in any philanthropic organisation.''
Short title and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011
Bill No. LXXXIII of  2010
Amendment
of article 16.5
10

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With  the enforcement of economic reforms and liberalisation of economy in the country,
greater emphasis on Government's economic policy is being given to free trade, business
and industry. The economy has been transformed from protected economy, into liberal
economy with emphasis on free enterprise. With India having signed the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), as a member of the World Trade Organisation, more and more
of public sector enterprises are being passed into private hands, workers' co-operatives are
being transformed into joint sector enterprises with increasing private equity, and joint
ventures with foreign countries, Non-Resident Indians or multinational participation.
In this scenario, when public sector is shrinking, the provision for reservations of
posts and jobs for weaker sections of the society, as contemplated under article 16 (4) or
under the Mandal Commission Report, are losing their significance, insofar as protection of
the interests of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes are concerned.
Time has come and situation has arisen when the spirit of the provisions of the
Constitution and the Mandal Commission recommendations should be extended to cover
the joint sector, private sector, co-operative enterprises and other organisations, including
the philanthropic organisations.
Hence  this Bill.
NARENDRA KUMAR KASHYAP

GMGIPMRND—6682RS(S3)—28-02-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap, M.P.)