Bill No. V of  2023
Short title and
commencement.
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 24 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code), the
following new section shall be inserted, namely:—
"24A. Whoever commits an act with the intention of causing death or with the
intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death to a woman or a
group of women because of their sex or gender, and such act results in death of the
woman or a group of women, commits the offence of "femicide".".
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Insertion of
Section 24A.
45 of 1860.
5
10
"Femicide"

2
3. After section 300 of the Code, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:—
"300A. Except in the cases excepted under sections 299 and 300, murder shall 
amount to femicide, if the act by which the death caused, is done with the intention of 
causing death of the woman or a group of women, or—
2ndly.—If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the 
offender knows to be likely to cause the death of a woman or a group of women to 
whom the harm is caused by an intimate or non-intimate partner, or—
3rdly.—If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any woman or 
a group of women and the bodily injury inten ded to be inflicted is sufficient in the 
ordinary course of nature to cause death, for bringing dishonor upon the family name 
or prestige, or—
4thly.—If the person commits sexual violation in a way that the person knows 
that it is so imminently dangerous that it will, in all probability, cause death, or such 
bodily injury resulting in death, and commits such act with the intention to establish 
superiority or ownership over a woman or a group of women.".
4. After section 302 of the Code, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:—
"302A. Whoever attempts to commit or commits femicide shall be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to pay a fine amounting to not 
less than ten lakh r upees.".
Insertion of
section
300A.
Murder
amounting to
femicide.
Insertion of
section
302A.
Punishment
for femicide.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The data from the National Crime Records Bureau shows that the rate of crime against
women (number of incidents per 1 lakh population) has increased from 56.5 per cent in 2020
to 64.5 per cent in 2021. The data encompasses all crimes committed against women but does
not specifically indicate the number of deaths caused. The murder of women is never really
understood as the complex gendered factors behind such violence and aggression is not
taken into cognizance.
2. Recent murders have drawn public attention to the increasing gender-based vio-
lence in India. This is in the backdrop of India's continued commitment to the UN Declaration
on ending violence against women that includes the threat of such acts or even coercion
occurring in both public and private life.
3. The Indian Penal Code, 1860 does not define femicide nor does it provide enhanced
punishment for crimes motivated by gendered stereotypes, emanating from discrimination
towards women and girls and unequal power relations between women and men, or harmful
social norms. The World Health Organization has highlighted the types of femicide as:
dowry-related femicide, honour killings, non-intimate and intimate and sexual femicide.
4. Therefore, it is pertinent to bring the different variations of murder amounting
to femicide under the ambit of the Indian Penal Code which otherwise are not linked to
gender-based motives.
Hence, this  Bill.
SUJEET KUMAR.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
ACT NO. 45 OF 1860.
* * * * *
24. Whoever does anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to one person
or wrongful loss to another person, is said to do that thing "dishonestly".
* * * * *
300. Except in the case hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by
which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or—
2ndly.—If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender
knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or—
3rdly.—If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the
bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
death, or—
4thly.—If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangersous
that it must, in all probability, cause death, or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,
and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such
injury as aforesaid.
* * * * *
302. Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *
4
"Dishonestly".
Punishment
for murder.
Murder.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Sujeet Kumar, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—097—14.12.2023.