THE LEARNING OF DEV ANAGARI SCRIPT (FOR NATIONAL UNITY)
BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory learning of Devanagari Script in schools by every citizen of
India and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
WHEREAS article 343 of the Constitution provides that official language of the Union
shall be Hindi in Devanagari Script and therefore it is expedient that in national interest,
every citizen should learn Devanagari Script.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Learning of Devanagari Script (For National Unity)
Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as may the Central Government by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
the State and in other cases the Central Government;
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. V of 2011
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "primary school" means any school imparting education from first to fourth
standard, whether established by the appropriate Government or, local self Government
and includes aided school recognised by the appropriate Government and private
school.
3. The appropriate Government shall, within six months of the commencement of this
Act, ensure compulsory learning of Devanagari Script by every citizen during the first four
years of learning in the primary school throughout India for reading and writing words in
Devanagari Script in addition to the language and script in which the primary education is
imparted to him:
Provided that the marks secured by a student out of the prescribed marks for writing
words in mother tongue or official language of the State as the case may be, and the marks
obtained in Devanagari Script and vice versa shall be added to the total marks secured in the
primary school examination but the marks obtained in the Devanagari Script shall not count
for determining pass in the examination.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every school within its jurisdiction
is fully prepared to impart learning in Devanagari Script in accordance with the provisions of
this Act.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), every school shall appoint at least one qualified
teacher for imparting education of Devanagari Script at all level in the school and maintain
data of the performance of each student about his learning of Devanagari Script.
5. The appropriate Government shall ensure periodic monitoring and inspection of
schools imparting learning of Devanagari Script in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament, in
this behalf provide requisite funds for the purpose of this Act.
7. If any school violates the provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government shall
take such action against the school as is a available to it under the existing laws regulating
the functioning of the schools in its jurisdiction.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Central
Government
to make
provisions for
compulsory
learning of
Devanagari
Script.
Schools to be
prepared for
Devanagari
Script.
Central
Government
provide fund.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
Monitoring of
schools.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Under Article 343 of the Constitution Hindi in Devanagari Script has been made the
official language of the Union. It is a matter of common knowledge that out of the twenty two
languages mentioned in the eighth Schedule to the Constitution, the script of three languages,
namely, Sanskrit, Hindi and Marathi is Devanagari Script. Number of States have been formed
on the basis of language considering it as essential in democracy for the respective state
Government should speak to the people in their own language. In, view of this policy, each
State has adopted its own official language and consequently the primary education is
imparted by and large in the language in which all children learn not only the official language
of the State but also its scripts. Thought Hindi has been declared as the official language of
the Union, it takes considerable time to use the said language effectively at all levels and in
all departments of the Union. However, learning Devanagari Script by all the citizens will go
a long way in the matter of National unity as learning of Devanagari Script would enable the
citizens to read and write any words or phrases in Devanagari Script. It would also help in
having single sign boards and in particular on all the Kilometer stones. As a result, citizens
do not feel any difficulty after crossing borders of their State and travel in other parts of the
Country. Therefore, in National interest, it is considered necessary to prescribe that every
citizen should learn Devanagari Script which is sure to help National unity.
Hence, this Bill.
M. RAMA JOIS
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the compulsory learning of Devanagari Script by every
citizen during the first four years of learning in the primary schools. Clause 4 provides
school to appoint teacher and maintain data of the performance of student in Devanagari
Script. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government, shall after due appropriation, provides
fund for the purpose of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India and it is very difficult to estimate the expenditure at this juncture.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of this Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory learning of Devanagari Script in schools by every citizen of India
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri M. Rama Jois, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—950RS(S-3)—05.08.2011.