1
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the companies (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section
135.
Bill No. V of 2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 26TH FEBRUARY, 2016

2
(i) in sub-section (3), after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(d) Undertake the responsibility to include the process of Social Impact
Assessment study in such manner as may be prescribed, for evaluating the performance
of the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy of the company and submit a Social
Impact Assessment Report undertaken by a third party of its findings to the Board
every financial year.’’
(ii) in sub-section (4), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(c) after taking into account the findings forwarded by the Corporate Social
Responsibility Committee, analyze the Social Impact Assessment Report for the company
and disclose the findings of this report in its Annual Report and also make it available
for the general public including placing it on the company's website, if any, in such a
manner as may be prescribed’’.
3. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to make
Rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Social impact assessment (SIA) presents an important opportunity to draw cross-
cultural encounters arising from project-based development efforts into wider procedures
of engagement and negotiation that might address the imbalance in relationships between
local communities, project proponents and Government. Social impact assessment helps
organizations to plan better, to implement more effectively and successfully bring initiatives
to scale.
Inter-organizational Committee on Principles and Guidelines for Social Impact
Assessment IOCPGSIA (2003:231) defines social impacts as "the consequences to human
populations of any public or private actions that alter the ways in which people live, work,
play relate to one another, organize to meet their needs, and generally cope as members of
society. The term also includes cultural impacts involving changes to the norms, values,
and beliefs that guide and rationalize their cognition of themselves and their society."
Social Impacts are both positive and negative.
Social impact assessment is not only necessary but critical. The social sector's
commitment is to serve its constituents and, while their lives cannot be measured in outputs
and outcomes, they are ultimately the purpose that the work should be assessed. Social
Impact Assessment as a process and as a methodology has the potential to contribute
greatly to the planning process of impact sector initiatives taken by the Corporate Social
Responsibility, giving it more accountability.
Social Impact Assessments are instrumental in ensuring that corporates create a
positive impact in the community, and information gathered as part of Social Impact
Assessment exercise can be a vital interest to organizations conducting business or
development projects in India. The log-term benefits of conducting Social Impact
Assessment outweigh their initial costs, as positive relations with the community can lead
to increased business productivity and recognition.
Hence, this Bill.
A VINASH  PANDE
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
4

EXTRACTS FROM THE  COMPANIES ACT, 2013
135.  Corporate Social Responsibility
(1) ** ** ** **
(2) ** ** ** **
(3) The Corporate Social Responsibility Committee shall,—
(a) formulate and recommend to the Board, a Corporate Social Responsibility Policy
which shall indicate the activities to be undertaken by the company as specified in Schedule
VII;
(b) recommend the amount of expenditure to be incurred on the activities referred to
in clause (a); and
(c) monitor the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy of the company from time to
time.
(4) The board of every company referred to in sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) after taking into account the recommendations made by the Corporate Social
Responsibility Committee, approve the Corporate Social Responsbility Policy for the
company and disclose contents of such Policy in its report and also place it on the company's
website, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) ensure that the activities as the included in Corporate Social Responsibility  Policy
of the company are undertaken by the company.
5

GMGIPMRND—4609RS(S3)—26.02.2016.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013
————
(Shri Avinash Pande, M.P .)