AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. V of 2025 
THE EMPLOYEES’ WELLBEING BILL, 2025 
A
BILL 
to promote wellbeing of full-time, temporary, and contractual employees 
in their workplace by limiting working  hours, fixing leaves, 
 addressing mental health concerns, and ensuring 
appropriate compensation and for matters 
connected therewith and 
 incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:― 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Employees’ Wellbeing Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,―
(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) ‘employee’ means any person contributing towards activities at
an organisation  whether by rendering their services or contributing 
knowledge and includes full -time, part -time, contractual, temporary, 
seasonal workers, interns or any other form of work arrangement; 
(c) ‘employer’ means any person or entity employing or engaging one
or more employees for any activity or service in an organisation, and 
includes their representatives, or assigns; 
(d) ‘night work’ means the duty to be performed by an employee for at
least three hours of t heir working time during the period between twenty 
hours of a given day to six hours of the next day; 
(e) ‘night worker’ means any worker who performs night work;
(f) ‘organisation’ means any private entity established or located or
registered in the country for the purpose of carrying out business, trade, 
profession, or other economic activities in the organi sed or unorganised 
sector;  
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central
Government under this Act; 
(h) ‘recently graduated’ means any person who has completed an
educational degree or diploma from a recognised university or school 
within the last three years and is working in a professional environment 
for the first time; 
(i) ‘rest period ’ means any peri od which is not designated as
working time; 
(j) ‘shift work’ means  any method of organising work in sh ifts
whereby workers succeed each other at the same work stations according 
to a certain pattern, including a rotating pattern, and which may involve 
continuous or discontinuous operations, entailing the need for workers to 
work at different times over a given period of days or weeks; 
(k) ‘shift worker’ means any worker whose work schedule is part of
shift work; 
(l) ‘week’ means a consecutive period of seven days; and
(m) ‘working time ’ means any period during which the employee
working is at the employer's disposal and is carrying out his activity or 
duties as required by the employer , in accordance with national laws 
and/or practice. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
CHAPTER II 
WORKING HOURS, REST PERIODS, AND LEAVES 40 
Working hours. 3. (1) No organisation or employer shall require or permit an employee to work
for more than forty-two hours in any week.
Explanation. ― For the purposes of this sub-section, the total working 
hours in any week shall be calculated as an average of weekly working hours 
over a continuous period of four weeks. 45 

3 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an employer may 
require an employee to work up to forty-eight hours in a week, subject to the 
condition that such extended hours shall not be required for more than two 
days in a calendar month. 
(3) In case an employee is required to work beyond the prescribed limit of 
working hours under sub -section (1), such employee shall be entitled  to 
overtime wages as specified in sub-section (3) of section 9. 
(4) In case of an emergency in an organisation, employer may request an 
employee to perform work beyond the prescribed working hours, subject 
to the employee’s consent and such employee  shall accordingly be paid 
in overtime wages. 
(5) An employee shall have the right to refuse his agreement to work 
overtime, as may be required by the employer under sub -section (4) or 
revoke it at any moment. 
(6) If the working hours of an employee on any day exceeds six hours, then 
such employee shall be entitled to a rest break as may be prescribed. 
(7)  Notwithstanding anything contained  in this section, every employer 
shall ensure that an employee gets the minimum hours of rest which shall 
not be less than: 
(a)  ten consecutive hours of rest in any period of twenty-four hours; 
and 
(b) a total of seventy-seven hours of rest in any period of seven days. 
(8)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all forms of employment, 
whether in-person, remote, or hybrid forms of working. 
 
25 
30 
35 
    4. (1) Where an organisation or employer requir es an employee to perform 
night work, the organization or the employer shall ensure that normal 
hours of work for night workers do not exceed an average of eight hours 
in any twenty-four-hour period. 
(2) For employees engaged in night work involving special hazards or 
heavy physical or mental strain, the working hours shall not exceed such 
number of hours in any period of twenty -four hours during which such 
night work is performed, as may be prescribed. 
Explanation.– The determination of work involving special hazards 
or heavy physical or mental strain for the purposes of sub-section (2) shall 
be made in accordance with rules prescribed under this Act. 
(3) An employee undertaking n ight work suffering from health problems 
recognised as being attributable to such work shall, upon recommendation 
by a medical practitioner, be transferred whenever possible to day work to 
which he is suited. 
 Night work. 
 
40 
45 
    5. (1) An organisation or employer shall provide at least forty-five days of 
leave every year to its employees, whether permanent or temporary: 
Provided that out o f the total number of leaves provided by an 
organisation or employer, at least thirty days of leaves shall be paid 
leaves, which shall include medical and menstrual leave also. 
(2) If a gazetted holiday falls on the day which is already considered a 
leave by the organisation or employers,  such as a weekly off day,  the 
organisation or employer shall provide an  additional day of leave to its 
employees, which shall not be included within the leave entitlement under 
sub-section (1). 
 Leaves. 

4 
 
(3) An organisation or employer shall determine the distribution of leaves 
permitted throughout the calendar year for the employees: 
Provided that the distribution of leave so determined in this sub -
section shall comply with the provisions of this Act. 
Right to 
disconnect. 
     6. (1) Every employee shall have the right to disconnect from work-related 
communications in any form, from the organisation or the employer, outside 
their official working hours. 
 (2) No adverse consequence or disciplinary action shall be imposed upon any 
employee for exercising his right under sub-section (1). 
(3) The guidelines for the effective implementation of this section, including 
measures to address grievances arising from its violation, shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
5 
10 
 
  CHAPTER III 
PROVISIONS FOR MENTAL HEALTH 
  
Mental 
wellbeing 
check-up 
services 
by mental 
health 
professionals 
for 
employees. 
 
     7. (1) Every organisation shall provide for voluntary mental wellbeing 
check-up services for all employees  with professional mental health 
experts on such interval as may be prescribed, to ensure a healthy work -
life balance for all employees. 
(2) Every organisation  shall provide mandatory monthly mental 
wellbeing check -up services for all recently graduated employees  with 
professional mental health experts to ensure a healthy work-life balance 
for new employees. 
(3) The mental wellbeing check-up services under sub -section (1) and 
(2) shall be provided by qualified health professionals who may be either 
employed in-house or engaged externally through contractual 
arrangements. 
(4) The reports from the mental wellbeing check -up sessions shall  
remain confidential with the mental health professionals conducting such 
sessions. 
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub -section (4), the mental health 
professionals may give their general review of employees’ mental health 
to the organisation’s administrators , to ensure mental wellbeing of all 
employees, while maintaining confidentiality of the matter. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
 
 
 
Guidelines to 
create a healthy 
workplace. 
 
     8. (1) The appropriate Government shall issue guidelines, on such intervals as 
may be prescribed to create a healthy workplace, and may include measures 
for addressing workplace challenges, promoting transparency, fostering 
ethical practices, and ensuring the physical and mental well -being of 
employees, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2)  Every organisation or employe r shall clearly specify guidelines to its 
employees on growth and promotion opportunities in the workplace to 
prevent overworking, unfair exclusion of  employees, and unfair power 
dynamics in the workplace. 
(3) The head of every organisation or employer shall convene meetings at 
regular intervals with union representatives or other authorised 
representatives of employees to review and address feedback related to 
workplace conditions and implement me asures for fostering a healthy and 
inclusive workplace environment. 
35 
40 
45 
 
 
 

5 
 
  CHAPTER IV 
WAGES 
  
 
 
 
 
 
29 of 2019. 
5 
10 
15 
    9. (1) The appropriate G overnment shall specify the minimum wage s for 
different categories of employees, including stipends for recently-graduated 
employees, in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the minimum wages specified in this sub-section shall be 
in consonance with the Code on Wages, 2019  unless otherwise provided in 
this Act. 
(2) The minimum wage or stipend for an employee prescribed under sub -
section (1) shall be determined in proportion to the cost of living in the 
geographical location from where the employee is expected to perform his 
duties. 
(3)  An employee shall be entitled to overtime wages calculated at twice the 
hourly rate of his usual remuneration for performing any overtime work 
beyond forty-two hours in a week. 
(4) All wages, stipends, and overtime payments payable to an employee under 
this Act shall be adjusted to the prevailing rate of inflation on a yearly basis  
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 Wages. 
 
20 
CHAPTER V 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
  
 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
 10. 
 
(1) (a) Every organisation employing such minimum number of employees, 
as may be prescribed , shall, within one year of the commencement of this 
Act, constitute a Grievance Redressal Committee of the Organisation to 
address any concerns of the employees relating to the provisions of this Act; 
and 
(b) The Grievance Redressal Committee of an organisation shall consist of 
not less than three and not more than ten members, including— 
(i) at least one member who is a qualified legal professional; and 
(ii) at least one external member from the senior management of another 
organisation in the same sector: 
Provided that the members of the Grievance Redressal Committee 
shall be periodically replaced in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2)(a) Every State Government shall, within one year of the 
commencement of this Act, by notification  in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a State Grievance Redressal Committee in each State, which 
shall address complaints escalated to them from the Grievance Redressal 
Committee of the Organisation constituted under sub-section (1): 
Provided that in case of the absence of a Grievance Redressal 
Committee in the organisation as required under sub-section (1), an employee 
may submit his complaint directly to the State Grievance Redressal 
Committee concerned. 
(b) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Grievance Redressal 
Committee of the organisation, may prefer an appeal against such order to the 
State Grievance Redressal Committee on the grounds of facts or law within 
such period from the date of the order and in such form and manner, as may 
be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grievance 
redressal 
committees. 
 

6 
(c) The State Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of not more
than ten members, including—
(i) at least two legal professionals;
(ii) at least three representatives of labour unions;
(iii) experienced professionals from diverse industries; and
(iv) at least one expert in labour rights, such as an activist,
lawyer, or researcher. 
(3)(a) The Central Government shall, within one year of the 
commencement of this Act, by notification  in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Central Grievance Redressal Committee to address 
complaints escalated from the State Grievance Redressal Committees or 
address matters connected thereon or incidental therewith, either 
referred to it or taken up on suo-moto basis; and 
(b) The Central Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of ten
members, including—
(i) at least two legal professionals;
(ii) at least three representatives of national-level labour unions;
(iii) professionals with expertise in industries of national
relevance; and 
(iv) at least one academician or researcher in the field of labour
rights and employment. 
(4) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules to provide
for the qualifications, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment,
salaries, term of office, resignation and removal of the members of the Central
and State Grievance Redressal Committees.
(5) The appropriate Government shall provide the Central and State
Grievance Redressal Committees with such officers and other employees
as may be required to assist them in the discharge of their functions.
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the officers and other employees referred in sub-
section (5) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) The functions of the Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees,
the mechanism for filing complaint and manner in which the complaint shall
be filed and admitted, shall be such as may be prescribed.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Grants by the 
Central 
Government. 
11. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the
Parliament, by law in this behalf, provide funds to the Central and State
Grievance Redressal Committees by way of grants, as it may consider
necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees may utilize
such grants as they deem fit for performing the functions and
discharging the duties assigned to them under this Act, and such
expenditures shall be treated as payable out of the funds refer red to in
sub-section (1).
35 
40 

7 
 
(3) The accounts of the funds received and expenditures incurred by the 
Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees shall be maintained 
and audited in the manner prescribed by the appropriate Government. 
 
5 
 12. The Central and the State Grievance Redressal Committee shall prepare, in 
such form and at such time, for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its 
annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year and forward a copy thereof to the appropriate Government. 
 Annual report. 
 
10 
 13. The appropriate Government shall cause the annual report together with the 
audit report, to be laid, as soon as may be after the reports are received, before 
each House of Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be. 
 Annual report 
and audit report 
to be laid before 
Parliament or the 
State 
Legislature. 
 
5 of 1908. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
 14. (1) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees shall, while  
inquiring into any  matter under this  Act, have the same powers  as are 
vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit under the  Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely: 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and 
compel them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to produce 
the documents or things; 
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any 
court or office; 
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or 
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything inconsistent in any other law for the time 
being in force, the Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees 
may, during the inquiry into any complaint under this Act, examine any 
record to which this Act applies which  is under  the control of the 
Committee, and no such record may be withheld from it on any grounds. 
(3) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees shall inquire 
into any matter in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees shall maintain 
a register of complaints containing such particulars and such record of 
proceedings as may be specified by regulations. 
 Powers of the 
State and 
Central 
Grievance 
Redressal 
Committees. 
 
 35 
40 
45 
 15. (1) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees may, on the basis 
of an inquiry made in accordance with the procedure laid down by or under 
this Act, ―  
(a) impose a monetary penalty for violation of the provisions of this 
Act and rules made thereunder, which may extend up to ten lakh rupees; 
and 
(b)  recommend the initiation of criminal prosecution in cases 
involving severe violations of the provisions of this Act and rules made 
thereunder, as per the applicable laws. 
(2)  The manner of recovery of the monetary penalty imposed under sub -
section (1)(a) and the timeframe for disposal of an inquiry initiated under sub-
section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 Violation and 
penalties. 

8 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Power to make 
rules. 
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session , for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be wit hout prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
5 
10 

9 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
     As India progresses on its path to development, numerous international and 
domestic organizations have established offices in the country, creating 
employment opportunities for Indians. However, due to lenient labour laws, 
employees in these organizations often work long hours and are expected to be 
available at unreasonable times of the day. 
2. India’s workforce comprises a wide range of employment types, including
formal, informal, part -time, and gig work. This diversity underscores the need 
for comprehensive labour laws that apply to all categories of workers to prevent 
exploitation and promote a healthy work-life balance.
3. Many employees experience overwork, toxic work cultures, inadequate 
work-life balance, and limited attention to mental health concerns. These issues
frequently lead to burnout and diminish economic productivity.
4. To address these modern forms of "corporate slavery" and the growing 
dissatisfaction among the workforce, government intervention is essential. Such 
measures would ensure that employees are not overworked, maintain a healthy
work-life balance, and receive necessary support for their mental health.
5. This Bill, therefore, seeks to promote healthier workplace practices and
establish a structured grievance redressal mechanism to safeguard employees'
rights and well- being.
Hence, this Bill. 
PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI. 

10 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 10 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall 
constitute a Grievance Redressal Committee at the State and the Central Level.  
Clause 11 provides for the g rants by the Central Government to the Central and 
State Grievance Redressal Committees.  
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non -recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 

11 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purpose of this Bill. As the rules relate to the matters of details only 
the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to promote wellbeing of full-time, temporary, and contractual employees 
in their workplace by limiting working  hours, fixing leaves, 
 addressing mental health concerns, and ensuring 
appropriate compensation and for matters 
connected therewith and 
 incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–039–10.02.2026.