1
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4828RS.PM5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
THE PREVENTION OF SALE OF CHILDREN IN THE GARB OF
ADOPTION  BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to provide for preventing the sale of a child in the garb of adoption and for banning the
organizations engaged in such activities and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Sale of Children in the Garb of
Adoption Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “appropriate Government”
means in case of a State, Government of that State and in other cases, the Central
Government.
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
the sale of a child belonging to any community in the garb of adoption or otherwise is
hereby prohibited.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall issue orders to ban centres, Non-
Governmental Organizations which, on investigation are found to be indulged in sale of
child through whatever way.
Bill No.  V of  2002
Short  title,
extent and
commencement.
Definition.
Ban on sale of
child.
Ban  on
organizations
engaged in sale
of  child.
5
10
15

2
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4828RS.PM5
(2)  All the children who are in custody of a center or NGO banned under Sub-
section (1), shall be  taken custody of by the appropriate Government.
5. The appropriate Government shall set up such number of centres as may be
specified, in each district under its jurisdiction for the purpose of protection, welfare and
development of children taken over from such organizations found to be engaged in
activities of illegal adoption and sale of children.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for time being inforce the
centres set up by the appropriate Government shall, on being satisfied by the genuineness
of the prospective parents desiring to adopt a child, allow such adoption:
Provided that the prospective parents, by an undertaking in writing pledge to inform
the centre of the activities carried out by them for the welfare and development of child
upto attainment of the age of twenty-five years.
7. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six years or with fine of rupees one
lakh or with both.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
2
Centres for
welfare of
children.
Information
about welfare
of an adopted
child.
Penalty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
2

3
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4828RS.PM5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Recently it has come to the notice  that there exist in the country some organisations
where children are being looked after and are sold to the people without any verification
after demanding a good sum from the person  who afterward sell these children in the
country and also to the foreigners. Number of organisations have protested against the
sale of children in the name of adoption by certain non-governmental organisations in
the States. They have demanded that inquiry should be conducted into the entire dealings
of adoption by a sitting judge to prevent illegal activities like sale of children in the
Country.
Recently,  inquiry into child-trafficking  have revealed that there are large number
of non-governmental organisations which indulge in such activities. There is no law at
present to tackle such illegal sale and adoption and therefore, an enactment of a special
adoption act for protecting the children and punishing the culprits involved in the racket
is necessary.
Hence this Bill.
RUMANDLA RAMACHANDRIAH.

4
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4828RS.PM5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for setting up centres for welfare of children in all
districts. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India with respect to Union Territories. It is expected that a sum of
rupees fifty crores is likely to be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
It may also involve a non recurring expenditure of rupees two crores from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

5
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4828RS.PM5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.

6
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4828RS.PM5
MGIP(PLU)MRND—4828RS—12-02-2002.
RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for preventing the sale of a child in the garb of adoption and for banning the
organisations engaged in such activities and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
(Shri Rumandla Ramachandriah, M.P.)