THE  DROUGHT  AFFECTED  AND  DROUGHT  PRONE
AREAS  (SPECIAL  PROVISIONS)  BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for the special provisions such as compulsory maintenance of food and potable
water supplies for human consumption and fodder for livestock of the farmers, financial
assistance for lost crops to farmers in drought affected areas of the country by the
Union Government and for creation of water bodies like lakes, ponds, wells, rainwater
harvesting, diversification of water intensive crops to low water intensive requirement
crops, community afforestation programmes etc., as long term action plan for the
drought prone areas of the country by the Union Government and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drought Affected and Drought Prone Areas (Special
Provisions) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. V of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2015
5

2
Definitions.
Diversifica-
tion of
cropping
pattern.
2. In this Act, unless, the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘drought affected area’’ means any area situated in any part of the country
which has got below normal rainfall in any season of a calendar year and which in the
opinon of the Central Government has been affected by drought and declared, by
notification in the Official Gazette, to be a drought affected area for such period as
may be specified in the notification;
(c) ‘‘drought prone areas’’ means the areas where average rainfall is consistently
below normal and also include such areas which in the opinion of the Central
Government are drought prone and declared as such, by notification in the official
Gazette, in consultation with the Governments of the States where such areas exist for
the time being;
(d) ‘‘fodder’’ includes dry and green fodder generally fed to the livestock by the
farmers and others;
(e) ‘‘food’’ includes cereals such as wheat, barley maize, jowar, bajra etc., rice,
pulses, edible oils and fuel for cooking;
(f) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall maintain uninterrupted food supplies in drought
affected and drought prone areas for the inhabitants of such areas in such manner as may
be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall maintain adequate supply of potable water
through tankers and other means as it may deem necessary and appropriate, in the areas
covered under this Act for such period as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall maintain adequate supplies of fodder in the area
covered under this Act by procuring fodder from other areas or States, as the case may be,
in such manner and for such period as may be prescribed.
6. The appropriate Government shall provide ex-gratia and adequate financial
assistance to farmers of the areas covered under this Act according to the estimated
losses caused by withered crops and for revival of agricultural activities in such manner
as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall with the help of Krishi Vikas Kendras and other
such organisations and research centres working for the diversification of cropping system
in the areas covered under this Act from water intensive crops to low water requirement
crops to save the ground water and reduce the dependence on rains.
8. The appropriate Government shall promote the creation of traditional and other
water bodies like lakes, ponds, wells, ditches, etc. for the collection of rain water in order to
recharge the ground water in the areas covered under this Act.
9. The Central Government shall promote rainwater harvesting in the areas covered
under this Act by providing the necessary technique and equipments free of cost through
the village panchayats in such manner as may be prescribed.
10. The appropriate Government shall promote community afforestation programmes,
from time to time, in the areas covered under this Act as long term action plan of such areas
in such manner as may be prescribed.
Compulsory
maintenance
of food
supplies in
drought
affected and
drought prone
areas.
Maintenance
of potable
water.
Ex-gratia and
financial
assistance to
farmers.
Maintenance
of fodder
supplies.
Creation of
water bodies.
Promotion of
rainwater
harvesting.
Afforestation
programme.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
11. The Central Government shall provide requisite funds, from time to time, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
12. The Central Government may give such directions to the Government of any State
having areas covered under this Act within its territorial jurisdiction, as may appear it to be
necessary for carrying out in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made
thereunder.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to give
directions.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Of late Marathwada and Vidharbha regions of Maharashtra and their adjoining areas
are slowly turning into drought prone areas where truant monsoons are playing havoc very
frequently. Normal rainfall has become rare in these regions of the State. Similarly, large
number of areas in various parts of our vast country have either turned drought prone or
have been affected by drought some time or the other playing havoc and bringing miseries
to the people and their livestock in such areas. When drought conditions engulf any area,
the worst sufferers are the farmers and other inhabitants, having no food to eat and water to
drink for their survival, resulting in their exodus. In such areas, starvation deaths are very
common. The worst sufferers are the mute livestock. Their owners leave them stray and
without fodder and water ultimately resulting in their death. The farmers lose their crops and
hopes. The indebted farmers do not have money to restart agricultural operations even if
they want. Frustrated with dashing hopes, many of them take extreme step of committing
suicides. Vidharbha region of Maharashtra has become synonymous with suicides of farmers.
It has been observed that in Maharashtra, Punjab and other parts of the country, the
farmers have started growing water intensive cash crops to earn more money, resulting in
decline of ground water levels to dangerous levels which makes such areas drought prone.
Hence, diversification of crops from water intensive ones to crops needing very less water
has become necessity of the day. Promotion of water bodies like lakes, ponds, wells ditches
etc., rainwater harvesting and community afforestation programmes have become necessary
for the drought affected and drought prone areas.
At the same time, it is necessary that the supply of food, potable water and fodder is
maintained uninterrupted on priority so that people do not have to leave their places and
their livestock is not left to die. The farmers need to be given ex-gratia and financial assistance
so that they do not take extreme steps of committing suicide.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR  DHOOT
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the ex-gratia and financial assistance to farmers.
Clause 11 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds. The Bill
if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Though, it is not
possible to quantify the amount at this juncture it is estimated that a sum of rupees thirty
thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty-thousand crores may also involve.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—5355RS(S3)—13-03-2015.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the special provisions such as compulsory maintenance of food and potable
water supplies for human consumption and fodder for livestock of the farmers, financial
assistance for lost crops to farmers in drought affected areas of the country by the
Union Government and for creation of water bodies like lakes, ponds, wells, rainwater
harvesting, diversification of water intensive crops to low water requirement crops,
community afforestation programmes etc., as long term action plan for the drought
prone areas of the country by the Union Government and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P.)