THE ACTS OF PARLIAMENT  (APPLICATION TO NAGALAND)
BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the procedure for application of the Acts of  Parliament in respect of the
State of Nagaland and for matters  connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act shall be called the Acts of Parliament  (Application to Nagaland)
Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “Act” means an Act made by Parliament in exercise of its ordinary and
constituent powers of legislation and  includes an Ordinance promulgated by the President
of India under article 123 of the Constitution;
(2) “Committee” means the Joint Governments’ Committee constituted under section 4
of this Act;
(3) “Government of Nagaland”  means the Governor of  Nagaland  acting  on the aid
and advice of the Council of Ministers of Nagaland; and
(4) “Report” means a report of the Joint Governments’ Committee.
Bill No. V of  2009
Short title
and com-
mencement
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH FEBRUARY, 2009

2
3.  All Acts enacted hereafter shall contain a declaration that such Acts shall  apply
to the State of Nagaland subject to article 371A(1)(a)  of the Constitution read with this
Act.
4.   All Acts enacted hereafter, shall, within sixty days of their enactment, be referred to
a Joint Governments’  Committee comprising such number of Ministers and officers both
from the Union Government and the Government of Nagaland, as may be determined, by
notification, by the Union Government in consultation with the Government of Nagaland:
Provided  that the representatives of the Government of Nagaland to the Committee
shall be nominated by the Government of Nagaland.
5. The Joint Governments’ Committee shall examine the question whether an Act, so
referred, requires a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland for applying its
provisions, partly or fully, to the State of Nagaland or not, and present a  report in that  behalf
concurrently to the Union Government and the Government of Nagaland within sixty days of
reference of the Act  to the Committee.
6. (1) For receiving the report from the Joint Governments'  Committee  favouring
resolution for application of an Act to the  State of Nagaland  the necessary resolution shall
be passed  by the Legislative Assembly within sixty days of the receipt of the report by the
Government of Nagaland and:—
(i) upon passing of the resolution, the Act shall be deemed to have applied  to
the State of Nagaland from the date of its enactment;
(ii) upon failure to  pass a resolution or failure of a resolution to be carried when
moved in the Legislative Assembly within the  period of  sixty days  the  Act shall  be
deemed to have applied to the State of Nagaland from the date  when the  said period
of sixty days shall  expire.
(2) If according to the   report a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland is
not required for application  of an Act to the State of Nagaland, then the Act shall apply to the
State of Nagaland  at the expiration of sixty days from the date of receipt of the report by the
Government of Nagaland:
Provided that the report may be referred back to the Joint Governments' Committee for
further examination by  a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland passed within
sixty days from the date of receipt of the report by the Government of Nagaland:
Provided further that the resolution of the Legislative  Assembly so passed shall
enumerate the  issues on which the Act is referred back to the Committee.
7. (1) A report referred back to the Committee under the provisos to sub-section (2) of
section 6 shall be reconsidered by the Committee in the light of issues enumerated in the
resolution within sixty days of receipt of the resolution.
(2) If according to the revised report a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland is required for application of the Act to the State of Nagaland, then the
procedure outlined in sub-section (i) of section 6 shall be followed.
(3) If  according to the revised report a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland is not required for application of the Act to the State  of Nagaland, then  the Act
shall apply to the State of Nagaland at the expiration of sixty days from the date of receipt of
the revised report by the Government of Nagaland, unless the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland passes  a resolution before  the expiration of the said period,  directing  that the
Act shall not apply to the State  of Nagaland and upon passing of such a resolution,  the Act
shall not apply  to the State of Nagaland at any point of time.
Declaration
to be
contained in
all Acts.
Reference of
Acts to Joint
Governments’
Committee.
Report of
the Joint
Governments’
Committee.
Actions on
Report.
Action on
reconsidered
report.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 371A(1) (a) of the Constituion accords Nagaland a special place in regard to
application of Acts of Parliament to the State.
2. Ever since the creation of the State on the 1st December, 1963, neither the State
Government nor the Union Government had paid due attention to the working of that special
provision in relation to Nagaland.
3. This Bill seeks to lay down a procedure for effectuating article 371A(1)(a) in relation
to the State of Nagaland.
KHEKIHO ZHIMOMI
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Section 4 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to issue notification
naming the Ministers and Officers who would constitute the Joint Governments' Committee
under the proposed Act. This delegation of legislative power is normal.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the procedure for application of the Acts of Parliament in respect of the
State of Nagaland and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Khekiho Zhimomi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—664RS(S5)—13.02.2009.