1
THE TERMINATED EMPLOYEES (WELFARE) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the employees who have been terminated by the
employers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Terminated Employees (Welfare) Act, 2020.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall not apply to terminated employee
who has been terminated for any of the following reasons:—
(a) proven misconduct;
(b) cheating;
(c) indulging with fraudulent means and appropriate money; or
(d) having been found guilty by a criminal court of justice.
Bill No. V of 2020
Short title and
application.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7
TH
  FEBRUARY, 2020

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'employer' means the owner or the director of any establishment or any
organization which is not owned by the Central Government or a State Government
or which is not the undertaking controlled by the Central Government or a State
Government or funded by the Central Government or a State Government but
includes the owner or director of a private establishment where not less than ten
persons are employed;
(b) "fund" means the corpus fund established under section 5; and
(c)  "terminated employee"  means any employee who was employed by any
employer, whether on regular or temporary capacity or casual in nature or on
contract and whose services have been terminated by such employer.
3. (1) An employee whose employment is terminated for the reasons of the winding
up of  the organization or the establishment due to:—
(i) economic slowdown; or
(ii) change in technology in the respective field; or
(iii ) the owner or director managing the affairs of the establishment
becoming insolvent; or
(iv) the orders of any court; or
(v) incurring losses and unable to carry on the business; or
(vi) the change in Government policy;
shall be entitled to such unemployment compensation health insurance benefits
or any other benefits as may be prescribed by the Central Government, if such benefits
are not part of the employee-employer agreement, for nine months or till the time he
gets employed elsewhere, whichever is earlier.
Explanation I —The period of nine months shall include the notice period to be
served by the employer before termination.
Explanation II —The unemployment compensation shall be admissible if the
employer does not provide any severance package to the terminated employee or the
severance package is less than the compensation provided under this Act.
(2) The unemployment compensation shall not be less than sixty per cent. of the
gross salary of the terminated employee or as per the terms of the employee-employer
agreement, whichever is higher and it shall be borne by the employer.
(3) The health insurance benefit shall continue till the period as specified in
sub-section (1) with the same terms and conditions which prevailed during his
employment.
(4) A terminated employee shall be entitled to the terminal benefits on the cessation
of employment like provident fund, gratuity, leave encashment etc.
(5) The benefits notified under sub-section (1) shall be paid to the terminated
employee from the month following the month on which termination is communicated
to the employee or completion of the notice period, if any, whichever is earlier.
(6) If due to any reason, the employer is not able to pay the benefits within one
month from the date of the termination of the employment, the employer shall pay to
the terminated employee an interest at the rate of twelve per cent. per month for such
delay.
(7) Nothing in this Act shall apply to any terminated employee if benefits
admissible under the employee-employer agreement, are higher than the benefits
prescribed under this Act.
Definitions.
Benefits to
terminated
employee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
4. (1) Every employer shall create a corpus fund to which at least five per cent of
the net profit of the organization shall be credited, which shall be used for the welfare
of terminated employees.
(2) Every employer shall be entitled to solicit contribution from any organization,
individual or trust for the purpose of maintaining the fund, in such manner as may be,
prescribed.
(3) Without pre judice to the generality of the provision contained in sub-section
(1) the fund shall also be utilized for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) payment of expenditure in connection with the education of the children
of the terminated employees; and
(b) medical facilities, free of cost, in such a manner as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately follwoing the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or Parliament
agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereater have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Corpus fund
for welfare of
terminated
employees.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In an era, when the space for Public Sector has substantially shrunk and role of
Private Sector has expanded, many questions relating to the welfare of employees
attached to Private Sector and employer-employee relations have become significant.
Pertinently, it gives rise to the question of emerging culture of relationship betwen
employers and employees. It has been observed that employees face undiminished
threat of losing jobs and live in a climate of uncertainty. Things become worse when
they are relieved from jobs without any substantive compensation. Hundreds and
thousands of people in their midage with family responsibilities and economic liabilities
face unprecedented challenges to survive. It not only affect their lives but also the
social and cultural process too. Moreover, laying off due to change in management
policies or the Government policies or due to the losses incurred due to inefficient
management are all the events where the employee doesn't have much control but is the
one who suffers the most.
The Bill provides for minimum nine months time with assused income to the
terminated employees and also medical benefits which will give them enough time to
reassign themselves to new employment without disturbing the existing set up of their
family. After employment a person often takes few loans to meet his need, gets their
children admitted at a certain level of school. All this cannot come to a halt without any
of his fault. The family of the employee should not sufer because of such events.
Neo liberalisation has increased the uncertainties in the lives of people. It also
justifies inequality to an extent on the one hand and indoctrinates the employers to
become insensitive to their employees. In fact, it has revived the rejected doctrine
'survival of the fittest'. This concern needs to be essentially addressed. Any welfare
State cannot give primacy to profit making. Indian Constitution aspires, idealizes and
also inspires to make endeavour to achieve equality. This cannot be  treated as dead
ideal. The State has to strive for it. No economic system can endure or can yield greater
good of greater number nad protect the interests of working people if it follows the
blind path of development and allows the concentration of wealth. The goal of New
India is to maximise egalitarianism and to minimise inequality. In this context protection
of economic interests and dignity of employees of prive sector is both moral and
constitutional duty of the Indian state.
At present there is no law to ensure that the employers provide terminal benefits
in time and which makes provision for education, medical facilities etc., to the families
of employees who have been terminated. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
Hence, this Bill.
RAKESH SINHA

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide funds for
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per annum. A non-recurring expenditure
of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the employees who have been terminated
by the employers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rakesh Sinha, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5265RS(S3)—07-02-2020.