1
THE CRIMINAL LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second year of the Republic of India as
follows:––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, be notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. V of 2021
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH FEBRUARY, 2022

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
2.  For section 272 of the Indian Penal Code, (hereinafter referred to as the Penal
Code),  the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"272. (1) Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article
noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it
to be likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished,—
(i) where such adulteration does not result in injury, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees;
(ii) where such adulteration results in non-grievous injury, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend to three lakh
rupees;
(iii) where such adulteration results in a grievous injury, with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to six years and with fine which shall not be less than five
lakh rupees;
(iv) where such adulteration results in death, with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life and with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees:
Provided that the court shall record adequate reasons for imposing a sentence of
imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for life;
(2) The fine imposed under this section shall be just and reasonable to meet the
medical expenses and rehabilitation of the victim and it shall be paid to the victim.''
3. For section 273 of the Penal Code, the following Section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"273. (1) Whoever sells, or offers, or exposes for sale, as food or drink, any article
which has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink,
knowing or having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink, shall
be punished,—
(i) where the sale or offer for sale or exhibition for sale of such food or drink
does not result in injury, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months
and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;
(ii) where the sale of such food or drink result in non-grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with five which may extend
to three lakh rupees;
(iii) where the sale of such food or drink results in a grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six years and with fine which shall not be
less than five lakh rupees;
(iv) where the sale of such food or drink results in death, with imprisonment for
term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life and with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees:
Adulteration
of food or
drink intended
for sale.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 272.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 273.
Sale of
noxious food
or drink.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Provided that the court shall record adequate reasons for imposing sentence of
imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for life.
(2) The fine imposed under this section shall be just and reasonable to meet the
medical expenses and rehabilitation of the victim and it shall be paid to the victim."
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
4. For section 357 B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as
the Criminal Code the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"357B. The compensation payable by the State Government under Section 357A shall
be in addition to the payment of fine to the victim under section 272 or section 273 or
section 326A or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "victim" shall be
construed as defined in clause (wa) of Section 2."
5. In the First Schedule to the Criminal Code under the heading “I.—OFFENCES
UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, for the entries relating to the sections 272 and 273,
the following entries shall be substituted, namely:—
123 4 5 6
"272. Adulterating Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any
food or which may Magistrate
drink extend to six
intended for months and
sale, so as to with fine
make the which may
same extend to one
noxious - (i) lakh rupees
where such to be paid
adulteration to the victim.
does not
result in injury
(ii) where such Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any
adulteration which may Magistrate
results in extend to one
non-grievous year and with
injury fine which may
extend to
three lakh rupees
to be paid to the
victim.
(iii) where Imprisonment Cognizable Non Any
the sale of which may Bailable Magistrate
such food or extend to six
drink, results years and
in a grievous with fine which
injury shall not be less
than five lakh
rupees to be
be paid to the
victim.
(iv) where Imprisonment Cognizable Non Court of
the sale of of not less than Bailable sessions
such food or seven years but
Substitution of
new section for
section 357B.
Amendments
to the First
Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
Compensation
to be in addition
to fine under
Section 272,
Section 273,
Section 326 or
Section 376D of
Indian Penal
Code.

drink, results which may
in death extend to life
and with fine
which shall not
be less than
ten lakh rupees
to be paid to
the victim.
273. Selling any Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any
food or which may Magistrate
drink, as extend to
food or six months and
drink with fine which
knowing the may extend to
same to be one lakh rupees
noxious - (i) to be paid to
where the the victim.
sale, offer
for sale of
exhibition
for sale of
such food or
drink, does
not result in
injury
(ii) where Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any
the sale of which may Magistrate
such food or extend to
drink, results one year and
in non- with fine which
grievous may extend to
injury three lakh rupees
to be paid to
the victim
(iii) where Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Any
the sale of which may Magistrate
such food or extend to
drink, results six years and
in a grievous with fine which
injury shall not be
less than five
lakh rupees
to be paid to
the victim.
(iv) where Imprisonment Cognizable Non Court of
the sale of of not less than Bailable Session.”
such food or seven years but
drink, results which may extend
in death. to life and with
fine which shall
not be less than
ten lakh rupees
to be paid to
the victim.
1 2345 6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
4

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our increasing daily needs and fast changing lifestyle has resulted in the availability
of innumerable ‘food’ and ‘food products’ in the market; instant food and instant cooking
has become a common requirement in every household today. The ever growing food and
food products market brings along with it, the greed of anti-social persons engaging in food
adulteration, a serious crime against society. The increasing menace of food adulteration in
the country involves health hazards that ultimately result in various ailments and even
premature deaths.
The adulteration of food causes several health problems in humans. Most food
adulterants are very harmful and toxic; yet, greed and profit motives encourage anti-social
persons to commit this act in the absence of strong consequences. The tackling of food
adulteration is required to be given due importance for its serious effect on the health of the
public. Currently, the existing maximum punishment of six months for such offences under
the IPC is grossly inadequate.
The object of this Bill is to create a uniform scheme of punishment for food adulteration
offences. The suggested amendments aim at eliminating the low quantum of punishment
provided in the IPC and updates it to bring it in line with the provisions of the Food Safety
and Standards Act, 2006 as well as the punishments as found in the amendment of the IPC
made by the states of Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Appropriate amendments to
the relevant Schedule of the Criminal Procedure Code are also proposed.
Hence this Bill.
PRASHANTA  NANDA

ANNEXURE
THE I NDIAN  P ENAL C ODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
"272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.— Whoever adulterates any
article of food or drink, so as to make such article noxious as food or drink, intending to sell
such article as food or drink, or knowing it to be likely that the same will be sold as food or
drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
273. Sale of noxious food or drink.—Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as
food or drink, any article which has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state
unfit for food or drink, knowing or having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food
or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both."
* * * * *
T
HE C ODE OF C RIMINAL  P ROCEDURE , 1973
(2 OF 1974)
[357B. Compensation to be in addition to fine under section 326A or section 376D of
Indian Penal Code.—The compensation payable by the State Government under section
357A shall be in addition to the payment of fine to the victim under section 326A or section
376D of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
* * * * *
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of  Criminal
Procedure, 1973
————
(Shri Prashanta Nanda, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2008RS(S3)—07-02-2022.