Bill No. V of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide employment or means and resources for self-employment to at least one adult
member of every family and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employment Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the Employment Advisory Board constituted under section 5;
(b) "family" includes wife, husband and minor children; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Definitions.
5
10

2
3. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to provide gainful employment to at
least one adult member of every family.
4. Every unemployed person shall be entitled to receive monthly unemployment
allowance at such rate as may be prescribed, till he is provided with gainful employment.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Employment Advisory Board for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court—Chairperson;
(b) two representatives of the Central Government—Members;
(c) one representative from Union Ministry of Labour and Employment—
Member;
(d) two persons having experience in labour laws, to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed—Members;
(e) one representative from the National Institution for Transforming India
(NITI)  Aayog—Member;
(f) one woman having experience in the field of empowerment of women and
children, to be appointed by the Central Government—Member; and
(g) Director - General of Employment, Union Ministry of Labour and Employment
Member Secretary;
(3) The Board shall have at least three meetings in a quarter of the year:
Provided that the Chairperson may call for a meeting at any time in consultation with
the Member-Secretary as and when the circumstances warrant so.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The Board shall,—
(a) identify fields and areas for generation of employment and forward the
information to the Central Goverment;
(b) collect data of unemployed persons in every district;
(c) develop model for geneartion of self employment for unemployed youth;
(d) develop model for providing skill development and vocational training to
youth;
(e) encourage businessmen for generation of employment; and
(f) undertake such other measures for generation of self-employment for
unemployed youth as it considers necessary.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Employment Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the
Employment Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, on the recommendation of the Board, take steps to
promote the interest of unemployed youth for getting employment or self-employment,
through various measures in such measure or may be prescribed.
Central
Government
to provide
employment.
Grant of
unemployment
allowances.
Constitution
of
Employment
Advisory
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Constitution
of
Employment
Fund.
Promoting
interest of
unemployed
youth.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The Central Government shall provide facilities or resources for self-employment to
every family where it is not possible to provide employment to atleast one dependent member
of that family.
10. The Central Government shall, after the appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid before each
House of the Parliament, as soon as may be after it is made. While it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may comprise in one session or more successive sessions, and
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any such modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, as the case may be; however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
resources or
facilities to
dependent
member of
family.
Power to
make rules.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Unemployment is one of the biggest problems in India. Even after seventy-one years
of Independence, we have not been able to meet the challenge of providing employment to
the massive unemployed youth. Although our country has progressed in many fields, yet it
has failed to improve the generation of employment and job opportunities. With two-thirds
of 1.2 billion people in the age group of 35 year, India is the world largest youth population,
something a challenge and an opportunity. More than 30 per cent of India's youth are not in
employment. They are reeling under poverty.
There are a large number of families where there is not even a single earning member
and most of them earn their livelihood by working as labourers, domestic servants, bonded
labourers, etc. majority of population lives below poverty line. Our country being a welfare
State should take necessary steps to improve the lot of the people and formulate schemes
and plans to eradicate poverty from the country.
The National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) round table was last held in 2011-12 and
there is lot of confusion about the prevailing employment situation. The focus of the
Government needs to shift to more spending on enhancing quality of education and vocational
and skill training. There is a need to improve India's track record on job creation.
It is proposed that at least one adult member of every family should be provided with
employment and where it is not possible to provide employment, the Government should
encourage those who desire to set up their own business and improve their capability of
increasing production, like handicraft artisans, carpenters, weavers, cottage industry so that
they become self-sufficient and the family should be given all necessary facilities for decent
and reasonable living.
Hence this Bill.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide employment to
at least one adult member of every family. Clause 4 provides for payment of unemployment
allowances to every unemployed person at such rate as may be prescribed till he is provided
with gainful employment. Clause 5 provides for constitution of Employment Advisory Board.
Clause 7 provides for contribution of Employment Fund for carrying out the purposes of this
Bill. Clause 9 provides that the Central Government shall provide subsidy and all facilities or
resources for self-employment to a family where it is not possible to provide employment
clause 10 empowers the Central Government to provide funds for carrying out the purposes
of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India in implementing the provisions of the Bill. It is likely to involve an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees seven thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of
India. A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees four thousand crore is likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide employment or means and resources for self-employment to at least one adult
member of every family and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—811RS(S3)—25-06-2019.