1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In section 166 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for the words ‘‘which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both’’, the words
‘‘which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both’’ shall be substituted.
3. In section 167 of the principal Act for the words ‘‘which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both’’, the words ‘‘which may extend to six years, or with fine, or with
both’’ shall be substituted.
4. In section 168 of the principal Act for the words ‘‘which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both’’, the words ‘‘which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both’’ shall be substituted.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment of
section 166.
Bill No.  V of  2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010
Amendment
of section
167.
Amendment
of section
168.
45 of 1860.
5
10

2
5.  In section 169 of the principal Act for the words ‘‘which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both; and the property, if purchased, shall be confiscated’’, the words
‘‘which may extend to four years, or with fine, or with both; and the property, if purchased,
shall be confiscated’’ shall be substituted.
6. In section 170 of the principal Act for the words ‘‘which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both’’, the words ‘‘which may extend to four years, or with fine, or with
both’’ shall be substituted.
7. In section 171 of the principal Act for the words ‘‘which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both’’, the words ‘‘which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to four hundred rupees, or with both’’
shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 169.
Amendment of
section 170.
Amendment of
section 171.
5
10

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS AND  REASONS
Public servants are entrusted with the duty of working for the public good, and vested
with powers to fulfill that duty. Unfortunately, though, there have been increasing instances
wherein public servants have actively misused their positions of power to either serve their
personal purpose or subvert the procedure of law in favour of the wrong-doer. This has
shaken the people's faith in the entire executive and judicial system. Indeed, it goes against
the fundamental right to equality, right to freedom, right to freedom from exploitation and
right to constitutional remedies provided by the Constitution to each citizen of India.
Hence, there is an urgent need to make public servants accountable for their actions
and to instill confidence among the people. It is, therefore, necessary that the law should act
as a deterrent, ensuring exemplary punishment for errant public servants, whether police or
civil.
In this backdrop, it is felt that there is a need to amend the Indian Penal Code suitably.
Hence this Bill.
PRAKASH  JAVADEKAR
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  INDIAN   PENAL  CODE,  1860
*** *** *** ****
CHAPTER  IX
OF  OFFENCES  BY  OR  RELATING  TO  PUBLIC  SERV ANTS
166. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person—Whoever,
being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as to the way in which
he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely
that he will, by such disobedience, cause injury to any person, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
167. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury—
Whoever, being a public servant, and being, as such public servant, charged with the
preparation or translation of any document or electronic record, frames, prepares or translates
that document or electronic record in a manner which he knows or believes to be incorrect,
intending thereby to cause or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury to any
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three year, or with fine, or with both.
168. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade—Whoever, being a public servant,
and being legally bound as such public servant not to engage in trade, engages in trade,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
169. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property—Whoever, being a
public servant, and being legally bound as such public servant, not to purchase or bid for
certain property, purchases or bids for that property, either in his own name or in the name of
another, or jointly, or in shares with others, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; and the property, if purchased,
shall be confiscated.
170. Personating a public servant—Whoever pretends to hold any particular office
as a public servant, knowing that he does not hold such office or falsely personates any
other person holding such office, and in such assumed character does or attempts to do any
act under colour of such office, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
171. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent intent—
Whoever, not belonging, to a certain class of public servants, wears any garb or carries any
token resembling any garb or token used by that class of public servants, with the intention
that it may be believed, or with the knowledge that it is likely to be believed, that he belongs
to that class of public servants, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred
rupees, or with both.
*** *** *** *** ***
4

GMGIPMRND—2336RS(S5)—03-05-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Prakash Javadekar, M.P.)