Bill No. V of 2024 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of  the Republic  
of India as follows:– 
5 
1. (1)   This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as  the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
 43 of 1951. 
10 
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, after section 127A, the
following new sections shall be inserted, namely,–
 ―127B. (1) Any person who is found paying for news, or receiving 
payment for news shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years, and with fine, which may extend to twenty-five 
lakh rupees. 
Paying for news. 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024 

2 
Non-disclosure of 
interest in political 
advertising.  
 Offences by  
companies.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to payments made
by registered political parties for the management of official publications 
(print, radio, television and all other electronic media) owned or controlled 
by them.  
(3) To avail of the exemption under sub-section (2), all registered
political parties must disclose their interests in any publication in the form 
and manner notified by the Election Commission of India in this regard.  
(4) An attempt to commit an act punishable under sub-section (1)
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both.  
(5) No court shall take cognisance of any offence punishable under
this section unless there is a complaint made by order of, or under authority 
from, the  Election Commission of India or the Chief Electoral Officer of 
the State concerned.  
127C. (1) Any political advertisement in any media shall carry a 
disclosure to this effect in the form and manner notified by the ECI in this 
regard.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provision of sub-section (1) shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to six 
months, or with fine, which may extend to five lakh rupees, or both.  
127D. (1) Where an offence under sub-section (1) of section 127B has 
been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence 
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for 
the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,— 
(a) ―company‖ means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) ―director‖, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.‖
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        The influence money exerts in corrupting the democratic process is 
undeniable and sadly, this is true now, more than ever. In our increasingly 
connected, media heavy world, political advertisements are omnipresent and an 
essential part of any campaign. Unregulated, they provide a platform for 
candidates to propagate patent untruths. This severely undermines the right to 
accurate information based on which a voter can make his or her decision. The 
seriousness of these issues is amplified by the extent to which it has become a 
systematic part of promoting one‘s election. The money spent on unethical paid 
news and disguised politic al advertisements, is rising at an exponential rate in 
both national as well as regional media. 
  In PUCL v. Union of India (2003) 4 SCC 399, the Supreme Court held 
that availability of impartial, proper and relevant information about the election 
candidates fosters and promotes freedom of speech and expression. Paid news 
distorts this right. As per the 2010 Press Council Sub-Committee report on 
Paid News, it was suggested that the act of publishing news items in exchange 
for consideration should be construed as electoral malpractice with a 
punishment of minimum 2 years imprisonment. The Election Commission of 
India in its 2012 circular, which was later incorporated in the Handbook for 
Media for Lok Sabha General Elections, proposed that the Representation of 
the People Act, 1951, should be amended to prevent the publishing and 
abetment to publish any paid news for furthering the prospects of a candidate‘s 
election. In 2014, TRAI in its recommendations on media ownership also 
recommended that the term ‗paid news ‘ should be comprehensively defined 
and a proper framework for scrutinizing complaints and taking punitive actions 
should be established.  
  In the United Kingdom, there is a blanket ban on telecasting paid political 
advertisements on television and radio. This prohibition also extends to any 
advertisement which tends to influence public opinion on a matter of general 
controversy. As per the Commonwealth Electoral Act, 1918 of Australia, it is 
m
andatory for unfolding t he details of any electoral advertisement, handbill, 
pamphlet, poster or notice that contains electoral matter. Similarly in Canada, 
the Canada Election Act, 2000, sets provisions for adequately disclosing the 
details of any electoral advertising.   
 Currently, the guidelines for disclosing political paid advertisements are 
not adequately framed and uniform. To check disguised paid political 
advertisements, the disclosure provisions have to be made compulsory for all 
media firms to assist the public in identifying the nature of content (whether 
sponsored or editorial content) and keep a vigilant track of transactions 
between the media and election candidates.  
  Hence, this Bill. 
SASMIT PATRA 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
_______ 
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS─PMB(E)─054─05.02.2024.