1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill  No.  V of  2008
THE WORKING JOURNALISTS WELFARE FUND BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Working Journalists Welfare Fund at the national
level for promoting welfare of the Journalists employed in various newspaper
establishments and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Working Journalists Welfare Fund Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "accident" with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means
an unexpected event causing injury, damage to any part of the body or death and
includes any fatal disease which is contracted by a working journalist within or outside
the working hours;
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
(b) "competent authority" means any authority authorised by the Government,
by notification in the Official Gazette, to perform all or any of the functions of the
competent authority as may be specified therein under this Act;
(c) "fund" means the Working Journalists Welfare Fund established under
Section 3;
(d) "Government" means the Central Government;
(e) "newspaper establishment" means an establishment under the control of
any person or body of persons, whether incorporated or not for the production or
publication of one or more newspapers, news, magazines or for conducting any news
agency or news syndicate within the country;
(f)  "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "working journalists" means a person whose principal vocation is that of a
journalist and who is employed as such in, or in relation to, any newspaper establishment
and includes an editor, a lead writer, news editor, sub-editor, feature  writer, copy taster,
reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, news-photographer and proof reader working in
such establishment.
3. With effect from such date as the Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established a Working Journalists Welfare
Fund, money into which shall be—
(a) given by the Government after due appropriation made by Parliament from
time to time;
(b) contributed by a newspaper establishment in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(c) received as voluntary donations from any individual or organisations.
and the said fund shall be managed by a Board of Trustees appointed under
section 4.
4. The Board of  Trustees shall have one Chairman, who shall be nominated by the
Government and as many other members as are in the operation of the Government required
to manage the fund and all such member shall be elected from representatives of
organisations representing the working journalists and other newspaper employees in the
country.
5. The fund shall be spent by the Board of Trustees to meet the expenditure in
connection with measures which in the opinion of the Board of Trustees are necessary or
expedient to promote the welfare of the working journalists in the country and in particular
for—
(i) providing and improving housing and recreational facilities;
(ii) rendering adequate, financial assistance in case of infirmity and disability
due to accident or old age;
(iii) rendering adequate financial assistance to the kith and kin of a working
journalist who dies prematurely due to an accident or otherwise;
(iv) providing school and colleges education to the dependent children of a
working journalist who dies prematurely or becomes infirm or disable and for the
improvement of their standard of living and nutrition; or disable and for the improvement
of their standard of living and nutrition;
Establishment
of Working
Journalists
Welfare Fund.
Board of
Trustees.
Application of
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(v) providing and improving such other welfare measures as may be prescribed
from time to time.
6. The provisions of Section 5 shall be carried out under the guidance and
supervision of the Board of Trustees who shall constitute regional committees in
different parts of the country for the effective implementation of the said provisions.
7.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force regulating many of the matters dealt with in this
Act.
8. The Central Government may,  by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Regional
Committees.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In a democracy like ours, Press plays  a very significant role in its proper functioning.
It highlights the shortcomings in the governance of the country which compels the
Government to rectify the errors and function properly for the welfare of the people. But
journalists play vital role in giving the necessary news and maintaining the press function
properly. The journalists collect news undeterred by season, hostile atmosphere and violence.
They do not bother for scorching heat, chilly winters and intermittent rains. Be it a bandh,
demonstration, communal riot, curfew or even war the journalist gathers the news for his
newspaper establishment even if there is a risk to his own life. A photographer of a newspaper
establishment covers every important aspect of a news risking his own life. Sometimes the
risk becomes a reality and mishaps take place which render the near and dear ones of such
journalists totally helpless. The newspaper establishments do provide some relief but that
remains inadequate. The entire life style of dependents of such a journalist changes overnight.
Some incidents such as the death of a correspondent while covering the demonstration or
the death of correspondents in tragic road accident have highlighted the dangers involved
in this profession and the helplessness of their near and dear ones. In some cases money is
collected by the colleagues of the deceased to help the dependents but not in every case. In
such prevailing circumstances it is felt that a welfare fund for the working journalists should
be established in the country in which money be given by the Central Government and
newspaper establishments from time to time and welfare measures should be undertaken
therefrom for the working journalists and for their near and dear ones so that the journalists
could discharge their duties fearlessly.
Hence this Bill.
S.S. AHLUWALIA

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of working journalists Welfare
Fund. Clause 4 provides for a Board of Trustees. Clause 6 provides for contributing regional
committees. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crores is likely to be incurred as recurring
expenditure every year.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees twenty crores is also likely to be incurred.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character, as the
matters to be prescribed are of details only.
6

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Working Journalists Welfare Fund at the national level
for promoting welfare of the Journalists employed in various newspaper establishments
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4740RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.