Bill No. V of  2006
THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (REMUNERATIVE PRICES)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for ensuring remunerative prices for the agricultural produce of the farmers  by
way of fixation of minimum support price, compulsory purchase of the produce through
Governmental agencies and compulsory market intervention by such Governmental
agencies in cases of bumper crops and for the establishment of an autonomous Board
for the purposes and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce (Remunerative Prices) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE  RAJYA  SABHA
ON  THE  3RD MARCH , 2006
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “agricultural produce” include wheat, paddy, pulses, sugarcane, cotton,
oilseeds, fruits, jute, vegetables and such other agricultural produce like bajra, jowar,
millet, madwa, maize, soyabean, spices including chillies or horticultural produce which
is used for human consumption or for medicinal purposes;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the cases of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(c) “Board” means the National Agricultural Proudce Remunerative Prices
Fixation Board established under section 3;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Board to be
known as the National Agricultural Produce Remunerative Prices Fixation Board for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) a  Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson  with qualifications in the field of
agriculture or with agriculture background to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) five members to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation
with State Governments, by rotation in alphabetical order, to represent the Governments
of the States;
(c) one member each to represent the Union Ministries of Agriculture and
Fertilizers to be appointed by the Central Government;
(d) one member to represent the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;
(e) two representatives of the agricultural workers;
(f) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
farmers representing the four regions of the country;
(g) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by Lok Sabha and
one by Rajya Sabha.
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, members of the Board
and the manner of filling vacancies and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of
their functions shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5)The headquarters of the Board shall be at Pondicherry.
(6)The Board shall set up one Zonal office  each in the eastern, western, northern and
southern parts of the Country at such places and also in other parts of the Country as the
Board may deem necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board and such zonal offices
shall provide the necessary inputs and data of agricultural production to the Board with
such details and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(7)The Board shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and staff and with
such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall  discharge the following functions, namely:—
(a) fix and declare remunerative prices of agricultural produce before every sowing
season so as to ensure that farmers do get remunerative price for their produce:
Definitions.
Establishment
of the
National
Agricultural
Produce
Remunerative
Pirces
Fixation
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Provided that different prices may be fixed for different zones of the Country.
(b) while fixing the remunerative prices of the agricultural produce, the Board
shall take into account the following factors, namely:—
(i) average investment made by the farmers in sowing and growing the
crop of particular agricultural produce;
(ii) average labour charges and expenditure incurred by farmers thereon;
(iii) expenditure on premium of crop insurance, if applicable in the area;
(iv) maintenance cost of the fields;
(v) prevailing market price of the produce;
(vi) climatic conditions and occurrence of natural calamity;
(c) ensure that the farmers get a reasonable and remunerative price for their
produce.
(2)The Board shall discharge the functions in close liaison with Central and State
Agencies, institutions, authorities responsible for procurment, supply distribution, trade or
such other activities of agricultural produce and avoid duplication of efforts in this regard.
(3)The Board shall give wide publicity to the remunerative prices Fixed by it for the
agricultural produce through electronic and print media throughout the country.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,—
(a) the Central and State Government agencies shall purchase the agricultural
produce from the farmers at the prices fixed by the Board in case the farmers fail to sell
their produce in the open market.
(b) the appropriate Government shall invoke market intervention compulsorily
whenever there is bumper crop of any agricultural produce for which the Board has not
fixed remunerative prices and purchase the produce offered for sale through the
Governmental agencies in the manner as may be prescribed.
(c) the appropriate Government shall keep a watch on the activities of the vicious
circle of traders and middlemen during the immediate post harvest period to ensure
that the prices of agricultural produce do not fall below the expectations and take such
measures as it may deem necessary to protect the interests of the farmers.
6. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the farmers and their produce.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the purpose of this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Miscellaneous
Provisions.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has rightly been said that India lives in villages because nearly 80 per cent of our
population lives in villages and majority of them are farmers who grow food for the entire
nation and who have made the country self sufficient in foodgrains. But unfortunately even
after more than five decades of country’s independence the lot of farmers has not improved
mainly because they have to depend upon the vagaries of monsoon and they do not get
remunerative prices for the crop they grow for which they and their entire family works hard.
But it has been observed that in the immediate post harvest period, prices of agricultural
produce nosedive due to the manipulation of the unholy nexus of unscrupulous traders,
middlemen and others in the trade. The farmers have to sell their produce at throwaway
prices due to this nexus which later on is sold on premium to the consumers. One small
Committee in the Union Agriculture Ministry fixes the Minimum Support Pice (MSP) of some
agriculture produce but it has been observed that generally the MSP is not remunerative and
remains below the expectations of the farmers. More so, this MSP has no legal backing.
Hence it is felt that if an autonomous Board is established to fix the remunerative prices with
certain guidelines, this problem of the farmers can be solved to a great extent because
assured prices of the commodities or agricultural produce will remove the uncertainty caused
by the glut in the market. The farmers will get the remunerative prices for their produce and
eventually it will benefit them and they will become prosperous.
       Hence this Bill.
V . NARAY ANASAMY
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Agricultural Produce
Remunerative Prices Fixation Board. Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall provide
adequate funds. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one hundred crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for ensuring remunerative prices for the agricultural produce of the farmers by
way of fixation of minimum support price, compulsory purchase of the produce through
Governmental agencies and compulsory market intervention by such Governmental
agencies in cases of bumper crops and for the establishment of an autonomous Board
for the purposes and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri V.  Narayanasamy,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5993RS (S-3)—03-03-2006.