THE RIVERS DESILTATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA  BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Rivers Desiltation Authority for the purposes of carrying
out desiltation exercises covering the major rivers and its tributaries for obtaining better
management of water resources by deepening the river beds resulting in deceleration
 in flow of river waters into the ocean and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rivers Desiltation Authority Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Authority" means the Rivers Desiltation Authority of India established
under section 3;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007
Bill No. V of 2007
Short title,
and
Commencement.
Definitions.

2
3.  The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette establish an
Authority to be called the Rivers Desiltation Authority of India.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) The Prime Minister of India, who shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the
Authority;
(b) The Union Minister of Water Resources and the Union Minister of Shipping,
who shall be the ex-officio Vice Chair-Persons of the Authority;
(c) Chief Minister of those states falling along the course of the Indus and the
Ganga-Brahmaputra river system and along the course of all the major rivers of the
Deccan Plateau viz., Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna and Cauvery, and nine members to
be  nominated by Central Government in accordance with such procedure as may be
prescribed; and
(d) one member, to be appointed by the Central Government, who shall be the
Director of the Authority.
(2) The terms and conditions of the service of the members referred to in clause (c)
and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf,
the Authority may, for the purposes of enabling it to perform its functions or exercise its
powers efficiently under this Act appoint such officers and other employees, as it may think
fit, and determine their functions and conditions of services.
5.  The funds of the Authority shall  consist of,—
(a) annual grants made to it by the Central Government after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf; and
(b) contributions from the beneficiary states on proportionate basis.
6. The functions of the Authority shall be to,—
(a) draw up short-term and long-term plans for carrying out desiltation exercises
in the basins of major rivers and its tributaries in various parts of the country on
continuous basis;
(b) set up adequate logistics and appropriate infrastructure judiciously in order
to carry out the work and obtain pre-determined depth of the targeted river basins;
(c) perform such other functions as may be incidental, or conducive to the
discharge of its main functions;
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Functions of
the Authority.
Power to
make rules.
Establishment
of Rivers
Desiltation
Authority of
India.
Composition
of the
Authority.
Funds of the
Authority.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our country, which has the world's highest and the most spectacular mountains, is
also fortunate to be blessed with one of the world's most extensive and fertile plains, made up
of alluvial soil brought down in the form of fine silt by the mighty rivers. Ironically, over the
centuries depth of the basins of the rivers have continuously decelerated owing to
concentration of alluvial soil and sand on these rivers' beds. Due to narrowing of the rivers'
basins by silts, devastation by floods have become a recurring feature during the excess
water flow in every monsoon season inundating vast parts of the country and, due to the
decreasing water catchment capacity of the rivers, precious water has been compelled to be
drain out into the ocean. Moreover, due to obstructions to seamless water flows caused by
sediments deposited in the river beds, mighty rivers like the Ganges and the Brahmaputra
have been changing their course by way of eroding the river banks in many of their catchment
areas especially during every monsoon season for the last several years. Recent notable
instance among them is the continuous erosion of banks in the course of the river Ganges
along Murshidabad and Maldah in West Bengal where the River is seen to be progressively
advancing towards Bangladesh obliterating the existing geographical boundary between
the two countries.
The problem of silt accumulation in rivers' beds is poised to multiply as no concrete
steps to tackle it have been sincerely attempted so far. Desiltation of rivers will not only
augment their water conservation capacity but will also facilitate much cheaper mode of
transportation of goods and passengers on the waterways and the exercise will result in
creation of huge employment opportunities, particularly for the unskilled people in rural
areas along side the rivers.
This Bill seeks to establish a Rivers Desiltation Authority which will take appropriate
steps for planning and implementing strategy for desiltation of rivers in the country in order
that water resources can be managed fruitfully, occurrences of floods can be controlled and
waterways can be harnessed for yielding economic benefits to the society, including large
employment generation.
Hence this Bill.
S. S.  AHLUWALIA
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish the Rivers Desiltation Authority. It is estimated
that a sum of Rupees one hundred crore will be required from the Consolidated Fund of India
initially to set up the Authority. A sum of Rupees ten crore per year will also be required to
meet the recurring expenditure.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Act. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
________
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Rivers Desiltation Authority for the purposes of carrying
out desiltation exercises covering the major rivers and its tributaries for obtaining better
management of water resources by deepening the river beds resulting in deceleration
 in flow of river waters into the ocean and for matters connected therewith.
________
(Shri  S. S. Ahluwalia,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1215RS(S5)—16-03-2007.