1
Amendment of
Section 151A.
Short title and
commencement.
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the people Act, 1951
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 151A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to as for clause (a) of
the proviso, the following shall be substituted namely:—
“(a) The remainder of the term of the person elected to fill the vacancy is less
than one year from the estimated date of declaration of the result by the Election
Commission explanation: For the purpose of this proviso the estimated date of
declaration of the result shall be provided by the Election Commission.’’
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Bill No. V of 2019
43 of 1951. 5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is considered necessary to avoid the exorbitant expenditure involved in conduct of
bye-elections to fill the vacancy of Member of the Parliament or State Legislatures, if the
remaining term of such member in a relation to a vacancy is less than one year subsequent to
their estimated date of assumption of office. To maintain that the elections to office for this
small duration is not a burden on the exchequer is not an acceptable stand. The Parliament
should respect the right of the people to be represented but it should also necessarily take
into consideration the money and resources of the people at the disposal. It is necessary to
note that this provision is resources of the people at the disposal. It is necessary to note that
this provision is working to the detriment of the populace. Moreover, delayed bye-elections
are a frequent case usually tending to be held in the latter part of the stipulated six month
duration. The onus therefore lies on the Parliament to amend the laws for the betterment of
the people and being true to the realities of the democracy along with the principles.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
K.C. RAMAMURTHY
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE REPRESENTATION  OF THE PEOPLE  ACT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
* * * * * *
151A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 147, section 149, section 150
and section 151, a bye-election for filling any vacancy referred to in any of the said sections
shall be held within a period of six months from the date of the occurrence of the vacancy:
Provided that nothing contained in the this section shall apply if—
(a) the remainder of the term of a member in relation to a vacancy is less than one
year, or
(b) the Election Commission in consultation with the Central Government certifies
that it is difficult to hold the bye-election within the said period.
* * * * * *
3
Time limit for
filling
vacancies
referred to in
sections 147,
149, 150 and
151.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the people Act, 1951
————
(Shri K. C. Ramamurthy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—853RS(S3)—24-06-2019.