1
THE FLOOD AND DROUGHT CONTROL  BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Flood and Drought Control Board to control
flood and drought and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
WHEREAS  entry 56 of List I-Union List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
provides for regulation and development of Inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent
to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest;
A
ND WHEREAS a lot of havoc is caused by floods and drought every year in almost all
parts of the country;
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient in the public interest to take effective measures for flood
control and checking drought;
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Flood and Drought Control Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short titles, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.
Bill No.  VI  of 2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Board" means the National Flood and Drought Control Board established
under section 3 of this Act; and
(b) "Prescribed" means Prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall establish, by notification in the Official Gazette,
a Board to be known as the National Flood and Drought Control Board for performing
functions assigned under this Act.
(2) The Head Office of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
(3) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairman, who shall be an expert dealing with flood and drought control,
to be appointed by the Central Government; and
(b) a representative each from every State Government and Union Territory,
who shall be expert on flood control measure and drought Management, to be nominated
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairman and other Members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall make available to the Board such officers and staff
as may be required for efficient functioning of the Board.
4. The functions of the Board shall be,—
(a) to identify areas which are prone to floods and droughts;
(b) to suggest measures for flood and drought control;
(c) to make a time bound plan for inter-linking of rivers which are prone to floods
with the ones  which are not so;
(d) to suggest measures for the development of land in areas which are prone to
floods and drought;
(e) to install flood forecasting system in such areas which are prone to floods
and warn the inhabitants in those areas to move out to safer places in case floods and
droughts are forecast in the area;
 (f) advise the State Governments on the preventive measures and rehabilitation
during floods, and
(g) advise the State Government for proper storage of rain water and construction
of dams.
5. The expenditure involved in the flood and drought control measures as suggested
by the Board shall be borne by the Central Government and the State Governments in such
ratio, as may be determined by the Board.
6. (1) The Board shall from time to time make recommendations to the Central Government
on the flood and droughts control measures.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the recommendations of
the Board:
Provided that where it is felt  that any recommendation cannot be implemented due
to any reason, the Central Government may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing inform
the Board, accordingly.
Establishment
of the
National
Flood and
Drought
Control
Board.
Functions of
Board.
Ratio of
Expenditure
to be borne by
the Control
and State
Government.
Recommen-
dations of the
Board.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. The Board shall prepare once in every calender year, in such form and at such time
as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during
the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the
Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Annual
Report.
Power to make
rules.
5

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is the land of many great rivers. Floods occur in almost all river basins of the
country and many parts of the country are visited by droughts. The water resources of the
country are not being fully utilized. Every year there are floods which cause immense loss of
life and property and the same can be said about droughts. Whereas in some parts of the
country there are floods, there is drought in other parts. The national resources are damaged
by floods. The problem, therefore, needs to be addressed urgently to mitigate the effects of
floods and droughts.
Therefore, it is expedient in public interest to evolve an integrated and scientific
approach to the flood control and dealing with droughts and to draw out a national plan
fixing priorities for implementation of strategies in the future.
The Bill seeks to provide for the setting up of a National Flood Control and Droughts
Board to suggest measures to prevent and control floods and droughts in the country.
Hence this Bill.
T. SUBBARAMI REDDY

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Flood and Drought Control
Board. Clause 5 provides that the expenditure on flood control measures suggested by the
Board shall be borne by the Central Government and State Governments. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2334RS(S5)—03-05-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Flood and Drought Control Board to control flood
and drought and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P .)