THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Act,
2012.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 12 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as
the Principal Act), after sub-clause ( ii), of clause ( a), the following sub-clause, shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(iii) a person or Non-Government Organization or an institute”.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH APRIL, 2012
Bill NO. VI of 2012
Amendment of
section 12.
5
Act No. 10 of
1994.

2
3. In section 17 of the Principal Act, for clause ( i), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(i) call for information or report from the Central Government or any State
Government or any other authority or organization subordinate thereto or from a
person or Non-Government Organization or an institute for violation of such human
rights as have arisen out of International Covenants and enforceable by courts of
India, within such time as may be specified by it."
4. In section 18 of the Principal Act:—
(i) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(1) where the inquiry discloses, the commission of violation of human rights
or negligence in the prevention of violation of human rights by a public servant, a
person Non-Government Organization or an institute, it shall recommend to the
concerned Government or authority the initiation of proceedings for prosecution or
such other action as the Commission may deem fit against the concerned person or
persons:
Provided that the Commission shall specify such action or quantum of punishment
as may be prescribed for violation of human rights, action for which can not be initiated
in any other law in force."
(ii) after clause (6), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(7) The Commission shall, on being satisfied that the action taken or proposed
to be taken by the concerned Government or authority is not in proportion to
the offence committed, forward the complaint to the Magistrate, who shall proceed
to try the case in accordance with sections 200 and 201 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure 1973.’’
Amendment of
section. 17.
Amendment of
section. 18.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The term "human right" has been defined in the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993
as the rights relating to life, liberty equality and dignity of the individual guaranteed by the
Constitution and embodied in the International Covenants and enforceable by courts in
India. As such, human rights relating to the rights guaranteed by the Constitution, if violated
by the state or any public authority, may be protected. Of late, many new rights have been
recognized by International Covenants violation of which can not be actionable in any other
law in force. In addition to this, a person, Non Governmental Organisation (NGO) or a
private institute as per the Act can not be held liable for violation of human rights even if
they may have violated human rights recognized by the International covenants in other
words. The Act provides for action for violation of human rights by public authority and not
against a private entity.
2. It has been observed that the powers of the National Human Rights Commission
have been reduced to act merely as an agency to initiate an enquiry into cases of violation of
human rights and to publish action taken report submitted to it by the Government. It has
only recommendatory powers, whereas, taking into account the expertise, experience and
specilization in handling cases of violation of human rights, the Commission should have
been given powers to specify penal actions at least for cases which are not covered by any
relevant statute.
3. In view of the above, the bill proposes to amend the Protection of Human Rights
Act, 1993.
4. Hence this Bill.
E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ACT, 1993
* * * * *
17. The Commission while inquiring into the complaints of violations of human rights
may—
(i) call for information or report from the Central Government or any State
Government or any other authority or organisation subordinate thereto whithin such
time as may be specified by it:
* * * * *
‘18. The Commission may take any of the following steps upon the completion of an
inquiry held under this Act, namely:—
(1) where the inquiry discloses; the commission of violation of human rights or
negligence in the prevention of violation of human rights by a public servant, it may
recommend to the concerned Government or authority the initiation of proceedings
for prosecution or such other action as the Commission may deem fit against the
concerned person or persons;’
* * * * *
4
Steps after
inquiry.
Inquiry into
complaints.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.
—————
(Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—440RS—(S3)—27.04.2012.