AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. VI of 2001

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE AGED BILL, 2001
‘a
BILL

to provide for securing a life with dignity, peace and security to the aged and for their
welfare and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-Second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for the Aged Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
5 (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.—

(a) “Aged” means any person being a citizen of India, above the age of sixty
years;
(b) “appropriate Government” means the State Government in respect of any
10 State and the Central Government in all other cases;

(c) “Indigent” means an aged person who because of any age related infirmity or
disability is incapable to earn his livelihood, nor has any source of livelihood;

(d) “National Policy” means the National Policy for the Aged, as provided under
Section 3;

Short utle,
extent and
Commencement

Definitions


Formulation
of National
Policy for
Aged.

National
Commission

for the Aged.

Functions
of the

Commission.

Meeting of
National
Commission

2
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

() “Regulatory Authority” means Regulatory Authority appointed under
Section 7.

3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, lay down a
National Policy for the Aged in consultation with the National Commission constituted
under Section 4 to secure to the aged, besides freedom from want, a sense of participation in
community life, self-fulfilment and dignity of life.

4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set
up a Commission to be called the National Commission for the Aged.

(2) The National Commission shall consist of the following, namely:—

(a) the Union Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment who shall be the
‘Chairman of the National Commission;

(b) the Secretary to the Union Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
who shall be the ex-officio Secretary to the National Commission;

(c) the Union Ministers of Health and Family Welfare, Labour and Finance, the
Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Chairman of Central Social
Welfare Board as the ex-officio members of the National Commission;

(d) three members of Parliament, two from the Lok Sabha and one from the
Rajya Sabha who shall be elected by the respective House of Parliament as members
of the National Commission for a period of one year.

(e) five members of the National Commission to be appointed by the
Central Government in the manner as may be prescribed.

5. The National Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions
namely:—

(J) to evolve a National Policy for securing to the aged, besides freedom from
want, a sense of participation in community life and fulfilment to lead a life with
dignity and for harnessing the reserve of wisdom, maturity of mind and experience
available amongst the aged, in the service of the nation;

(2) to lay down schemes and programmes to achieve the objectives set out in
clause (1);

(3) to create and generate funds for financing welfare schemes for the aged;

(4) to evolve and float health insurance schemes for the aged through appropri-
ate Financial Institutions and Insurance Companies;

(5) to promote a network of Old-Age Homes through the appropriate Govern-
ments;

(6) to lay down Old Age Pension Schemes and its operation through appropriate
Governments;

(7) to make a review of the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, insofar as they
relate to me aged, so as to ensure due peace and security of life and to secure to them
a life with dignity and to suggest amendments thereto;

(i) to monitor the working of various policies, programmes and schemes
laid down by it, and to issue directives for proper implementation of the Na-
tional Policy laid down under clause (1);

(ii) to lay down norms for recognition and registration of Voluntary Or-
ganisations and trusts engaged in welfare of the aged.

6. The National Commission shall meet at least once in every six months.

20

25

30

35

40

45


20

3
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall be notification in the Official Gazette,

appoint a Regulatory Authority for each territorial division, created for the purpose;

(2) It shall be the duty of the Regulatory Authority—

(a) to maintain a Register of the Aged, residing in its territorial jurisdiction,
classifying them in three categories, namely,—

(i) the aged who are employed or engaged in any vocation or profession;

(ii) the aged who wish to be employed in any vocation, profession or
other work, including social and honorary work; and

(iii) the aged who are destitute, needing economic, social support and
care including health care,

(b) to evolve plans and programmes with the approval of appropriate Govern-
ment to aid and advise the aged seeking employment or engagement in productive
and constructive channels in the best interests of the society and the nation, with or
without the help of employment exchanges;

(c) to utilise their services in bodies where public interest needs to be represented
or protected, on a voluntary basis keeping in view the knowledge, experience and
background of such Aged persons;

(d) to ensure due implementation of the plans, programmes and schemes laid
down by the National Commission; and

(e) to operate Old Age Pension Schemes as provided for by the appro-
priate Government under section 8.

8. The appropriate Government shall lay down an Old Age Pension Scheme for

Appointment
of Regulatory
Authority.

Old Age

rendering financial aid to each Aged indigent person and the amount of pension payableto —_ pension
such persons every month shall be linked with the cost of living Index and shall be so fixed scheme.
as to ensure to decent living.

9. Every Aged person shall have the right to receive free medical aidinsuch manner Free medical

30

35

40

45

(6) ensure adequate representation of the Aged persons in different wel-
fare and social bodies, like Social Welfare Boards and Consumer Protection
Fora at Central and State levels;

(c) provide training and other assistance to the Aged for securing suitable
employment, vocation and social service opportunities;

(व) reserve at least five per cent of all housing units constructed under
various Welfare Housing Schemes;

(e) provide free travel facilities by rail, road, or inland waterways in pub-
lic transport, to the aged, in such manner as may be prescribed;

(f) provide for recreational tours, including religious pilgrimages like Haj,
to the aged, in such manner as may be prescribed;

(g) to provide facilities for Yoga and Sports for the aged, in such manner as
may be prescribed;

(A) provide for interest free loans for housing and self-employment needs.

as may be prescribed. aid.
10. To provide and secure due place in society to the aged, the appropriate, Measures to
Government shall— secure due
place in
(a) reserve adequate number of seats for the Aged in Panchayats and local society for
bodies; Aged persons.


Old Age
Fund

Right of aged
Persons to be
supported by
their children

Power to
make rules

4

11. The appropriate Government may provide for an Old Age Fund for payment
of old age pensions and for implementing other schemes for the Aged, under this Act.
12. The aged parents shall have the right to be supported by their children, in accord-

ance with the social and economic status of their family, enforceable through the Regula-
tory Authority, who for that purpose shall have the powers of a Judicial Magistrate.

13. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

One of every 10 persons on earth is over 60 years of age. In India over 6 per cent of the
Population is over 60 years, which is likely to grow up to 10 per cent by 2016 A.D.

In view of the fast growing population of the aged (60 plus) in the world, the United
Nations had declared the year 1999 as the International Year of the Older People. The
Government of India has formulated a National Policy for the Old (sixty plus) persons to
help them in the last phase of their life. This policy document, outlines a series proposals
for providing social and economic security to the aged. It has also mooted the idea of
observing the year 2000 as the National Year of the Older Persons.

The Principal areas of intervention and action strategies suggested in the Policy for
the aged include the following:— हि

1. Financial Security for Older Persons working in the formal sector as well those in
the informal sector;

2. Health Care & Nutrition to enable Older Persons to cope with health and other
problems commonly associated with old age with particular emphasis upon
preventive strategies;

3. Shelter/housing keeping in view the life style of older persons;

Emphasis upon education, training and information needs of older persons along
with promotion of research and advocacy in the field;

5. Priority attention to especially vulnerable group such as the destitute, widows and
the disabled older persons;

6. Establishment of a welfare fund for Older Persons;
7. Special attention to protection of life and property of Older Persons;
8. Provision of appropriate concessions, rebates and discounts to Older Persons;
9. Full participation of Non-Government Organisations in the sector;
10. Formation of self help groups of older persons;

11. Strengthening of the family and reinforcing intergenerational relationships
between children and Older Persons;

12. Development of trained manpower in the sector particularly in medical colleges
and schools of social work;

13. Use of experts in Public Administration to coordinate and monitor the implemen-
tation of the policy.

It may appear from this formulation that the national policy seeks to address only
economic needs of sustenance of the aged. It fails to recognise the enormous store of
wisdom, intelligence and experience available amongst the aged, and the need to impart
amongst them a sense of active participation in community life, self-fulfilment and dig-
nity in society, which can go a long way in contributing to the development of the nation.
The national policy really falls too short of the nation. The national policy really falls too
short of the UN Principles for the Older Persons (resolution 6/91) adopted by the UN
General Assembly in 1991 calling upon world Governments to incorporate them into
national programmes. The 18 principles adopted under the Resolution called for action in
many areas including:

Independence: Older Persons should have access to food, water, shelter, clothing
health care, work and other income generating opportunities; education, training, and a
life in safe environment.

Participation: Older Persons should remain integrated into community life and
participate activiely in formulation of policies affecting the well-being of the nation.

5


6

Care: Older Persons should have access to social and legal services and to health care,
so that they maintain an optimum level of physical, mental and emotional well-being.
This should include full respect for dignity, beliefs, needs and privacy.

Self-fulfilment: Older Persons should have access to education, cultural, spiritual
and recreational resources and be able to develop their full potential.

Dignity: Older Persons should be able to live in dignity and security, be free from
exploitation and physical or mental abuse and be treated fairly, regardless of age, gender and
social or ethnic background.

The necessary provisions are, therefore, to be made in conformity with the UN
Declaration. Provisions should not only be made to provide economic independence to the
aged, but also to ensure that they remain integrated into community life and actively participate
in the formulation of policies for their own well-being and the well-being of the nation. They
should thus have access to educational, cultural and recreational resources to develop their
potential to the full, and to lead a life with dignity, social status and security.

Apart from the National Policy and programme for the aged, it is necessary to provide
them, not only economic freedom from want for food, water, shelter, clothing and health care,
but also to ensure their active participation in community life and opportunities for self
fulfilment and to lead a life with dignity.

KARAN SINGH.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bull provides for constitution of a National Commission for the Aged
Clause 5 provides for generation of funds for financing schemes for Aged and promotion of
network of old-Age homes. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Regulatory
Authority Clause 8 provides for old Age pension Clause 9 provides for free medical aid to
the Aged Clause 10 provides for training, suitable employment, vocation, free travel facilities
etc to the Aged persons Clause 11 of the Bill provides for creation of an Old Aged Fund

The Bull, therefore, 1f enacted, will involved expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India It 1s estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees Ten crore will be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of about rupees Five crore 1s also likely to be
involved


MEMORANDUM ON DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carry-
ing out the purpose of the Bill. The delegation of legislative powers is of a normal
character, as the matters to be prescribed are of detail only.


RATYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for securing a life with dignity, peace and security to the aged and for their
welfare and for matters connected therewith.

(Dr. Karan Singh, M.P.)

MGIP(MRND)PLU—6147RS—24-01-2001.