Bill No. VI of 2008
THE WORKING CHILDREN (WELFARE AND REHABILITATION)
BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures to be undertaken by the State and the employer
of working children and for their rehabilitation through education, training and
specialisation in some trade or vocation and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as  follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Working Children (Welfare and Rehabilitation)
Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “accident” includes an accident which occurs in the course of an employment
of a child or the occupational disease which is contracted by a working child within
or outside the working hours;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
(b) “child” means a person who is under the age of fifteen years;
(c) “competent authority” means any authority authorised by the Government,
by notification in the Official Gazette, to perform all or any of the functions of the
competent authority under this Act and for such areas as may be specified therein;
(d) “contractor” means a person who, in relation to a manufacturing process,
undertakes to produce a given result by executing the work through contract child
labour or who engages child labour for any manufacturing process in a private dwelling
house, shop, factory or such establishment and includes a sub-contractor, agent, munshi,
thekedar or sattadar or the like, by whatever name called;
(e) “employer” means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment the person who or the authority which
has the ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment and where the said
affairs are entrusted to any other person whether called a manager, managing
director, managing agent or by any other name, such person;
(ii) in relation to a dwelling house the head or Karta of such family; and
(iii) in relation to shop, stall or kiosk the owner of such   shop, stall or kiosk
doing business therein;
(f) “establishment” means,—
(i) a factory;
(ii) a mine;
(iii) a plantation;
(iv) a shop, stall, kiosk, dhaba, tea stall, hotel or restaurant;
(v) an establishment where children are employed for the exhibition of
equitation, acrobatic and other performances;
(vi) any place or premises including the precincts thereof or any part in
which any manufacturing process connected with the making of goods is being
or is ordinarily carried on with the help of  child labour;
(g) “fund” means the  Working Children Benefit and Rehabilitation Fund
established under Section 8;
(h)  “Government” means the Central Government;
(i) “Inspector” means an Inspector appointed under Section 12;
(j) “wages” shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Payment of
Wages Act, 1936.
3.  It shall be the duty of every contractor and employer to send every working child
employed by him to a school for getting education as per his calibre during such time, as
may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Government shall open schools and Technical Education Institutions for
free education of working children at appropriate places in the country.
(2) The working children attending the school and Technical Education Institutions
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be provided with books, writing materials, dress and other
relevant articles free of cost by the Government.
5. Every employer of a working child shall, at his cost, insure the working child against
accident.
Compulsory
education of
working
children.
4 of 1936.
Government to
open Schools
and Training
Institutes for
working
children.
Insurance
against
accident of
working
children.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
Government shall fix the working hours for the working children in any establishment or
other place, their other conditions of service and minimum wages to be paid to them by the
employers.
7. Any employer or any establishment or contractor violating the provisions contained
in section 3 or section 5 shall be liable for imprisonment which may extend to six months or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.
8. With effect from such date as the Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint, in this behalf, there shall be established a Working Children Benefit and
Rehabilitation Fund, moneys into which shall be given by the Government after due appro-
priation made by Parliament, from time to time, and the said fund shall be managed by a
Board of Trustees appointed under Section 9.
9. The Board of Trustees shall have one Chairman, who shall be nominated by the
Government, and as many other members as are required in the opinion of the Government,
to manage the fund but at least one half of the members shall be elected from the representa-
tives of organisations devoted to safeguarding the interests of working children in the
country.
10. The fund shall be spent on the upbringing of the working children through their
free education at convenient time of the working child and vocational training in some
trade or technical apprenticeship through a time bound scheme framed by a competent
authority.
11. The provisions of Section 10 shall be carried out under the guidance and supervi-
sion of the Board of Trustees who shall constitute regional committees for the effective
implementation of the said provisions.
12. The Government shall appoint as many inspectors, welfare officers and such
other officers and staff as it considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
14. The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Government to
fix working
hours,
conditions of
service and
minimum
wages.
Punishment
for non-
compliance.
Establishment
of Working
Children
Benefit and
Rehabilitation
Fund.
Board of
Trustees.
Application of
fund.
Regional
Committees.
Appointment
of Inspectors
etc.
Overriding
effects of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Working children constitute a considerable work force in our country despite various
laws prohibiting their employment. The Constitution of India also prohibits employment of
children in hazardous occupations. Despite all this, millions of children are working in
Carpet factories, Beedi factories, Bangles Industry, Circus, Hotels, Tea Stalls, Dhabas, Work-
shops of Motor Vehicles and Cycles, in the agricultural fields and as domestic workers either
for their own subsistence or to support their poor families. They work under pathetic and
unhygenic conditions. Though they are talented they remain illiterate because they cannot
attend schools. In some cases they work as bonded labour. They are paid meagre wages and
in some cases only two time meals and clothes. In case of accident or dangerous disease
affecting them they are left to fend for themselves. They are left to their fate not only by their
employers but also by their parents due to their sheer poverty. Child labour is such a shame-
ful and depressing phenomenon that nobody views it analytically. In the same process we
overlook the skill, productivity and ingenuity so consistently displayed by the major part of
our child population but instead of encouraging them they are forced to work under pathetic
conditions.
It is true that children must enjoy their childhood, they must get nutritious diet, good
education and good atmosphere to grow as responsible citizens of the country but at the
same time we have to accept the reality. Now the time has come to accept the bare truth that
we cannot abolish child labour by laws which will certainly enlarge the statute book but
certainly cannot discourage child employment. So instead of wasting our energy in futile
activities of abolition of child labour we must see that it should be made mandatory for the
employer of a working child to send him to school at convenient time preferably in the
evenings to enable the child to get proper education. The child also must be insured against
accidents and diseases. They must get minimum wages and other benefits prescribed by
Government. On the other hand the Government should open schools and training institutes
for working children. It is proposed for the establishment of a Benefit and Rehabilitation
Fund for the benefit of working children which may help the working children to lead a
better life and they are settled for a respectable living and avail good working conditions.
Hence this Bill.
S.S. AHLUWALIA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that Government shall open Schools and Training Institu-
tions for working children. Clause 8 provides for the establishment of a Fund. Clause 9
provides for the constitution of Board of Trustees. Clause 11 provide for constitution of
Regional Committees. Clause 12 provides for appointment of Inspectors, etc. The Bill, if
enacted, would involve a recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India to the
extent of about rupees ten crores per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crores is also likely to be incurred
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of legislative
power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
________
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures to be undertaken by the State and employer
of working children and for their rehabilitation through education, training and
specialisation in some trade or vocation and for matters connected therewith.
________
(Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4741RS—(S5)—29-12-2008.