1
THE TEACHING OF SANSKRIT AS A COMPULSORY LANGUAGE IN
SCHOOLS BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for the teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory language in schools.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory language in
Schools Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
2. It shall be compulsory for every school to teach Sanskrit language as a compulsory
subject up to class eigth.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Teaching of
Sanskrit as a
compulsory
language in
schools.
Bill No. VI of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MARCH, 2016
5

2
3. The Central and the State Governments shall equally share the expenditure likely
to be incurred on the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Expenditure
to be shared
by Central
and State
Governments.
Power to
make rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sanskrit has been the language of India's soul. It is also  said to be the Mother of all
languages. Our Rishi Munis called it "Devabhasha" or the Language of the Gods. No one
can truly understand and appreciate the spirit of Indian culture, if he does not know the
Sanskrit language since all the major ancient texts are written in this language. Sri Aurobindo,
while speaking of the importance of the Sanskrit language for India, says: "It is of the utmost
value to a nation, a human group-soul to preserve its language and make it a strong and
living cultural instrument. A nation, race or people which lose its language cannot live its
whole life or real life".
Jawaharlal Nehru has also said "The past has gone and the present is with us and we
work for the future. But I have no doubt that whatever the shape the future may take, one of
the biggest, the strongest, and the most powerful and the most valued of our legacies, will be
the Sanskrit language." Sanskrit is the only language which was spoken all over India in the
past and it is the only language which can still unify the country.
The versatile literary creations in the Sanskrit language have evoked a deep sense of
awe and wonder among scholars of the world. All the profound spiritual wisdom of India
embodied in our ancient scriptures like Vedas, Upanishadas, Bhagwad Gita, Puranas and
Shastras are expressed in the Sanskrit language. No wonder great Indian sages like
Sri Aurobindo and Swami Vivekananda viewed Sanskrit language as the most perfect medium
for expressing spiritual and philosophical ideas. But interestingly, even some of the modern
scientists in the high-tech field of computers; have discovered that Sanskrit is the best
language for the latest generation of Artificial Intelligence machine-systems. But the people
of India are turning away from this treasure house of our ancient Indian culture and do not
realize its value.
It is highly deplorable that such a language which has a vast literature is being
neglected in its own country. It is high time now to make sincere efforts to increase awareness
in the younger generation about the importance of Sanskrit. Teaching of Sanskrit as a
compulsory language in Schools will enable the younger generation to enrich their personality
and the noble traditions and thoughts of Indians and make better citizens.
Hence this Bill.
MANSUKH  L. MANDA VIYA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the total expenditure incurred on teaching of Sanskrit
as a compulsory language in every school shall be borne equally by the Central and State
Governments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. Although, the exact amount of expenditure cannot be estimated,
a recurring expenditure of twenty crore rupees per annum is likely to be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory language in schools.
————
(Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5038RS(S3)—11-03-2016.