1
Bill No. VI of  2013
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON
THE 8TH MARCH, 2013
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PREVENTION OF BEGGING AND REHABILITATION
OF BEGGARS  BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of begging and rehabilitation of  beggars in the country and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention and Rehabilitation of Beggars Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "beggar" means any person who indulges in begging at public places or go
from door to door to solicit alms;
(c) "fund" means Rehabilitation Fund established under section 4; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Definitions.5
10

2
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the
Central Government shall, as soon as may be formulate a national action plan for the
prevention of begging and rehabilitation of beggars.
(2) The activities of the national action plan shall be,—
(a) to collect exact and authentic data related to begging in the country;
(b) to set up Task Forces in every district of the country in consultation with the
appropriate Government to identify the persons indulged in begging at various places
and take steps for their rehabilitation;
(c) to constitute an advisory team in association with the stakeholders and the
persons having knowledge and expertise in the field of social welfare and prepare a
rehabilitation action plan on the basis of recommendations made by the advisory
team;
(d) to formulate various welfare schemes for the rehabilitation of beggars
including construction of rehabilitation homes; and
(e) to make all efforts for the prevention of begging.
4.  ( 1) The Central Government shall establish a Rehabilitation Fund for the
rehabilitation of beggars with an initial corpus of rupees one thousand crores.
(2) A rehabilitation home shall function in every district with the aid of the
Rehabilitation Fund.
(3)  The fund shall be used for providing boarding and lodging, education and
employment, etc. to the beggars who have been brought to the rehabilitation home.
(4)  The Central Government shall administer the fund in such manner as may be
prescribed.
5. The provisions  of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
6.  The provisions of this Act  shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
National
action plan
for
prevention of
begging and
rehabilitation
of beggars.
Establishment
of
Rehabilitation
Fund.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
law.
5
10
15
20
25
Power to
make rules. 30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Today, our country is facing many problems, begging being a major among them. After
so many years  of independence, a large number of people in our country are still indulging
in begging and the beggars are dying of starvation everyday. It is a matter of national shame.
These beggars can be seen at railway stations, bus stands, traffic signals and other public
places beseeching foreign tourists in metro cities and tourist places which is again a matter
of great shame. It is high time that the Government should take concrete steps to discourage
begging and make proper arrangements for rehabilitation of beggars.
There is a need to formulate a national action plan for the prevention and rehabilitation
of beggars. There is also a need to set up task forces in all the districts of the country, which
would identify persons indulged in begging at various places and take adequate steps for
their rehabilitation so that the country could get rid of the national shame of begging.
Hence, this Bill.
PRABHAT JHA

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of  task forces in all the districts for the
identification and rehabilitation of beggars. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of
Rehabilitation Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees
five thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislation power is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of begging and rehabilitation of  beggars in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5531RS(S4)—8.3.2013.