THE JHARKHAND ATOMIC AUTHORITY  BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Atomic Authority for the purposes of setting up an
atomic power plant for generating electricity in the State of Jharkhand and for matters
connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Jharkhand Atomic Authority Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. The Central Government shall establish an Authority to be called the Jharkhand
Atomic Authority in the State of Jharkhand.
3. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Prime Minister of India, who shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the
Authority;
(b) the Chief Minister of the State of Jharkhand or in his absence the Governor
of the State of Jharkhand, who shall be the ex-officio Vice Chairman of the Authority;
Bill No.  VI  of 2007
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Establishment
of Jharkhand
Atomic
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007

2
(c) eighteen Scientists, nine to be nominated by the Central Government and
nine by the Government of Jharkhand State in accordance with such procedure as may
be prescribed by rules framed under this Act; and
(d) one member, to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with
the Government of the State of Jharkhand, who shall be the Director of the Authority.
(2) The terms and conditions of the service of the members referred to in clause (c) and
(d) of sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(3) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the
Authority may, for the purposes of enabling it to perform its functions or exercise its powers
efficiently under this Act, appoint such officers and other employees, as it may think fit, and
determine their functions and conditions of services.
4. The funds of the Authority shall consist of,—
(a) contributions, subscriptions and donations made to it by any person; and
(b) annual grants made to it by the Central Government after due appropriation
made by Parliament in this behalf.
5. The functions of the Authority shall be to,—
(a) set up an atomic power plant at an appropriate place in the State of Jharkhand;
(b) set up atomic power plant for generating electricity to meet the energy needs
of the State as well as those States in its neighbourhood whosoever shall intent to
obtain supply of surplus electricity energy from the Authority;
(c) perform such other functions as may be incidental, or conducive to the
discharge of its main functions;
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Funds of the
Authority.
Functions of
the
Authority.
Power to
make rules.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There is acute shortage of electricity in the State of Jharkhand and several other states
in the region resulting in backwardness of the State and the entire region. The lowest per
capita consumption of electricity registered in the region has been largely attributable to
perennial scarcity of electric power at affordable cost. Supply of quality electricity produced
by Atomic Power plant will not only facilitate development of the region but will also result
in lowering of input cost for industries strengthening their competitiveness especially in the
international markets.
Electricity can be produced by harnessing atomic energy and one of the richest areas
in the world containing vital raw-material is located in the State of Jharkhand which has the
richest Uranium deposits. In spite of that no atomic power plant for producing electricity has
been set up in Jharkhand so far.
This Bill seeks to establish an Atomic Authority in Jharkhand to take appropriate steps
for setting up of an atomic power plant in Jharkhand so that adequate electricity can be made
available to meet the growing industrial and domestic consumption in Jharkhand. It will
boost the economy of the State and generate employment opportunities.
Hence this Bill.
S. S. AHLUWALIA

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to establish the Jharkhand Atomic Authority. Clause 4 provides
for grants to be made by the Central Government for its functioning. It is estimated that a sum
of rupees one hundred crore will be required from the Consolidated Fund of India initially to
set up the Authority. A sum of rupees two crores per year will also be required to meet the
recurring expenditure.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Atomic Authority for the purposes of setting up an
atomic power plant for generating electricity in the State of Jharkhand and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri S.S. Ahluwalia,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1217RS(S-5)—16.03.2007.