 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No. VI of 2024 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) 
 BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
furt
her to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
         BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India 
 as follows: 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2024.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 
  43 of 1951 2. In section 86 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in sub -section (7), for the words “endeavour shall be
made to conclude the trial within six months”, the words “shall be concluded
within six months”, shall be substituted.
Amendment of 
section 86. 
110 3. In Section 116A of the principal Act, after sub -section (2), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely: 
“(3) Every appeal preferred under sub-section (2) shall be disposed of within six 
months from the date of its filing and the proceedings shall be conducted on  
day-to-day basis.” 
Amendment of 
section 116A. 

2 
ST
ATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Elections are perennial phenomena in our country; be it the General Elections 
to the Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies, elections to the Rajya Sabha and 
Legislative Councils or B ye-elections. As  is the case everywhere , elections  are 
fervently contested  in our country and there are a lot of stakes involved in all these 
elections. 
2. The Election Commission has been vested with the task of conducting the
elections.  As per the provisions of the Representation of the People  Act, 1951 (RP
Act, 1951), all the candidates/ parties have to adhere to the norms fixed for contesting
these elections. At times, when these norms are violated, the aggrieved party is free to
approach the High Court, which has been given the original jurisdiction in this regard,
for deciding election disputes.
3. The grounds on which the election of a candidate can be challenged are outlined
in the RP Act, 1951.  Although Section 86 of the RP A ct, 19 51 provides that all
endeavours shall be made by the High Court to conclude the trial within 6 months, in
practice, it has been  observed that, the decision on election petitions are pronounced
when the term of the elected person is about to expire or has already expired. After
announcement of the decision of the High Court, the aggrieved party is entitled to
approach the Supreme Court under Section 116 A of the RP Act, 1951.  In that section,
there is no time limit being prescribed within which the appeal has to be disposed of.
4. In 2015, in the case of Mohd. Akbar Vs. Ashok Sahu and Others,  the Supreme
Court had expressed its concern over the delay in the disposal of election petitions. The
Court had  observed that very rarely , the election disputes are resolved during the
tenure of the winning candidate , thereby reducing the adjudicating process into a
mockery of justice. The Court had suggested that each High Court should have  a
dedicated bench for deciding election  petitions.  R ecently, in 2023, in the case of
Rajendra Kumar Vs. Kuwar Bhartendra Singh, the Allahabad High Court has observed
that often  the delay is such that the election petition becomes infructuous, or if it
survives, it would only be for  academic purposes. The Court has further observed that
the High Courts have to be more careful and have to endeavour  to decide election
petition at the earliest, so that it may not render it infructuous due to efflux of time.
5. Even after all these, the situation in most of the election petitions is the same
and it takes considerable time to decide the petition s. It is high time that a period be
fixed for both High Courts as well as the Supreme Court within which they should
dispose of election petitions and appeals thereon respectively.
6. The Bill seeks to stipulate  a maximum period of six ( 6) months from the date of
filing of the election petition  or appeal, as the case may be, for both the c ourts to
decide on and dispose them of.
Hence, this Bill. 
A.D. SINGH

3 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951 
(43 of 1951) 
*              *         
       *             *  
86. (7)   Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and
endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six months from the date on
which the election petition is presented to the High Court for trial.
Trial of election 
petitions. 
*              *                *             *       
116A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court on any question (whether  
of law or fact) from every order made by a High Court under section 98 or 
section 99.  
(2) Eve
ry appeal under this Chapter shall be preferred within a period of thirty
days from the date of the order of the High Court under section 98 or section 99:
       P
rovided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of 
the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient 
cause for not preferring the appeal within such period. 
Appeals to Supreme 
Court 
*     *                *             *       

RAJYA SABHA 
______ 
A 
BILL 
fur
ther to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 
_______
___ 
(Shri
 A.D. Singh, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS─PMB(E)─062─05.02.2024. 