Bill No. VI  of  2015
THE COMPULSORY REGISTRATION OF CALLERS USING
PUBLIC TELEPHONE BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of callers using public telephone for making calls
in the interest of national security and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth  year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Registration of Callers using Public
Telephone Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Public Call Office (PCO)" means a telephone facility located in a public
place through manned or coin operated payphone;
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2015
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(c) words and expressions unsed but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Information
Technology Act, 2000 shall have the same meaning as is respectively assigned to them
in those Acts.
3. (1) It shall be mandatory for every PCO owner or his representative to obtain a copy
of a valid identity proof from every caller using PCO services and to maintain a record of
callers and numbers called upon by them in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, the expression "valid identity
proof" includes—
(i) valid passport; or
(ii) voter identity card; or
(iii) Aadhar Card; or
(iv) any photo identify card issued by the State Governments or the Central
Government or State or Public Sector Undertakings or Banks.
(2) Every owner of a PCO or the service provider as the case may be shall depute a
person to maintain record of callers using coin operated payphone in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) Every owner or his representatives or the service provider of a PCO shall furnish
the records of the callers, as mentioned in sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 3, to Government
or Intelligence Agencies or the Police Department on demand.
4. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 of this Act shall be punished
with fine which may extend to rupees ten lakh for the first violation and upto rupees twenty
lakh for second and subsequent violation.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law, for the time being in force regulating public call office.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Registration of
callers using
PCOs.
Penalty.
45 of 1860
13 of 1885
21 of 2000
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
law.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
25
30
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a sharp increase in number of fake or hoax calls made from Public
Calls Office (PCO) for spreading false information related to militancy and for threatening,
abusing and sexual harassment, etc. It is a very serious security concern for our nation. This
has adversely affecting the activities of police force and disrupting public services.
Several People call from PCOs, some, however, misuse the service for making false
or hoax calls. When such fake calls are made from PCOs, police swings in action to locate
such PCOs, but it takes some time for them to locate and reach there and anti-social elements
find enough time to escape from the site of PCO, leaving police forces helpless for want of
callers' details.
In order to curb false or hoax calls, it is felt that it should be made compulsory for all
PCO owners to maintain a record of callers with sufficient proof of identification along with
the details of number called.
Hence this Bill.
MANSUKH L. MANDAVIYA
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of callers using public telephone for
making calls in the interest of national security and for
matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5359RS(S3)—13.03.2015.