Bill No. VI-F of 2009
ORIGINAL
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJY A SABHA ON 3RD AUGUST, 2010
LOK SABHA ON 10TH AUGUST, 2010)
ASSENTED TO
ON 18 AUG., 2010
ACT NO. 24 OF 2010

2
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to  as the principal Act),  in
section 2,—
(i) in clause (a),—
(a) in sub-clause (i),  for the words “ major port, the Central Government,
and”, the words “major port, any company in which not less than fifty-one per
cent. of the paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government, or any
corporation, not being a corporation referred to in this clause, established by or
under any law made by Parliament, or the Central public sector undertaking,
subsidiary companies set up by the principal undertaking and autonomous
bodies  owned or  controlled by the Central Government, the Central Government,
and” shall be substituted;
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.
14 of 1947.
Bill No. VI-F of 2009

(b) for sub-clause ( ii), the following sub-clause shall be  substituted,
namely:—
“(ii) in relation to any other industrial dispute, including the State
public sector undertaking, subsidiary companies set up by the principal
undertaking and autonomous bodies  owned or controlled by the State
Government, the State Government:
Provided that in case of a dispute between a contractor and the contract
labour employed through the contractor in any industrial establishment where
such dispute first arose, the appropriate Government shall be the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, which has control
over such industrial establishment.”;
(ii) in clause ( s), in sub-clause ( iv), for the words “one thousand six hundred
rupees”, the words “ten  thousand rupees” shall  be substituted.
3.  Section 2A of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after sub-section (1) as so numbered, the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, any such workman as is
specified in sub-section (1) may,  make an application direct to the Labour Court or
Tribunal for adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five
days from the date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the
appropriate Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application
the Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it  by  the appropriate Government in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and  all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation
to such adjudication as they apply in  relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by
the appropriate Government.
(3)  The application  referred to in sub-section (2) shall be made to the Labour
Court or Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of  discharge, dismissal,
retrenchment  or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub-section (1).”.
4.   In  section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),  after   clause (e), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(f)  he is or has been a  Deputy  Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) or Joint
Commissioner  of the State Labour Department, having  a degree in law and  at least
seven years’ experience in the labour department including  three years of experience
as Conciliation Officer:
Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner  or Joint Labour
Commissioner shall be appointed unless he resigns from the service of the Central Government
or State Government, as the case may be, before being appointed as the presiding officer; or
(g) he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade  III with three years’ experience
in the grade.”.
5.    In section 7A of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (aa), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(b) he is or has been a  Deputy  Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) or Joint
Commissioner  of the State Labour Department, having  a degree in law and at least
seven years’ experience in the labour department including  three years of experience
as Conciliation Officer:
Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour  Commissioner or Joint Labour
Commissioner shall be appointed unless he resigns from the service of the Central
Government  or  State Government, as the case may be, before being appointed as the
presiding officer; or
(c) he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade  III with three years’ experience
in the grade.”.
Amendment of
section 2A.
Amendment of
section 7.
Amendment of
section 7A.
2

6.  After section 9B  of the  principal Act, for Chapter IIB, the following Chapter shall
be substituted, namely:—
“CHAPTER IIB
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MACHINERY
9C. (1) Every industrial establishment employing   twenty or more workmen shall
have one or more Grievance Redressal Committee for the resolution of disputes arising
out of individual grievances.
(2) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of equal number of members
from the employer and the workmen.
(3) The chairperson of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall be selected
from the employer and from among the workmen alternatively on rotation basis every
year.
(4)  The total number of members of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall not
exceed  more than six:
Provided that there shall be, as far as practicable, one woman member if the
Grievance Redressal Committee has two members and in case the number of members
are more than two, the number of women members may be increased proportionately.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the setting up of
Grievance Redressal Committee shall not affect the right of the workman to raise
industrial dispute on the same matter under the provisions of this  Act.
(6) The Grievance Redressal Committee may complete its proceedings within
thirty days on receipt of a written application by or on behalf of the aggrieved party.
(7) The workman who is aggrieved of the decision of the Grievance Redressal
Committee  may prefer  an appeal to the employer against the decision of Grievance
Redressal Committee and the employer shall, within  one month from the date of receipt
of such appeal, dispose off the same and send  a copy of his decision to the  workman
concerned.
(8)  Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the workmen for whom there
is an established Grievance Redressal Mechanism in the establishment concerned.”.
7.  In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-section (8), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(9) Every award made, order issued  or settlement  arrived at by or before
Labour  Court or Tribunal or   National Tribunal shall be executed in accordance with
the procedure laid down  for execution of orders and decree of a Civil Court under order
21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(10) The Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal,  as the case may be,
shall transmit any award, order or settlement   to a Civil Court having jurisdiction and
such Civil Court  shall execute the award, order or settlement as if  it were a decree
passed by it.”.
8.   In  section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) clause (ab) shall be omitted;
(ii) for  clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(c) the salaries and allowances and the terms and   conditions for
appointment  of the presiding officers of the Labour Court, Tribunal  and the
National Tribunal including the  allowances admissible to members of Courts,
Boards and to assessors and witnesses;”.
Setting up of
Grievance
Redressal
Machinery.
5 of 1908.
Amendment of
section 11.
Amendment of
section 38.
Substitution of
new Chapter
for  Chapter
IIB.
3

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—4507LS(S5)—13-09-2010.