Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 105.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In article 105 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso and
explanation shall be inserted namely:—
‘‘Provided that the immunity to the members of Parliament under this clause
shall not be extended to cover the corrupt acts committed by them in discharge of
their duties in either House of Parliament or otherwise.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, corrupt acts include accepting
money or any other valuable gift in consideration of speaking or giving vote or  raising
a matter in either House of Parliament in a particular manner.’’
Bill No. VI of 2006
AS INTRODUCED  IN  THE  RAJY A  SABHA
ON THE 3RD MARCH, 2006.
5
10

2
3. In article 194 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso and
explanation shall be inserted namely:—
‘‘Provided that the immunity to the members of the Legislature of a State under
this clause shall not be extended to cover the corrupt acts committed by them in
discharge of their duties in the House of such a legislature or otherwise.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, corrupt acts include accepting
money or any other valuable gifts in consideration of speaking or giving vote or
raising a matter in the House of such a legislature in a particular manner.’’
Amendment of
article 194.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 105(1) of the Constitution provides that subject to the provisions of the
Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of Parliament,
there shall be freedom of speech in Parliament. Clause (2) of the same article says that no
member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceeding in any court of law in respect of
anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any of its Committees. Similar
provisions are there for members of State Legislatures under article 194 of the Constitution.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in its judgement in 1998 in the JMM pay off case held
that a bribe-taker can claim immunity under article 105 of the Constitution if he has actually
spoken or voted as per the wishes of the bribe-giver. As a result what was morally
impermissible was made legally permissible. It would have never been the intention of the
founding fathers of our Constitution that such a protection shall be given to a person
involved in corrupt practices or acts.
The Constitution Review Commission in its report submitted in 2002 observed that
such an interpretation of immunity of members of Parliament runs counter to all nations of
justice, fairplay and good conduct. It has further been observed that freedom of speech
inside the House cannot be used by members to solicit or accept bribes which is an offence
under the criminal law of the country and JMM verdict makes it necessary to clarify true
intent of the Constitution. Any member of Parliament accepting money or any other valuable
gift in consideration of speaking or raising a matter or giving vote in a certain manner in
the House should be liable for action under the ordinary law of the land.
The cash-for-question scam which came to light during the last winter session of
Parliament in 2005 rocked the roots of the biggest democracy in the world. Therefore, to
protect the dignity, honour and respect of the Parliament and its members, it is essential to
put it beyond doubt that protection against legal action under article 105 of the Constitution
does not extend to cover corrupt acts.
In the UK Parliament, under the advocacy rule, a ban has been imposed by the House
of Commons on members lobbying for reward or consideration. It forbids a member to
engage in any advocacy that seeks to confer benefit exclusively upon a body from which
he has been directly or indirectly receiving a pecuniary benefit. It deals with the same kind
of situation that arose in our country in cash-for-question scam.
This situation emerging after JMM case and the recent cash-for-question scam needs
to be overcome and hence amendments in the Constitution are inevitable.
Hence this Bill.
VIJAY J. DARDA
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Vijay J. Darda, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5997RS(S-3)—03.03.2006.