THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second  Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 15 of the Constitution,—
(i) for sub-clause (a) of clause (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels, places of public
entertainment and worship; or”.
(ii) after clause (5), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special
provisions for prohibition of discriminations against Scheduled Castes,
Short title and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. VI of  2011
Amendment
of article 15.
5
10

2
Scheduled Tribes and  Backward  Classes of citizens in respect of right to gaining
entry to places of public worships, and to perform duties as priests:
Provided that due knowledge, training and practice shall be acquired by
the person willing to perform the duties as priests in the sanctum sanctorum of
places of worship. 5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 15 of the Constitution provides right to equality in respect of religion, race,
caste, sex or place of birth and article 25 provides right to freedom of religion. Despite our
Constitution mandates on the principle of equality of treatment in different spheres it is seen
that the under-privileged and deprived classes of the society are being discriminated in
respect of gaining access to public places of worship in the country and are being still
considered as socially and religiously outcaste and untouchable.
It is only fair and just that when a large number of citizens falls under the socially,
economically and educationally backwardness and suffer from multiple discrimination, the
Constitution should offer protection against any such discrimination. The amendment in
article 15 of the Constitution proposed to remove discrimination against all citizens especially
the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes persons in respect of gaining access to places of
public worships, and also to perform duties as priests after having acquired the due
knowledge, training to perform such duties. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence  this Bill.
TARUN  VIJAY
S3\E\BILL2011\RS\6682RS

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE  CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
******
15.  (1).                *                      *              *         *   *
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment;
or
******
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.

GMGIPMRND—980RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Tarun Vijay, M.P.)