1
THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (RESERV ATION
IN ADMISSION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
Admission) Amendment Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 3 of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
Act, 2006, after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iv) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty,
thirty three per cent. seats shall be reserved for women including the number of seats
secured by women under sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii).”.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. VI of  2023
Amendment of
Section 3.5 of 2007.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER 2023
5
10

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Education is the most important tool for empowering women through knowledge,
skills and self-confidence. It helps in reducing gender discrimination and also improves
their status in the family and society. Numerous studies have consistently shown that
educating girls leads to significant and wide-reaching benefits not only to women them-
selves and their families but also to their societies and economies.
2. Higher education is the gateway to economic security and opportunity particu-
larly for women in India. The UNESCO Report of 2021 on "Women in higher education: has
the female advantage put an end to gender inequalities?" highlights the gender disparities
with the following takeaways from the report:
• Regardless of encouraging statistics on women access to higher education, women
still encounter obstacles when seeking to occupy key academic positions in
universities, to be involved with relevant research, and to take leadership roles.
• Women are overrepresented among teaching staff at lower education levels,
while their presence is markedly lower in tertiary education (vertical segregation).
Women are also still underrepresented as senior faculty and in higher education
decision-making bodies in many countries.
3. The situation is quite similar for India as well. There are slightly more than a
quarter of Professors in Indian academia who are women. In 2018-2019, women in India held
27.3 per cent. of faculty positions for Professor and equivalent, 36.8 per cent. of faculty
positions for Reader and Associate Professor and 42.6 per cent. of faculty positions for
Lecturer or Assistant Professor (MHRD, 2019).
4. According to The Equality Equation: Advancing the Participation of Women
and Girls in STEM, a World Bank report that provides a rich overview of global patterns of
gender gaps in STEM education, merely 18 per cent. of girls enrolled at the tertiary level are
pursuing studies in the field of STEM, as compared to 35 per cent. of boys. Women, in fact,
account for only 33 per cent. of researchers, 22 per cent. of professionals working in
artificial intelligence and 28 per cent. of engineering students across the world. In India,
women make up just 14 per cent. of scientists, engineers, and technologists in research
development institutions and universities.
5. Higher education represents itself as a milestone for women empowerment by
encouraging them to come out of their traditional role as woman despite several challenges.
Providing reservation to women in Central Educational Institutions will be an affirmative
step towards fulfilling the constitutional obligation to ensure equality as guaranteed by
article 14 of the Constitution. Increasing access to higher education will make women free
from rigid practices of gender inequalities through their potentialities.
6. It is with this objective that the Bill is presented to address the needs of women in
higher education and bring down systemic barriers and widen opportunities for their
leadership and full participation in society.
Hence, this Bill.
SUJEET KUMAR.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE CENTRAL  EDUCA TIONAL INSTITUTIONS  (RESERVA TION IN ADMISSION )
ACT, 2006
(ACT NO. 5 OF 2007)
* * * * *
3. The reservation of seats in admission and its extent in a Central Educational
Institution shall be provided in the following manner, namely:—
(i) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty,
fifteen per cent. seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes;
(ii) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty,
seven and one-half per cent. seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes; and
(iii) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty,
twenty-seven per cent. seats shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes:
Provided that the State seats, if any, in a Central Educational Institution
situated in the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
shall be governed by such reservation policy for the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, as may be specified, by
notification in the Official Gazette, by the Government of the State where such
institution is situated:
Provided further that if there are no State seats in a Central Educational
Institution and the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes exceed the
percentage specified under clause ( i) or the seats reserved for the Scheduled
Tribes exceed the percentage specified under clause ( ii) or the seats reserved
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes taken together exceed the
sum of percentages specified under clauses ( i) and (ii), but such seats are—
(a) less than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the
date immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, the
total percentage of the seats required to be reserved for the Other
Backward Classes under clause (iii) shall be restricted to the extent such
sum of percentages specified under clauses (i) and (ii) falls short of fifty
per cent. of the annual permitted strength;
(b) more than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the
date of immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, in
that case no seats shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes
under clause ( iii) but the extent of the reservation of seats for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall not be reduced in respect
of Central Educational Institutions in the specified north-eastern region.
* * * * *
Reservation of
seats in
Central
Educational
Institutions.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Sujeet Kumar, M.P . )
RS-P&PS-PMB(H)—093— 14.12.2023