AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. VI of 2025 
THE SUSTAINABLE FASHION (PROMOTION AND 
REGULATION) BILL, 2025 
________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
C
HAPTER II 
SUSTAINABLE FASHION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
3. Constitution of the Sustainable Fashion Commission of India.
4. Composition of the Commission.
5. Resignation and Removal of Chairperson and Members.
6. Meetings of the Commission.
7. Punishment for default in holding meetings.
8. Committees of the Commission.
9. Functions of the Commission.
10. Grants by Central Government.
11. Annual Report.
CH
APTER III 
NATIONAL SUSTAINABLE FASHION STRATEGY 
12. National Sustainable Fashion Strategy.
13. Green Certification scheme.
CH
APTER IV 
REGULATORY MEASURES 
14. Ecological impact standards.
15. Fair labour practices.
16. Waste management obligations.
CH
APTER V 
CIRCULAR ECONOMY INITIATIVES 
17. Promotion of circular economy practices.
18. Collaboration for research and development.

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
C
HAPTER VI 
AWARENESS INITIATIVES 
19. Public awareness and education.
CH
APTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
20. Penalty.
21. Whistleblower protection.
22. Offences by companies.
CH
APTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
23. Power to adjudicate disputes.
24. Bar of Jurisdiction.
25. Act not in derogation of any other law.
26. Power to remove difficulties.
27. Power to make rules.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. VI of 2025 
THE SUSTAINABLE FASHION (PROMOTION AND 
REGULATION) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide a framework for promoting sustainable fashion practices in the 
country, upholding environmental and social justice, and to establish 
 a framework for transitioning the fashion industry towards a  
circular economy, and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:⸺ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Sustainable Fashion (Promotion and
Regulation) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "circular economy" means an economic system aimed at
minimizing waste and making the most of resources through 
recycling, upcycling, and sustainable production practices; 
(b) "Commission" means the Sustainable Fashion Commission of
India established under section 3 of this Act; 
(c) “fashion” includes a popular trend or a lifestyle, specially in
styles of dress and ornament or manners of behaviour or the business 
of creating, promoting or studying styles in vogue or the designing, 
production and marketing of new styles of goods such as, clothing, 
accessories, craft and cosmetics; and the words “fashion industry” 
with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions, shall be 
construed accordingly; 
(d) "Green Certification" means an official recognition awarded to
fashion businesses that meet prescribed environmental and social 
standards; 
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this
Act; and 
(f) "sustainable fashion" means such practices in the fashion
industry that reduce environmental h arm and uphold social justice, as 
may be prescribed. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
CHAPTER II 
SUSTAINABLE FASHION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
Constitution of 
the Sustainable 
Fashion 
Commission of 
India. 
3. (1)  The Central Government shall, within one year from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute, a body to be known as the Sustainable Fashion Commission
of India, which shall be responsible for carrying out t he functions
assigned under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall have its head office in Delhi and may, with
the prior approval of the Central Government, establish regional offices
at other locations across India to enhance its reach and effectiveness.
(3) The Commission shall be a body corporate, with perpetual
succession and a common seal, empowered to acquire, hold, and dispose
of property (both movable and immovable), enter into contracts, and
initiate or respond to legal proceedings in its corporate name.
25 
30 
35 
Composition of the 
Commission. 
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of the following:
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be a person having not less than
ten years of experience in sustainable fashion, to be appointed by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(ii) not exceeding three Members, who shall be persons having
at least  seven years of practical experience in fields such as 
sustainable fashion, textile innovation, or environmental 
management, to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 
(iii) e ight ex-officio Members, to be nominated by the Central
Government, one each from the following Union Ministries: 
(a) Ministry of Textiles;
(b) Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change;
(c) Ministry of Women and Child Development;
40 
45 

3 
5 
10 
(d) Ministry of Commerce and Industry;
(e) Ministry of New and Renewable Energy;
(f) Ministry of Corporate Affairs;
(g) Ministry of Tribal Affairs; and
(h) Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises; and
(iv) five non-official members to be appointed by  the Central
Government from non -governmental organisations, academic 
institutions, or industry experts having at least five years of 
specialized knowledge or experience in sustainable fashion.  
(2) The salaries, allowances and terms and conditions of service of th e
Chairperson and Members of the Commission shall be as prescribed by
the Central Government.
(3) The Union Ministry of Textiles shall provide necessary secretaria l
assistance to the Commission.
15 
20 
25 
 
30 
5. (1) The Chairperson and other Members of the Commission may at any
time resign from their office by writing under their hand addressed,— 
(a ) in the case of the Chairperson, to the Secretary, Union
Ministry of Textiles; and 
(b ) in any other case, to the Chairperson of the Commission.
(2 ) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section (1), the Central
Government may remove from the Commission any member who, in its
opinion, has—
(a) been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude;
or 
(c) become physically or mentally  incapable of acting as  a
member; or 
(d) so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
detrimental to the public interest; or 
(e) acquired such financial or other interest as is likely t o
prejudicially affect his functions as a Member. 
Resignation 
and removal of 
Chairperson 
and Members. 
35 
40 
 
45 
6. (1) The Commission shall meet at least once every six months at such time
and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings, including the quorum at its meetings, 
as may be prescribed: 
Provided if, in the opinion of the Central Go vernment or the 
Chairperson, any business of an urgent nature is to be transacted, a 
meeting of the Commission at such time as deemed fit for the aforesaid 
purpose, may be convened. 
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the Commission.
(3) If for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the
Commission, any senior Member of the Commission chosen by the
Members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.
(4) A ll questions which come before any meeting of the Commis sion shall
be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting and in 
the event of equality of votes, the Chairperson or, in his absence, the person 
presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote. 
Meetings of the 
Commission. 

4 
Punishment for 
default in holding 
meetings. 
7. If any default is made in holding a meeting of the Commission in
accordance with sub -section (1) of section 6, every officer of the
Commission who is in default shall be punishable with a fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing default, with a
further fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for everyday during
which such default continues.
5 
Committees of the 
Commission. 
8. (1) The Commission shall constitute a Committee to be known as the
Scientific Advisory Committee, in such manner as may be prescribed,
to inform and advise the Central Government and the Commission on
sustainable fashion trends and on any other matter as deemed fit by the
Central Government and the Commission in the form of a report every
three months.
(2) The Commission shall constitute a Committee to be known as the
Sustainable Fashion Advisory Committee, in such manner as may be
prescribed, to inform and advise the Central Government and the
Commission on sustainable fashion planning in achieving national
sustainable fashion targets or any other matter referred to by t he
Central Government and the Commission.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -sections (1) and (2), the
Commission may constitute such number of committees as it deems fit
for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its function s
under this Act, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Every Committee constituted under this section shall co -opt such
number of persons, who are not the members of the Commission, as it
may think fit and the persons so co -opted shall have the right t o attend
the meetings of the Committee and take part in its proceedings but shall
not have the right to vote.
(5) T he persons co -opted as Members of the Committee under sub -
section (4) shall be entitled to receive such allowances or fees for
attending the meetings of the Committee as may be fixed by the Central
Government.
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Functions of the 
Commission. 
9. The Commission shall—
(a) advise the Central Government upon review of the national
sustainable fashion target and, if necessary, recommend changes to 
the target;  
(b) advise the Central Government on matters relating to
countering the adverse impacts of unsustainable fashion on vulnerable 
communities and eco-sensitive zones; 
(c) conduct periodic reviews of the sustainable fashion plan to
meet sustainable fashion targets at the national and international 
levels;  
(d) prepare annual national sustainable fashion risk assessments;
(e) ensure coordination with other Ministries of the Central
Government and for purposes connected therewith, to appoint nodal 
officers in other Ministries to ensure proper coordination between the 
Commission and the Central Government with the aim of 
implementing this Act; 
(f) conduct awareness and training programmes for officers
and personnel; and 
(g) perform such other functions as may be prescribed, by the
Central Government, for carrying out the objectives of this Act. 
 
35 
40 
45 
 
50 

5 
10. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of
money as the Central Government may think fit.
Grants by 
Central 
Government. 
 
5 
10 
11. (1) The Commission shall prepare every year, in such form and within suc h
time as may be prescribed, an annual report, giving a full account of its
activities during the previous year and copies of the report shall be
forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) A copy of the report received under sub -section (1) shall be laid by the
Central Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each
House of Parliament.
Annual Report. 
CHAPTER III 
NATIONAL SUSTAINABLE FASHION STRATEGY 
 
15 
20 
12. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
formulate a National Sustainable Fashion Strategy within six months of the 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) The strategy shall include:
(a) guidelines for adopting sustainable materials and technologies;
(b) manner of conduct of awareness campaigns on sustainable
consumption habits; and 
(c) recommendations for suitable training programs for workers
and designers on sustainable practices. 
National 
Sustainable 
Fashion 
Strategy. 
 
25 
 
30 
13. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Green Certification scheme for
the fashion industry.
(2) The certification criteria shall include:
(a) use of eco-friendly materials;
(b) waste reduction through recycling and upcycling; and
(c) compliance with fair labour standards.
(3) The Central Government may provide that the certified businesses shall
receive official recognition and access to adviso ry services for sustainable
practices, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Green 
Certification 
scheme. 
CHAPTER IV 
REGULATORY MEASURES 
35 
14. The Central Government shall prescribe standards to minimize water
pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, and waste generation in the fashion 
industry. 
Ecological 
impact 
standards. 
40 
15. (1)  Every fashion industry employer shall ensure compliance with labour
laws, including fair wages, safe working conditions, and the prohibition of
child labour.
(2) The Central Government shall conduct regular inspections to ensure
compliance of fair labour practices specified in section (1).
Fair labour 
practices. 
16. (1) Every fashion business shall adopt measures to manage waste
responsibly, including recycling and safe disposal of textile waste.
(2) The Central Government shall facilitate partnerships with private entities
for the establishment of textile recycling zones in major industrial areas.
Waste 
management 
obligations. 

6 
CHAPTER V 
CIRCULAR ECONOMY INITIATIVES
Promotion of 
circular economy 
practices. 
17. The Central Government shall encourage businesses to adopt circular
economy practices, including:
(a) design of durable and repairable clothing;
(b) use of biodegradable and recycled materials; and
(c) establishment of take-back and recycling programs.
 
5 
Collaboration for 
research and 
development. 
18. (1) The Central Government shall promote collaboration between industry
stakeholders and academic institutions to develop sustainable materials and
production methods.
(2) The Central Government shall encourage the fashion industr y
stakeholders   to allocate resources for innovation in a sustainable fashion.
 
10 
CHAPTER VI 
AWARENESS INITIATIVES 
Public awareness 
and education. 
19. (1) The Central Government shall conduct nationwide campaigns to
educate consumers about sustainable fashion. 
(2) The Central Government shall encourage the educational institutions to
include sustainable fashion and circular economy principles in their
curriculum.
15 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
20 
Penalty. 20. (1) Any person who fails to comply with ecological impact standards, fair
labour practices, or waste management obligations in contravention of the
provisions of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to one year or a fine, amounting to one lakh rupees which may
extend to five lakhs rupees, or both.
(2) If any person, after having been previously convicted of an offence
punishable under this Act subsequently commits and is convicted of the
same offence, he shall be liable to—
(i) twice the punishment, which might have been imposed on a
first conviction, subject to the punishment being maximum provided 
for the same offence; 
(ii) a further fine on daily basis which may extend up to one lakh
rupees, where the offence is a continuing one; and 
(iii) his licence shall be cancelled.
 
25 
30 
35 
Whistleblower 
protection. 
21. (1)  Whosoever reports violations under this Act shall be protected agains t
retaliation.
(2 ) The Central Government shall establish a confidential mechanism for
whistleblower complaints, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Offences by 
companies. 
22. (1) Where an offence under this Act is committed by a company, ever y
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in -charge of th e
c
ompany or was responsible for the conduct of business of the company,
as well as the company, shall be deemed to be g uilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
40 

7 
5 
10 
15 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any 
such person liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took 
place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent such contravention. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where any
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is prove d
t
hat such an offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) "company" means any  body corporate and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS
20 
23. Any dispute arising from any order or decision made by the Centra l
Government under the provisions of the Act shall lie before the National 
Green Tribunal within six months from the date on which such a dispute 
arose. 
Power to 
adjudicate 
disputes. 
25 
24. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter which the National Green Tribunal is empowered by 
or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any 
Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act. 
Bar of 
jurisdiction. 
25. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
 
30 
35 
26. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as ma y
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made u nder this section after the
expiry of the period of two years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
40 
 
45 
27. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive session
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or bot h
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule sh all thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
rules. 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India has the potential to become a global hub for sustainable fashion. 
However, the fashion industry significantly impacts environmental degradation and 
social inequality. Unsustainable fashion practices pose a dual threat, compromising 
both environmental preservation and social justice. The Bill aims to promote 
sustainable fashion practices, protect vulnerable groups, and uphold circular 
economy principles, establishing a comprehensive framework for sustainable 
fashion in India.  Further, it seeks to ensure that the industry's growth aligns with 
environmental sustainability and social responsibility.  
The fashion industry is notorious for its substantial environmental impact, 
including water pollution, greenhouse  gas emissions, and the generation of 
enormous waste. These unsustainable practices exacerbate social inequalities, 
disproportionately affecting underprivileged populations who suffer from 
environmental degradation and poor working conditions. The Bill add resses these 
critical issues by promoting sustainable production and consumption habits, 
endorsing circular economy principles, and enforcing stringent regulations to 
reduce the industry's ecological footprint.  
The concept of a circular economy in the fas hion industry focuses on 
eliminating waste through thoughtful design, promoting the long -term use of 
products and materials, and restoring natural systems. By encouraging practices 
such as recycling, upcycling, and the use of sustainable materials, the Bil l aims to 
reduce the industry's reliance on finite resources and lessen its environmental 
impact. This shift towards a circular economy is expected not only to conserve the 
environment but also to create new business opportunities, drive innovation, and 
foster economic growth.  
In summary, this Bill seeks to transform India's fashion industry by integrating 
sustainable practices and circular economy principles into its operational 
framework. In doing so, it will protect the environment, promote social equit y, and 
stimulate economic development, positioning India as a leader in sustainable 
fashion on the global stage. 
Hence, this bill. 
SUJEET KUMAR 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Sustainable Fashion 
Commission of India at the national level and clause 4 provides for its composition 
thereof. Clause 8 provides for constitution of Scientific Advisory Committee and 
Sustainable Fashion Advisory Committee by the Commission. Clause 9 inter alia  
provides that the Commission shall conduct awareness and training programmes 
for officers and personnel. Clause 19 provides that the Government shall conduct 
nationwide campaigns to educate consumers about sustainable fashion. 
The Bill, if enacted, would involve both non- recurring and recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible to 
estimate the exact recurring and non-recurring expenditure at this stage. 

10 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government  to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide a framework for promoting sustainable fashion practices in the 
country, upholding environmental and social justice, and to establish 
 a framework for transitioning the fashion industry towards a  
circular economy, and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
_____________ 
(Shri Sujeet Kumar, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—109—10.02.2025.