1
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4857RS.PM5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No.  VI of  2002
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5
THE FREEDOM OF CHILDHOOD BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to provide complete freedom to a child for enjoying his childhood through banning admission
of a child below five years of age for regular schooling which causes depression and
other ailments, for reducing workload of children who are above five years of age
but below the age of fifteen years, for attending school for education by prohibiting
assignment of home task to such children to enable them to play and enjoy and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Freedom of Childhood Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) “child” means a boy or girl who is below the age of fifteen years;
Definitions.

2
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4857RS.PM5
(c) "educational institution" includes any school whether nursery, KG, primary,
middle, secondary or senior secondary level, imparting education to child by whatever
name such institution is called;
(d) "parent" in relation to any child includes a guardian and every person who
has the actual custody of the child;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "toddler" means a boy or girl who is below the age of six-years.
3. No educational institution shall admit a toddler for regular schooling such as
reading, writing or cramming.
4. No child who is attending an educational institution for studies shall be given any
home task by such institution so as to enable the child to play and enjoy his childhood after
school hours.
5. It shall be the duty of every parent of a child to allow it to play and enjoy for a
reasonable period  of time during the day.
6. No person shall employ a child as domestic servant or in any establishment in any
manner whatsoever which may deny him the enjoyment of the childhood.
7. The appropriate Government shall conduct a periodic medical examination of
every child studying in any educational institution, falling under the jurisdiction of that
Government from time to time and take such remedial measures as are recommended by
the Medical authorities.
8. The appropriate Government shall conduct a survery from time to time in respect
the freedom available to children and prepare a report thereon and shall cause such report
to be laid before the respective Legislatures.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
all the admissions in a school at the entry stage of formal education shall be on the basis
of draw of lots to be held in the presence of parents.
10. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sections 3 or 4 shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with a fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees or with both;
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 6 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or with a fine which may extend
to fifteen thousand rupees or with both.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
2
5
Prohibition of
regular school-
ing for a toddler.
Home task not
to be given to a
child.
Parents to allow
the child to play
for reasonable
period of time.
Prohibition of
employment of
children.
Periodic
medical
examination of
the child.
Survey to be
conducted in
respect of
children.
Admission to
be through
draw of lots.
Penalties.
Power to make
rules.
10
15
20
25
30

3
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4857RS.PM5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Recently it was widely reported in the national print media that the medical community
is deeply concerned about the trauma of the pre-school children particularly in the age
group of 3 to 6 years. It was stated that there was an increase in the incidence of recurring
respiratory infections, fever, pains and temper tantrums among the pre-schoolers which
could be related directly or indirectly to early schooling. It is a well known fact that
now-a-days children are being sent to school at the tender age of two years in schools
known as Nursery, KG etc. These schools publish big advertisements in prominent
newspapers for registration of children and charge heavy registration fee. In some cases
registrations can be made few days after the birth of the child. Thereafter, the present
system of admission causes a lot of tension and trauma in children if they face rejection at
the entry stage and instils a sense of loss in their minds.
It is a sorry state of affairs that toddlers who should play and enjoy their childhood
are forced to attend regular schools at a very tender age. Instead of enjoying their childhood
by playing and running after the butterflies, making mischiefs, they are forced to read,
write and cram and do the home task assigned to them by their teachers. Children have
foregotten to play and enjoy. This sorry state of affairs is causing havoc to children.
According to some paediatricians the introduction of early formal education can lead to
adverse consequences not only in terms of intelligence but also in motivational and socio-
economic development. They have observed that there is an increasing incidence of stress-
related medical problems in children due to hazards of early formal schooling. Moreover
at tender age the childrens' muscles are still in the process of development at their muscles
co-ordination particularly of wrist and fingers need strength. As a result children do not
even have the capacity to hold and use a pencil in a well-co-ordinated way.
In these circumstances it is necessary that admission to schools for children below
six years of age should be stopped and children below the age of fifteen years should not be
given home task. They should get reasonable time to play and enjoy childhood. All
admissions at the entry point of school should be on the basis of draw of lots drawn before
the parents. No child should be employed by any one and medical examination should be
conducted for children from time to time. They must get time and opportunity to enjoy the
childhood without worries.
Hence this Bill.
S.S. AHLUWALIA

4
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4857RS.PM5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
4

5
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4857RS.PM5
RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide complete freedom to a child for enjoying his childhood through banning admission
of a child below five years of age for regular schooling which causes depression and
other ailments, for reducing workload of children who are above five years of age but
below the age of fifteen years, for attending school for education by prohibiting
assignment of home task to such children to enable them to play and enjoy and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—4857RS—14.02.2002.