THE COW PROTECTION BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to create an Authority to ensure stabilization of population of cows  (Bos indicus)
and to suggest such measures to comply with Articles 37 and 48 of the Constitution,
to ban the slaughter of cows and to provide for deterrent punishment including
death penalty for slaughter of cow and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cow Protection Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. VI of 2017
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON  THE 24TH MARCH, 2017
  5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Authority" means the National Cow Protection Authority established under
section 3.
(b) "Cow Protection" means total ban in any form of injury or slaughter or
enforced starvation of the breed of Indian cow ( Bos Indicus.)
(c) "Gowshalas" means health compliant hygenic comfortable shelters for Indian
cow.
(d ) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such dates as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority, to be known
as the National Cow Protection Authority consisting of the following members, namely,—
(a) Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandary in the Ministry of
Agriculture-Chairperson, ex-officio; and
(b) five persons of eminence in the fields of agricultural economics, animal
welfare and ancient Indian history or culture—Members
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the function of the Authority.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms of conditions of service of
members, officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Authority shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such rules of
procedure with regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
5. (1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as many be necessary to ensure
stabilization of the cow population in the country and formulate a comprehensive policy for
the purpose within one year after its constitution.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of
the Authority shall also include to—
(a) undertake a baseline study to collect data about cow population and to
formulate a Qualitative Cow Dignity Index (CDI) as may be prescribed which shall be
completed within one year of setting up of the Authority;
(b) formulate schemes to provide for healthy Bos Indicus cows and calves.
(c) provide for funds to help incentivise adoption of cow and setting up Gowshalas.
(d) recommend to the Central Government, deterrent penalties including death
penalty, to those who commit offences against cows and not follow the policies
framed by the Authority;
(e) frame syllabus for awareness about importance of cow protection and
development all over the country; and
(f) conduct awareness campaigns about medical imperatives for improving
health of Bos Indicus cows and progeny.
6. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed, an annual
report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes it has undertaken and
recommended to the Government during the previous year and it shall contain statements
of annual accounts of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the Report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall lay the Report before each House of Parliament as soon as it is received
Definitions.
Constitution of
National Cow
Protection
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
Functions  of
the Authority.
Annual Report
and its laying
before
Parliament.
  5
  10
  15
  20
  25
30
35
40
45

3
and shall also lay the action taken thereon within a period of three months from the date of
receipt of the report by the Central Government.
7. The Central Government shall from time to time provide after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. The Central Government shall on the recommendation of the Authority prosecute
any person within the framework of the Criminal Procedure Code of 1973 on commuting any
offence prescribed by law on the recommendation of the Authority under this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give
such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it be necessary
or expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
10. The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Government to
provide Funds.
Prosecution for
offences.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to make
rules.
2 of 1974.
  5
  10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
By creating an Authority under the Central Government to comply with article 37 of
the Constitution and in keeping with article 48 ofthe Constitution, a law be enacted to ban
the slaughter of all cows (Bos Indicus) as wished by Mahatma Gandhi as an imperative for
free Independent India and to recommend punishment including death penalty as a necessary
deterrent for the prevention of the criminal offence of cow slaughter.
Hence this Bill.
DR. SUBRAMANIAN SWAMY

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Cow Protection Authority
and appointment of officers and staff for this authority. Clause 7 requires the Central
Government to provide, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this legislation.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure, recurring and non-recurring, from the
Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible to assess the actual financial
expenditure which is likely to be incurred at this stage.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—5505RS(S3)—24.03.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to create an Authority to ensure stabilization of population of cows  ( Bos indicus)
and to suggest such measures to comply with Articles 37 and 48 of the Constitution,
to ban the slaughter of cows and to provide for deterrent punishment including
death penalty for slaughter of cow and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Subramanian Swamy, M.P.)