1
THE HOLY CITY OF KASHI (PRESERV ATION OF CULTURAL
HERITAGE) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
for the declaration of the city of Kashi as the oldest living city of utmost national
importance and to provide for the conservation, preservation and maintenance
of culutral and natural heritage, heritage of Kashi and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the ancient city of Kashi is one of the oldest living cities in the world and the
cradle of Indian civilisation.
AND WHEREAS the ancient city of Kashi is abounded by thousands of ancient temples
and other places of worship which play an important role in the social and cultural fabric of
the city.
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to take appropriate legal, scientific, technical,
Bill No. VI of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019

2
administrative and financial measures necessary for the identification, protection,
conservation, preservation and rehabilitation of cultural and natural heritage of the ancient
city of Kashi.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Holy City of Kashi (Preservation of Cultural Heritage)
Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointed date" means such date, as may be notified by the State
Government;
(b) "construction" means any erection of a structure or a building, including
any addition or extension thereto either vertically or horizontally including any
reconstruction, repair and renovation of an existing structure or building, or,
construction of roadways or waterways, or, construction, maintenance and cleansing
of drains and drainage works and of public latrines, urinals and similar conveniences,
or, the construction and maintenance of works meant for providing supply of water for
public, or the construction or maintenance, extension, management for supply and
distribution of electricity to the public or provision for other similar facilities for public;
(c) "heritage site" means a cultural heritage site, a natural heritage site, a mixed
cultural and natural heritage site or a cultural landscape of outstanding value;
(d) "Kashi" means the area of Varanasi district in Uttar Pradesh;
(e) "large scale project" means an activity, which concerns construction or
reconstruction estimated to cost not less than rupees twenty crores;
(f) "local authority" means a municpal corporation, municipal committee, land
development authorities constituted under the respective State Acts, or special area
development authority, village panchayat, zila parishad, hill development council,
cantonment board or such other bodies, vested with the powers to control and regulate
constructions and developmental activities in their respective areas;
(g) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
word "notify" shall be construed accordingly; and
(h) "State Government" means the Government of the State of Uttar Pradesh.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) "cultural heritage site" shall include,—
(a) monuments, that is to say, architectural works, works of monumental
sculpture and painting, elements or structures of an archaeological nature,
inscriptions, cave dwellings and combinations of features which are of
outstanding value from the point of view of history, art or science;
(b) buildings, that is to say, separate or connected buildings which, because
of their architecture, homogeneity or place in the landscape, are of outstanding
value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological point of
view;
(c) sites, that is to say, works of man including industrial or railway heritage
or the combined works of nature and man and areas including archaeological
sites which are of outstanding value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological
or anthropological point of view; and
(d) places of religious worship, that is to say, structures more than hundred
years old or more, where devotees offer prayers;
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) "natural heritage site" shall include,—
(a) natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas which are of
outstanding value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural
beauty;
(b) geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated
areas which constitute the habitat of threatened species of animals and plants
and are of outstanding value from the point of view of science or conservation;
(c) natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or
groups of such formations, which are of outstanding value from the aesthetic or
scientific point of view;
(iii) "mixed cultural and natural heritage site" shall include properties which
satisfy a part of the attributes of both cultural heritage site and natural heritage site;
(iv) "cultural landscape" includes cultural properties representing the combined
works of man and the nature and illustrative of the evolution of human society and
settlement over a time, under the influence of the physical constraints and opportunities
presented by their natural environment and of successive social, economic and cultural
forces, both external and internal;
(v) "outstanding value", in relation to a heritage site, means its cultural or natural
significance which is so exceptional as to transcend the boundaries of the place in
which it is located and is of great importance for the present and future generations of
the country;
3. The Central Government, shall by notification,declare Kashi as the 'oldest living
city of utmost national importance', Keeping in view the unique stature and importance of
Kashi.
4. The Central Government shall Institute a committee inter alia comprising of
archaeological experts and scholars for the purpose of identification, conservation and
preservation of heritage sites, natural heritage sites, mixed cultural and natural heritage sites
and cultural landscapes of outstanding value in Kashi, in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall maintain a heritage sites roster for Kashi and make
it available on its website for public viewing.
(2) The Central Government may, keeping in view the national importance of any of the
heritage sties, notify such heritage sites and enter the description of such sites in the
heritage sites roaster in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) All large scale projects and construction, started after the notification of this Act
or ongoing at the time of its enactment, shall be stopped with immediate effect pending an
evaluation published at an appointed date of their impact on heritage sites, natural heritage
sites, mixed cultural and natural heritage sites and cultural landscapes by the Committee
constituted under section 4.
(2) The State Government shall take all measures, including but not limited to shutting
down of polluting industries, revocation of government licenses and stoppage of large scale
projects detrimental to conservation, preservation and upkeep of heritage sites, natural
heritage sites, mixed cultural and natural heritage sites and cultural landscapes.
7. The local authority shall make all efforts to identify, rebuild and rehabilitate heritage
sites, natural heritage sites, mixed cultural and natural heritage sites and cultural landscapes
that have been harmed due to large scale projects and construction works undertaken
before enactment of this Act.
Declaration of
Kashi as the
oldest living
city of
national
importance.
Constitution
of Committee
for
preservation
of heritage
sites.
Maintenance
of a roster of
heritage sites.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Measures to
prevent
damage to
heritage sites.
Rebuilding and
rehabilitation
of heritage
sites.
45

4
8. The Central Govt. shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The Central Govt. may by notification in the official gazette, make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
Central Govt.
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Situated on the banks of the holy Ganges, the ancient city of Kashi is also the city of
Buddha, Jain Tirthankars, Shaiva and Vaishnava saints like Kabir and Tulsi. Kashi is one of
the oldest seats of knowledge and the city's various arts, crafts and mesmerising architecture
is recognised all over the world. Kashi is eternally in motion yet still holds the charm of an
ancient river valley civilisation, stuck in time but liberated simultaneously. Such is the story
of this marvellous living city.
At the same time, Kashi is the third most polluted city in India and its toxic air is
choking the city dwellers and tourists. Much of this has been done in the name of
development. The horrific collapse of a flyover in the city last year is a testament to the
haphazard way of development that has been undertaken.
Another one of such planned-ill development initiatives is the proposal for the
construction of a corridor, supposedly to provide easy access to pilgrims, the work on which
has already been started by the State Government. There is a need for protection of temples,
many of them hundreds of years old, and residences among other constructions while
implementing any developmental work.
The proposed Bill puts forward the demand of lakhs of people of Kashi as well as
crores of other who stand for conservation of our cultural heritage and see Kashi as the
holiest of the earth's cities. Hence, this Bill proposes the proclamation of Kashi as the 'oldest
living city of utmost national importance', the conservation and preservation of a wide array
of tangible and intangible heritage and the stopping of haphazard development projects.
The Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute a committee, without any
delay, to identify, enumerate and preserve Kashi's shared cultural heritage.
SANJAY SINGH
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a committee of archaeological experts
and scholars, while Clause 7 provided for re-building and rehabilitation of heritage site in the
ancient city of Kashi. Clause 8 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible at
this stage to estimate the actual financial expenditure that is likely to be incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
7

8
RAJY A SABHA
—————
A
BILL
for the declaration of the city of Kashi as the oldest living city of utmost national
importance and to provide for the conservation, preservation and maintenance
of culutral and natural heritage, heritage of Kashi and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Sanjay Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—855RS(S3)—25-06-2019.