1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted namely,—
"21B (1) Every citizen shall have the right to employment in such manner as Parliament
may, by law determine".
(2) In case of failure to provide employment to a citizen, the State shall provide
unemployment allowance at such rate and in such names as may be prescribed till employment
is provided to the citizen.
3. Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the State from making any provision for fixing
any criteria for providing employment to the citizens.
Explanation.—  For the purpose of this article, "employment" means providing
employment to each and every citizens who has attained the age of 18 years and provide
unemployment allowance till the employment is provided.
Bill No.  VII of  2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010
Short title.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Employment
to citizens.
Grants of
unemployment
allowances.
Right to
Employment.

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after sixty-three years of independence, twenty-seven per cent of India's population
is living below the poverty line and a large section of people die due to hunger every year.
Although, India has been able to reduce the poverty from seventy  five to twenty-seven per
cent.  A large section of our society is still unemployed and they have no source of  income.
As a result youths have resorted to activities, such as terrorism, robbery, hijacking, etc.
severely affecting our social order. Therefore, time has come now to amend the Constitution
for providing citizens the right to work, so that the young generation should not indulge in
activities, which are detrimental to the country and provide unemployment allowance to all
the young people till he or she is provided employment.
Hence this Bill.
T.  SUBBARAMI REDDY

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for unemployment allowance to employed youths. This
Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crore is likely to be
involved initially.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2332RS(S5)—03-05-2010.