THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA
BILL,  2016
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra for containing
growing desertification in Marathwada, Madhya Maharashtra and Vidarbha
regions caused by consistent deficit rainfall and drought conditions by way of
traditional water conservation through lakes, ponds wells, rainwater harvesting
and afforestation involving villagers and their Panchayats and for the
implementation of development works such as housing, drinking water, roads,
sanitation, creation of grain and fodder Banks, skill development and welfare schemes
for the women, children, senior citizens and poor people living in these regions of
the State and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Maharashtra
Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No. VII of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 26TH FEBRUARY, 2016
5

2
2. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
there shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India, which shall
not be less than One Lakh Crore rupees, every year, as the Parliament may by due
appropriation made by the law in this regard provide, as special financial assistance to the
State of Maharashtra.
(2) The special financial assistance under sub-section (1) shall be provided to meet
the costs of works to contain the desertification in Marathwada, Madhya Maharashtra and
Vidarbha regions of the State and of such development works and welfare schemes as may
be undertaken by the State Government of Maharashtra for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality contained in sub-section (2), the works to
contain desertification and development may include,—
(a) creation and maintenance of water conservation bodies such as check dams,
digging of open wells, ponds and desiltation of such bodies from time to time;
(b) encouraging and providing irrigation facilities to the farming sector and
promotion of drip irrigation facility in these regions;
(c) capping of water guzzling sugarcane area and promotion of traditionally
grown crops like jawar, bajra, sunflower, pegion pea or tur, mulberry, potato, etc.;
(d) promotion of rain water harvesting as a movement;
(e) afforestation particularly on vacant or barren and waste land with the help of
villagers and village Panchayats including community afforestation;
(f) promotion of growing fodder and setting up fodder Banks at conspicuous
places;
(g) creation of foodgrains Banks at conspicuous places to help the farmers and
other villagers;
(h) initiating welfare measures for improving the conditions of agricultural
workers, senior citizens, women, children and poor people living in these regions;
(i) improving the health and education standards of the children particularly of
the girl child;
(j) creation of employment opportunities in the villages for employment
throughout the year and particularly for the period of natural calamities;
(k) providing potable water for the villagers and livestock;
(l) providing skill development training to the youth particularly the unemployed
ones;
(m) creation of good quality infrastructure of roads, electricity, schools, colleges
and transport;
(n) establishing community centres;
(o) establishing cold storages and warehouses for the farmers;
(p) such other provisions as the State Government of Maharashtra may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3. If any difficulty arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President of
India may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
Special
financial
assistance to
State of
Maharashtra.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Maharashtra, known for its valour, rich traditions and culture, prosperity and
development both in urban areas and rural areas, is presently suffering the worst at the
hands of mother nature and rain god. Recurring droughts have made the State a epicenter
of the farmer suicide. The situation is more precarious in Marathwada  and Madhya
Maharashtra where droughts have been a frequent occurrence during the past fifty years.
During the current year rain deficit in these regions hovered between 40 to 50 per cent whcih
has created a near emergency situation. Suicides by farmers is at its peak. The frequent
droughts are resulting in desertification of the regions where quality pomegranates, grapes,
sweetlime, and other fruits used to be grown in plenty and exported for earning precious
foreign exchange. These regions used to grow bumper crops of Cotton, Soyabean and
traditionally grown crops such as jawar, bajra, sunflower and pegion pea or Tur and other
pulses and oilseeds. The traditional crops could survive the scorching weather but the crops
that have replaced them are less hardy so the same rainfall deficit has a greater impact. For
instance, cane has become the bane of Marathwada region which requires an annual rainfall
of 2500 mm against the 644 mm which the region got this season. Water guzzling cane has
resulted in steep fall in ground water level and resulted in growing desertification. This trend
has to be stopped through massive water conservation with check dams and other structures
to arrest rain water run off. The traditional methods of water conservation through digging of
open wells, ponds, lakes and such other bodies and time to time desiltation of such water
bodies needs to be undertaken. Rain water harvesting has to be promoted as a mass movement
in these regions.
Afforestation on a large scale particularly on barren and wastelands has to be promoted
in these regions involving villagers and village Panchayats by providing incentives. This
can certainly arrest the desertification in these regions.
Unfortuantely these regions of the State are not much developed in comparision to
other regions of the State in terms of infrastructure facilities like that of potable water, roads,
electricity, sanitation and other development indicators such as employment, per capita
income and education particularly of the girl child. Welfare measures for the senior citizens,
widows, physically handicapped or infirm do not exist in these regions of the State. As a
welfare State, the Government has to provide all these facilities and work towards containing
the desertification and give the requisite push to the much desired development.
But all this require massive financial resources which are beyond the capability of the
State Government of Maharashtra. Although the State Government is doing its level best to
contain the desertification of these regions in the State under a programme called Jalyukt
Shivar under which check dams and other structures are being constructed and water bodies
are being desilted. Subsidies given by the State have encouraged the digging of open wells.
Massive central financial assistance is required by the State of Maharashtra to overcome the
financial crunch and the Central Government should provide special financial assistance to
Maharashtra.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR DHOOT
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for special financial assistance to State of Maharashtra to
be paid out of the consolidated Fund of India by the Central Government every year which
shall not be less than one lakh crore rupees to be spent by the State Government of
Maharashtra to contain desertification of Marathwada, Madhya Maharashtra and Vidarbha
regions and also for development works and welfare schemes. The Bill if enacted will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Recurring expenditure of a minimum rupees
one lakh crore may be involved per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra for containing
growing desertification in Marathwada, Madhya Maharashtra and Vidarbha regions
caused by consistent deficit rainfall and drought conditions by way of traditional
water conservation through lakes, ponds wells, rainwater harvesting and
afforestation involving villagers and their Panchayats and for the implementation of
development works such as housing, drinking water, roads, sanitation, creation of
grain and fodder Banks, skill development and welfare schemes for the women,
children, senior citizens and poor people living in these regions of the State and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4601RS(S3)—26-02-2016.