1
THE VICTIM AND WITNESS PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE
BILL, 2020
A
BILL
to provide adequate protection and assistance to victims and witnesses
in criminal cases.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victim and Witness Protection and Assistance
Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. VII of 2020
5
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2020

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'bodily injury' means—
(1)  a cut, abrasion, bruise, burn, or disfigurement;
(2) physical pain;
(3) illness;
(4) impairment of the function of a bodily member, organ, or mental faculty;
(5) any other injury to the body, no matter how temporary.
(b) 'law enforcement officer' means an officer or employee of the Government, or
a person authorized to act for or on behalf of the Government or serving the Government
as an adviser or consultant—
(i) authorized under law to engage in or supervise the prevention, detection,
investigation, or prosecution of an offense; or
(ii) serving as a probation or pretrial services officer under this title;
(c) 'misleading conduct' means—
(i) knowingly making a false statement; or
(ii) intentionally omitting information from a statement and thereby causing
a portion of such statement to be misleading, or intentionally concealing a
material fact, and thereby creating a false impression by such statement; or
(iii) with intent to mislead, knowingly submitting or inviting reliance on a
writing or recording that is false, forged, altered, or otherwise lacking in
authenticity; or
(iv) with intent to mislead, knowingly submitting or inviting reliance on a
sample, specimen, map, photograph, boundary mark, or other object that is
misleading in a material respect; or
(v) knowingly using a trick, scheme, or device with intent to mislead;
(d) 'official proceeding' means—
(i) a proceeding before a Court of Session, Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate first class and second class
Metropolitan Magistrate or High Court; or
(ii) a proceeding before an investigation or law enforcement agency which
is authorized by law;
3. (1) The Court, when sentencing an accused convicted of an offence under Indian
Penal Code, 1860 may order, in addition to or in lieu of any other penalty authorized by law,
that the defendant make restitution to any victim of the offence.
(2) If the court does not order restitution, or orders only partial restitution, under this
section, the court shall state on the record the reasons therefor.
(3) The order may require that such accused—
(a) in the case of an offense resulting in damage to or loss or destruction of
property of a victim of the offence—
(i) return the property to the owner of the property or to a person designated
by the owner; or
(ii) if return of the property under sub-clause (i) is impossible, impractical,
or inadequate, pay an amount equal to the greater of—
(a) the value of the property on the date of the damage, loss, or
destruction, or
(b) the value of the property on the date of sentencing, less the
value, on as the date the property is returned, of any part of the property
that is returned;
Definitions.
Order of
restitution. 45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) in the case of an offence resulting in bodily injury to a victim—
(i) pay an amount equal to the cost of necessary medical and related
professional services and devices relating to physical, psychiatric and
psychological care, including non-medical care and treatment rendered in
accordance with a method of healing recognised by the law of the place of
treatment;
(ii) pay an amount equal to the cost of necessary physical and occupational
therapy and rehabilitation; and
(iii) reimburse the victim for income lost by such victim as a result of such
offence.
(c) in the case of an offence resulting in bodily injury which results in the death
of a victim, pay an amount equal to the cost of necessary funeral and related services,
in addition to amount given in clause (b).
(d) in any case, if the victim or if the victim is deceased, the legal heir of the
victims consents make restitution in services in lieu of money, or make restitution to a
person or organization designated by the victim or the legal heir.
(4) (a) The Court shall not impose restitution with respect to a loss for which the victim
has received or is to receive compensation, except that the Court may, in the interest of
justice, order restitution to any person who has compensated the victim for such loss to the
extent that such person paid the compensation and such order of restitution shall require
that all restitution to victim under such order be made before any restitution to any other
person under such order is made.
(b) Any amount paid to a victim under an order of restitution shall be set off against
any amount later recovered as compensatory damages by such victim in:—
(i) any civil proceeding; and
(ii) any settlement proceeding.
(5) The Court may require that such accused make restitution under this section
within a specified period or in specified installments.
(6) If such accused is placed on probation or parole under this title, any restitution
ordered under this section shall be a condition of such probation or parole and the court may
revoke probation and the Parole Commission may revoke parole if the accused fails to
comply with such order:
Provided that in determining whether to revoke probation or parole, the court or Parole
Commission shall consider the employment status of the accused earning ability, financial
resources, the wilfulness of the accused's failure to pay, and any other special circumstances
that may have a bearing on the ability of accused to pay.
(7) An order of restitution may be enforced by the enforcement agency of the
government named in the order to receive the restitution in the same manner as a judgement
or decree in a civil case.
4. (1) The Court, in determining whether to order restitution under section 3 and the
amount of such restitution, shall consider the amount of the loss sustained by any victim as
a result of the offence, the financial resources of the accused, the financial needs and
earning ability of the accused and the accused's dependents, and such other factors as the
court deems appropriate.
(2) The Court may order the probation service of the court to obtain information
pertaining to the factors set forth in sub-section (1) of this section and the probation service
of the court shall include the information collected in the report of pre-sentence investigation
or in a separate report, as the court directs.
Procedure for
issuing order
of restitution.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) The Court shall disclose to both the accused and the prosecution agency all
portions of the pre-sentence or other report pertaining to the matters described in
sub-section (1).
(4) Any dispute as to the proper amount or type of restitution shall be resolved by the
court by the preponderance of the evidence and the burden of demonstrating the amount of
the loss sustained by a victim as a result of the offence shall be on the prosecution agency,
the  burden of demonstrating the financial resources of the accused and the financial needs
of the accused and such accused's dependents shall be on the accused and, the burden of
demonstrating such other matters as the court deems appropriate shall be upon the party
designated by the court as justice requires.
5. (1) Within two hundred and sixty days after the date of  enactment of this Act, the
Central Government shall formulate and implement guidelines consistent with the purposes
of this Act.
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in sub-section (1),
these guideline shall inter-alia contain, that—
(i) Law enforcement personnel shall ensure that victims routinely receive
emergency, social and medial services as soon as poosible and are given information
on the following:
(a) availability of   victim compensation, where applicable;
(b) communicty based victim treatment programs;
(c) the role of the victim in the criminal justice process, including what
they may expect from the system as well as what the system expects from them;
and
(d) stages in the criminal justice process of significance to a crime victim,
and the manner in which information about such stages may be obtained.
(ii) A victim or witness shall rountinely receive information on steps that law
enforcement officers and prosecution agency may take to protect victims and witnesses
from intimidation.
(iii) All victims and witnesses who have been scheduled to attend criminal
justice proceedings shall either be notified as soon as possible of any change in
schedule which may affect their apprearances or develop a system for alterting witnesses
promptly by telephone or through email or otherwise.
(iv) Victims, witnesses, relatives of those victims and witnesses who are minors,
and relatives of homicide victims shall if such persons provide the appropriate official
with a current address and telephone number or email, receive prompt advance
notification of judicial proceedings relating to their case, including —
(a) the arrest of an accused;
(b) the initial appearance of an accused before a judicial magistrate;
(c) the release of the accused pending judicial proceedings; and
(d) proceedings in the prosecution of the accused including entry of a
plea of guilty, trial, sentencing, and, where a term of imprisonment is imposed,
the release of the accused from such imprisonment.
(v)   The victim of a serious crime, or in the case of a minor child or a homicide, the
family of the victim, shall be consulted by the prosecution agency in order to obtain
the views of the victim or family about the disposition of any state criminal case
brought as a result of such crime, including the views of the victim or family about —
(a) dismissal;
Formulation
of guidelines
for fair
treatment or
crime victims
and witnesses.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(b) release of the accused pending judicial proceedings;
(c) plea bargaining.
(vi) Law enforcement agencies and prosecutor shall promptly return victim's
property held for evidentiary purposes unless there is a compelling law enforcement
reason for retaining it.
(vii) Victims and other prosecution withnesses shall be provided prior to court
appearance, a waiting area that is separate from all other witnesses.
(viii) A victim or witness who so requests shall be assisted by law enforcement
agencies and attorneys in informing employers that the need for victim and witness
cooperation  in the prosecution of the case may necessitate absence of that victim or
witness  from work and a victim or witness who, as a direct result of a crime or of
cooperation with law enforcement agencies or prosecutors for the Government, is
subjected to serious financial stain, shall be assisted by such agencies and prosecutors
in explaining to creditors the reasons for such serious financial strain.
(ix)  Victim and witness's assistance education and training shall be offered to
persons taking courses at Government law enforcement training  facilities and
prosecutors for the Government so that victims and witnesses may be promptly, properly
and completely assisted.
(x) may any other important assistance to victims and witnesses, such as the
adoption of transportation, parking, and translator services for victims within the
primisses of the court be provided.
(xi) Public radio, television, multimedia and other publicity medium shall allot
sufficient number of the broadcasting hours allocated to information provision are
used to promote behavior and measures aimed at education and awareness of protection
of victim and witnesses.
(xii) National information campaigns shall also be carried out to encourae the
prevention and protection of victim and witnesses and Information about such
initiatives may be included on local authority websites.
(xiii) The publicity work may be given to non-government organization having
sufficient experience in this field.
(xiv) The implementation agency shall ensure that the guidelines one adhered
by all the law enforcement agencies.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by parliament by law in
this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Without the cooperation of victims and witnesses, the criminal justice system would
cease to function yet with few exceptions these individuals are either ignored by the criminal
justice system or simply used as tools to identify and punish offenders.
2. All, too often,  the victims of a serious crime is forced to suffer physical, psychological,
or financial hardship first as a result of the criminal act and then as a result of contact with a
criminal justice system unresponsive to the real needs of such victim.
3. Although the majority of serious crimes falls under the jurisdiction of Session
courts, the public prosecutor, has an important role ot assume in ensuring that victims of
crime, whether at the local, metropolitan or session court level, are given proper treatment by
agencies administering the criminal justice system.
4. Under current law, law enforcement and investigating agencies must have cooperation
from a victim of crime and yet neither the agencies nor the legal system can offer adequate
protection or assistance when the victims, as a result of such cooperation, is threatened or
intimidated.
5. While the accused is provided with counsel who can explain both the criminal
justice process and the rights of the accused, the victim or witness has not counterpart and
is usually not even notifed when the acused is released on bail, the case is dismissed, a plea
to a lesser charge is accepted, or a court date is changed.
6. The victim and witness who cooperate with the prosecutor often find that the
transportation, parking facilities, and child care services at the court are unsatifactory and
they are often made to share the pretrial waiting room with the defendant or his family and
friends.
7. The victim who has lost valuable property to an accused, may lose it again for long
periods of time to investigating agency, during the trial and sometimes is appeals, and many
times that property is damaged or lost, which is particularly stressful for the elderly or poor.
8. With these objectives in mind,  the Bill proposes to:—
(1) to enhance and protect the necessary role of crime victims and witnesses in the
criminal justice process;
(2) to ensure that the central and state government all that is possible within limits of
available resources to assist victims and witnesses of crime without infringing on the
constitutional rights of the accused; and
(3) to provide a model legislation for State and local Governments.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. AMEE YAJNIK
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 provides for formulation of guidelines which include publicity, education and
awareness of protection of victim and witnesses. As the bill seeks to provide for the protection
of victim and withnesses, its enactment is likely to result in expenditure by the government
from the Consolidated Fund of India. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the Central Government
to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
It cannot be estimated at this stage as how much expenditure will be incurred as of
now but it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore will be
spent.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crore will also be spent.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of this Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. Therefore, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide adequate protection and assistance to victims and witnesses
in criminal cases.
————
(Dr. Amee Yajnik, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—6003RS(S3)—16-03-2020.