1
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4855RS.PM5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No.  VII of  2002
THE MAINTENANCE OF UNINTERRUPTED POWER SUPPLY TO
INDUSTRIES OF BACKWARD STATES BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to provide for the uninterrupted Power supply to the Industrial Units operating in the
industrially backward States of the Country by the Central Government to ensure
the overall industrial development of such States and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance of Uninterrupted Power Supply to
Industries of Backward States Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of backward State the
Government of that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) “backward State” means a State which does not have the requisite industries
according to the size of the State and its population;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5
10

2
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4855RS.PM5
(c) “industry” means an Industry as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and the Electricity (supply) Act, 1948, shall have the
meaning respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The Central Government shall maintain uninterrupted power supply to the
Industrial units operating within the territorial jurisdiction of a backward State in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section ( 1) the Central Government may, if it deems
necessary so to do invite and promote private sector in establishing power generating
units exclusively for the industrial sector in the backward States.
4. The appropriate Government shall establish such number of new electricity
generating stations as it may deem necessary, from time to time, exclusively for providing
uninterrupted power to the industrial units operating within its territorial jurisdiction.
5. The Central Government shall, from time to time carry out investigations and
collect and record the data concerning the generation, distribution and utilisation of power
throughout the country meant for the Industrial Sector and submit an annual report, in
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, to the President of India who shall
cause the report to be laid before both the Houses of Parrliament, as soon as may be, after
it is received by him.
6. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law, adequate funds for the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
2
Central Gov-
ernment to
maintain unin-
terrupted
power supply
of Industries.
Appropriate
Government to
establish new
generating sta-
tions exclu-
sively for the
Industires.
Central Gov-
ernment to
carry out inves-
tigation and
collect date
about the power
availability to
Industries in the
Country.
Central Gov-
ernment to pro-
vide funds.
Savings.
Power to make
rules.
14 of 1947.
9 of 1910.
54 of 1948.
5
10
15
20
25

3
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4855RS.PM5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Industries are the backbone of every economy and the development of a country
depends upon the development of its industries. A strong economy requires good industrial
base. A developing country like ours needs a very solid industrial base in the modern
globalisation period to face the stiff competition in the world market. Apart from the
national level, industries are very vital at the State level also in a federal polity like ours to
have a balance at the State and National level. But at present in our country some States
are industrially backward. Take for instance the States of Bihar and Jharkhand and which
having 40 per cent of the country’s wealth but industrially it is the most backward State of
the Union. Such backward States need rapid industrialisation but for a good industrial
base one requires infrastructure like electricity, raw material, latest technology, trained
technicians, cheap labour etc. apart from all round dedication for growth. But in our
country unfortunately the basic requirement like power is not available in abundance
which is hampering industrial growth. For instance the overall power generation during
1990-91 was short of the target by 2.6 per cent due to poor performance of all the regions
of the country during the period. The situation is more alarming in industrially backward
States like Bihar, Jharkhend and North-Eastern States. Apart from poor performance and
less utilisation of installed capacity by State Electricity Boards whatever energy is generated,
major share of it is consumed by domestic and agriculture sectors. The Industrial Sector is
always left to end itself. So in the absence of uninterrupted electricity supply a number of
industrial units have to close down in the recent past. For example hundreds of Electric
Arc furnaces which require uninterrupted electricity supply have been closed down in
various parts of the country. It has left thousands of workers jobless and affected the
production targets. Similar was the fate of other industries also.
According to Reserve Bank of India report as at the end of March 1991 there were
223809 sick/weak industries, both SSI and non SSI with outstanding Bank credit of
Rs. 10767.82 crores and majority of them were in backward States. Shortage of power was
one of the reasons for the sickness/weakness of these industries. As such we have to give
top-most priority to electricity generation for the survival and development of our industries
particularly in the industrially backward State like Bihar etc. Hence it is proposed that it
should be made obligatory for the Central Government to maintain uninterrupted power
supply to the Industrial units of the country in general and of backward States in particular.
For this purpose the Government may involve the private sector and also establish power
stations exclusively for the Industrial Sector in such States. The Central Government should
make adequate funds available for this purpose.
Hence this Bill.
S. S. AHLUWALIA

4
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4855RS.PM5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government will provide adequate
funds for the purposes of this Bill which includes establishment of new power houses
exclusively for industries. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation will involve
expenditure from the Consolidate Fund of India. It is estimates that a sum of rupees two
thousand crores will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one thousand crores is also likely to be involved as non recurring
expenditure for establishment of new power houses and other infrastructure.

5
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4855RS.PM5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

6
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4855RS.PM5
MGIP(PLU)MRND—4855RS—14-02-2002.
RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the uninterrupted Power supply to the Industrial units operating in the
industrially backward States of the Country by the Central Government to ensure
the overall industrial development of such States and for matters connected therewith.
(Shri S. S. Ahluwalia, M.P.)