1
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE ORPHANS (RESERV ATION OF POSTS IN GOVERNMENT
ESTABLISHMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of Posts in Government establishment for Orphans and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Orphans (Reservation of Posts in Government
Establishment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall apply to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointing authority”, in relation to a service or post in an establishment,
means the authority empowered to make appointment to such service or post;
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON
THE 23RD NOVEMBER, 2012
Bill No. XLIII of  2012
Definitions.
5

2
(b) ‘appropriate Government’ means the State in relation to Government of a
State and the Central Government in all other matters;
(c) “establishment” means every establishment owned, established, controlled,
managed or financed by the appropriate Government and includes—
(i) a Ministry or department or subordinate office or attached office of the
appropriate Government;
(ii) a public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted under
any Central Act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up
share capital is held by the Government;
(iv) a university established by a Central Act and its affiliated colleges,
including medical and engineering colleges and institutions;
(v) a primary or secondary school or any other educational institution;
(vi) an industry, trade or business;
(vii) a Government company as defined under section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956; and
(viii) an autonomous body, organisation or institution receiving grant or
aid from the Consolidated Fund of India.
(d) “Group ‘A’ post” or “Group ‘B’ post” or “Group ‘C’ post” means a post
which is classified as such by the President in exercise of the powers conferred by the
proviso to article 309 of the Constitution or by or under any Act of Parliament and
includes an equivalent post in any establishment;
(e) “Orphan” means a beraft through death or disappearance of, abandonment
or desertion by, or separation or loss from both parents;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “promotion by non-selection” means promotion made on the basis of
seniority-cum-fitness;
(h) “promotion by selection” means promotion made on the basis of merit-cum-
seniority;
(i) “recruitment year” means the calendar year for which the recruitment is
made;
(j) “scientific or technical post” include post for which qualifications in natural
sciences or exact sciences or applied sciences or technology are essential and the
incumbent of such post shall have to use his or her knowledge in such sciences for
discharge of duties.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall reserve such percentage of posts for the
Orphans for appointment in civil services by direct recruitment and promotion, in such
manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The vacancy reserved for Orphans under sub-section (1) shall be filled in such
manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, there shall be no reservation
where appointments are made—
(i) for a period of less than forty-five days;
(ii) for work charged post required for any emergency relief work;
1 of 1956.
No reservation
in certain
cases.
Reservation
of posts for
appointment
in Civil
Services.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(iii) to posts higher than the lowest grade of Group ‘A’ posts and classified as
scientific or technical post; and
(iv) to posts higher than the lowest grade of Group ‘A’ posts in institutions of
national importance and Indian Institutes of Management as may be specified in the
Act.
(2) The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, include or
omit any institution of national importance and Indian Institutes of management from the
pursued of this Act and on the publication of such notification, such institution shall be
deemed to be included in or as the case may be, omitted under this Act.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
5. (1) Appointment to an unreserved vacancy shall be open to all eligible persons
including a person belonging to the orphan category.
(2) Where such unreserved vacancy is filled by direct recruitment or promotion by a
person belonging to the orphan category on the basis of merit, then, such person shall be
appointed against the unreserved vacancy:
Provided that no such appointment shall be made for promotion by non-selection.
6. (1) The maximum age limit fixed for direct recruitment to a service or post shall be
increased by five years for the orphans.
(2) The maximum age limit fixed for promotion to a post, if any, shall be increased by
five years for the orphans:
Provided that no such relaxation shall be available where the maximum age limit for
promotion has been fixed above fifty years.
7. The examination fee or application fee, determined for recruitment to a service or
post through competitive examination or otherwise, may be reduced to such extent for the
orphans, as may be prescribed.
8. (1) Any standard of suitability, excluding the essential and desirable qualifications,
required for appointment by direct recruitment to a post may be relaxed for the orphans, if
sufficient number of such candidates possessing requisite standards are not available to fill
the vacancies reserved for them:
Provided that no such appointment shall be made where the candidate is found unfit
to hold the post.
(2) The experience required for appointment by direct recruitment to a post may be
relaxed for the orphans, if at any stage of selection, sufficient number of such candidates
possessing the requisite experience are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for
them.
9. (1) Where a qualifying examination is held to determine fitness of eligible persons
for promotion by non-selection and sufficient number of orphans fulfilling the qualifying
standards are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them, such qualifying standards
may be relaxed, consistent with the minimum standards of fitness required for appointment
to the post, in the case of the orphans.
(2) Where qalifying examination is held to determine merit of eligible persons for
promotion by selection and sufficient number of the orphans fulfilling the qualifying
standards are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them, such qualifying standards
may be relaxed, consistent with the minimum standards of merit required for appointment to
the posts, in the case of the orphans.
10. The vacancies reserved for the orphans shall be filled by the orphans only.
Unreserved
vacancies to
be open to
orphans.
Relaxation of
age.
Fee concession.
Relaxation in
qualifications
and
experience.
Reservation
in case of
Promotion.
Reserved
vacancies to
be filled by
orphans only.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
11. Where posts in an establishment are to be abolished and as a result thereof, the
services of certain persons are required to be either surrendered or terminated, no such
surrender or termination shall be made in respect of the orphans, if it results in lowering their
representation in relation to the percentage of reservation fixed for them.
12. (1) Every establishment shall designate an officer of such rank, as may be
prescribed, to function as a liaison officer for the purpose of ensuring that the provisions of
this Act or the rules made thereunder or any direction or instruction issued by the Government
regarding reservation are not contravened.
(2) The liaison officer shall, from time to time, inspect and verify the documents,
records and reports with respect to appointments of the orphans made by the appointing
authority by direct recruitment or promotion.
(3) Where the liaison officer is satisfied that any establishment has contravened the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any direction or instruction issued,
he shall submit a report of such contravention to the head of the establishment.
(4) On receipt of the report of contravention under sub-section ( 3), the head of
establishment shall take such disciplinary action against the person responsible for such
contravention as may be prescribed.
13. (1) Every appointing authority, or an officer authorised by him in this behalf, shall
maintain such documents and records, and furnish every year a report on the appointments
of the orphans made by direct recruitment and promotion, in such manner and at such time,
as may be prescribed.
(2) The appointing authority or any other officer authorised by him shall make available
such documents  and records for inspection, furnish such information, and render such
assistance, to the liaison officer, as may be necessary, to enable him to carry out his functions
under this Act.
14. The appropriate Government shall, subject to the availability of finance and other
resources, develop and organise training programmes to advance the competence of the
orphans for appointment to services and posts.
15. Whoever knowingly makes a false claim that he is an orphan, shall be liable to
punishment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to
rupees fifty thousand or with both.
16. Whoever knowingly issues a false orphan certificate shall be liable for punishment
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to rupees fifty
thousand or with both.
17. Where any person responsible for implementing the provisions of this Act or the
rules made thereunder, intentionally contravenes any of the provisions thereof, he shall be
liable for disciplinary action under the service rules applicable to such person.
18. The appropriate Government may, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder, issue such directions to establishments, as it deems fit.
19. All memoranda issued or purported to have been issued by the Government in
relation to reservation of posts in Government services for the orphans, immediately before
the commencement of this Act, shall, in so far as they relate to the matters for which
provisions have been made in this Act and are not inconsistent therewith, be deemed to
have been issued under this Act as if this Act had been in force on the date on which such
memoranda were issued.
20. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
Liaison
officer.
Abolition of
Posts in an
establishment.
Maintenance
of documents
and records.
Training
Programme
for orphans.
Penalty for
false claim.
Penalty for
issuing false
certificate.
Disciplinary
action.
Directions of
establishments.
Power to
make rules.
Existing
office
memoranda
to continue.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(a) the percentage of posts for reservation and the manner of reservation under
sub-section (1) of section 3;
(b) the manner of filling vacancies under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(c) the extent of reduction in examination fee and application fee under section 7;
(d) the rank of the officer to be designated as the liaison officer under sub-
section (1) of section 12;
(e) the documents and records to be maintained and the time and manner of
furnishing report under sub-section (1) of section 13.
(3) Every rule made by the Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as
may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5
10
15

6
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Orphans do not have any identity in the society except the names and surnames
given by the Orphanges. After they turn eighteen years of age, they lose this shelter also
and are placed in the society without any defense. Soon they discover that their names and
surnames do not entitle them to any of the benefits that a social group, as deprived as
theirs, would normally have access to. Therefore, its pertinent that the Government should
recognize the orphans as a socially, economically deprived groups like other Backward
classes, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and others and provide for reservation for
orphans in government jobs with a view to empower the orphans to live a respectful and
decent life.
Hence this Bill.
A VINASH  RAI  KHANNA

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill.
Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislation power
is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3510RS(S3)—26.11.2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of Posts in Government establishment for Orphans and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Avinash Rai Khanna, M.P .)