1
VICTIMS OF ACID ATTACKS, REHABILITATION, SUPPORT AND
HEALTHCARE BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to ensure proper rehabilitation and relief to victims of acid attacks and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called Victims of Acid Attacks, Rehabilitation, Support and
Healthcare Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 4TH FEBRUARY, 2022
Bill No. VII of  2022
5

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Definitions.
40
45
45 of 1860
2 of 1974
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "acid attack" means the act of throwing acid, or causing to or using it in any
form on a person with the intent to cause grievous harm or with the knowledge that
such use may lead to permanent or partial disability or deformity or disfiguration of
any part of the body;
(b)"acid" is any substance that has an acidic or corrosive character or burning
nature that is capable of causing bodily injury leading to scars or disfigurement, or
both or, temporary or permanent disability;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government
and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(d) "authority" means the Central Victims of Acid Attack Rehabilitation Authority
under sub-section (1) of section 3;
(e) "compensation" means compensation as provided for by this Act;
(f) "family" includes a person, his/her spouse, minor children and minor siblings
dependent on them:
Provided that surviving spouses, divorcees, and persons deserted by families
shall be considered spate families.
Explanation: An adult of any gender with or without spouse or children or
dependents shall be considered as a separate family for the purposes of this Act;
(g) "fund" means the Acid Attack Rehabilitation and Support Fund mentioned in
section 14;
(h)"guardian" means a person having the care of the person of a minor or a
disabled person;
(i) "medical treatment" means medical, surgical, or rehabilitative treatment
(including any corrective surgeries, psychological counselling or diet, or other
regimens);
(j) "notification" means a notification published in the official gazette by the
appropriate Government;
(k)"person" includes any company or association or body of persons, whether
incorporated or not;
(1) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this act;
(m) "rehabilitation" includes medical and psychological care as well as legal and
social services with the intent to enable victims to attain as well as maintain
optimalphysical, sensory, intellectual, psychological environmental and social function
levels;
(n) "State Authority" means the State Victims of Acid Attack Rehabilitation
Authority established under sub-section ( 1) of section 9;
(o)"victim" means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by acid
attack and includes the guardian or legal heir;
(p) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts provided that they shall be applied in a
gender-neutral manner.

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
CHAPTER II
CENTRAL VICTIMS OF ACID ATTACK REHABILITATION AUTHORITY
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority, to be known as
the Central Victims of Acid Attack Rehabilitation Authority;
(2) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) Minister of State, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment as the
ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) Minister of State, Ministry of Home Affairs as the ex-officio Co-Chairperson;
(c) Minister of State, Ministry of Women & Child Development as the
ex-officio Vice-Chairperson;
(d) Minister of State, Ministry of Law and Justice as the ex-officio
Vice-Chairperson;
(e) Chairperson of National Commission for Women, as the ex-officio member;
(f) Chairperson of National Human Rights Commission, as the ex-officio
member;
(g) Director, National Legal Services Authority as the ex-officio member;
(h) Two retired High Court judges to be appointed by the Central Government
as members;
(i) Four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
persons having knowledge of, or practical experience in, matters relating to providing
assistance to victims of acid attack:
Provided that at least two of the members shall be women or non-binary persons;
(j) Such other representatives of the Ministries or Departments of the
Government of India or experts representing different states or union territories, as
may be prescribed as members.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(4) The rules by which salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions
of services of officers and staff of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to take all such steps as it may think fit, to
ensure planned and coordinated rehabilitation of victims of acid attack and for the purposes
of performing its functions under this Act, the Authority shall:—
(a) facilitate and ensure full and proper implementation of all provisions of this
Act, including those pertaining to rehabilitation and relief services, including but not
limited to compensation, reintegration to the victims, safety, care, protection and dignity
of victims including prevention of re-traumatisation of victims, or recurrence of any
acid attack against victims, in coordination with the concerned Ministries, Departments,
prescribed authorities, statutory bodies;
(b) ensure effective coordination between the concerned authorities involved in
the process of rehabilitation and support;
(c) coordinate with the appropriate Governments and other concerned authorities
to maintain an updated national database of the victims under this Act for the sole
purpose of providing relief and support;
(d) oversee the disbursement of funds allocated for the assistance of the victims;
(e) develop strategies to regulate and control the import, production,
transportation, hoarding, sale, distribution of acid;
Central
Victims of
Acid Attack
Rehabilitation
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
3

4
Disqualification
for office of
member.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(f) make recommendations to the approriate Government for efficacious
implementation of various programmes for victim rehabilitation and also for preventing
acid attacks;
(g) to make rules for disbursement of funds;
(h) enhance public awareness about the provisions of this Act and its rules and
regulations and also create a national toll-free helpline to aid the victims and/or their
family;
(i) perform such other functions as may be prescribed as considered necessary
by the Authority for effective discharge of the provisions of this act;
(j) perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central
Government.
5. (1) The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall hold office till the time they discharge
the functions of their incumbent office;
(2) The conditions of service of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson, and the members
shall be such as may be prescribed;
(3) The term of office of the members appointed by Central Government shall be four
years, or till they complete the age of sixty years or till fresh appointments are made, whichever
is earlier, and other conditions of service of such members shall be such as may be prescribed;
(4) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of Chairperson, whether by reason of death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the functions of a chairperson owing to illness or other
incapacity, the Vice-Chairperson holding office as such for the time being, shall act as the
Chairperson and shall, unless any other person is appointed earlier as Chairperson, hold the
office of the Chairperson for the remainder of the term of office of the person in whose place
the said person is to so Act;
(5) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice-Chairperson or any other
member, whether by reason of death, resignation or inability to discharge their functions
owing to illness or other incapacity, such vacancy shall be filled up by making a fresh
appointment and the person so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of
the office of the person in whose place such person is so appointed;
(6) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Authority,
exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Authority as may be delegated to them
by the Authority and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed;
(7) The Vice-Chairperson shall perform such functions as may be assigned to them by
the Chairperson from time to time.
6. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member if he or she:—
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body
corporate owned or controlled by the Government; or
(e) has in the opinion of the Central Government such financial or other interest
in the Authority as is likely to prejudicially affect the discharge by them of their
functions as a member.
Terms of
office and
conditions of
service.

5
Procedure of
business.
State Victims
of Acid Attack
Rehabilitation
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
7. The Central Government shall remove a member if he or she:—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 6:
Provided that no member shall be removed on the ground that he has become
subject to the disqualification mentioned in clause ( e) of section 6, unless he or she
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter; or
(b) refuses to act or become incapable of acting; or
(c) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused their position so as
to render his or her continuance in office detrimental to the public interest:
Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless he or she
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
8. (1) The Authority shall regulate its own business.
(2) The Authority shall meet at such time and place, and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including the quorum at
such meetings, as may be provided by regulations:
Provided that the Authority shall meet at least once in three months.
(3) The Chairperson, and in the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall
preside at the meetings of the Authority.
(4) If for any reason the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson, both are unable to
attend any meeting of the Authority, any other member chosen by the members present at
the meeting shall preside at that meeting.
CHAPTER III
S
TATE VICTIMS OF ACID-ATTACK REHABILITATION AUTHORITY.
9. (1) Every appropriate Government shall establish a State Victims of Acid Attack
Rehabilitation Authority for ensuring overall effective implementation of the provisions of
this Act within the State, for coordination wherever necessary.
(2) The State Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) Chief Secretary—ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) Secretary, Social Justice Department—ex-officio member;
(c) Principal Secretary, Home Department—ex-officio member;
(d) Secretary, Department of Women and Child—ex-officio member;
(e) Secretary, Labour Department—ex-officio member;
(f) Secretary, Health Department—ex-officio member;
(g) Secretary, State Legal Services Authority—ex-officio member;
(h) Secretary, Law Department—ex-officio member;
(i) Officer of the state police department, not below the rank of inspector general
of police to be appointed by the appropriate Government—member;
(j) Two social workers or representatives of civil society organisations or
non-governmental organisations working in the area of providing aid to the victims of
acid-attacks and related matters to be appointed by the appropriate Government, out
of which at least one shall be a woman or non-binary person—members;
(k) Such other persons to be appointed by the appropriate Government as may
be prescribed—members.
Vacation of
office of
member.

6
Providing
monetary
assistance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(3) The terms of office and condition of service of the State Authority will be the same
as the Authority as may be prescribed under section 3.
(4) In case of a Union Territory, the Central Authority shall discharge its functions.
10. (1) The State Authority Shall:—
(a) act as the nodal agency at state level for the compensation of victims of acid
attack and to create a single window for compensation of victims under all the applicable
schemes already in place;
(b) facilitate and ensure full and proper implementation of all provisions of this
Act, including those pertaining to rehabilitation and relief services including
compensation, reintegration to the victims, safety, care, protection, and dignity of
victims including prevention of re-traumatisation of victims, or recurrence of any acid
attack against victims, in coordination with the concerned ministries, departments,
prescribed authorities, statutory bodies;
(c) ensure effective coordination between the concerned authorities involved in
the process of rehabilitation and support;
(d) inquire into and constitute fact-finding teams to inquire into incidents of acid
violence;
(e) monitor the allocation and utilization of the funds allocated by the Authority;
(f) coordinate with District Legal Service Authority and State Legal Service
Authority to provide appropriate legal aid to the victims;
(g) recommend the appropriate Government to notify medical facilities and other
services including psychological help and other needs of the victims;
(h) develop strategies to regulate and control the import, production,
transportation, hoarding, sale, distribution of acid;
(i) make recommendations to the State Governments for efficacious
implementation of various programmes for victim rehabilitation and also for preventing
acid-attacks;
(j) arrange for appropriate training and sensitisation of functionaries and
governmental and non-governmental personnel;
(k) develop effective networking and linkages with governmental and
non-governmental organisations for specialised services and technical assistance like
vocational training, education, healthcare, nutrition, mental health intervention, and
legal aid services;
(1) enhance public awareness about the provisions of this Act and its rules;
(m) perform such other functions as may be prescribed as considered necessary
by the Authority.
CHAPTER  IV
R
EHABILITATION AND SUPPORT OF VICTIMS
11. (1) Upon registration of a first information report of an offence of acid attack, the
investigating officer shall forward a copy of the same to the State Authority and the District
Legal Services Authority, which shall provide immediate relief to the victim and dependent,
if any, including aid and assistance for medical and rehabilitation needs, as maybe required
after due assessment, in such manner as may be prescribed, within seven days of the receipt
of the same.
(2) The State Authority shall award interim relief to a victim or any dependent within
a period of thirty days of an application submitted by or on behalf of them in this regard,
after due assessment, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Functions of
the State
Victims of
Acid-Attack
Rehabilitation
Authority.

7
Medical and
legal
assistance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(3) The State Authority shall ensure that all measures have been taken for relief and
rehabilitation of the victim and dependent, if any, including for his safety and relocation, at
the earliest after registration of the first information report under this act, and within thirty
days of an application having been made in this regard by or on behalf of the victim:
Provided that, in case appropriate relief is not awarded, or has not been awarded within
thirty days from the application, the victim shall approach the Authority as per the provisions
of section 15.
(4) The relief and compensation, including those provided under sub-section (1), shall
be in addition to any other compensation including any amount or benefit payable by way of
any damages or under any scheme of the appropriate Government or pursuant to any order
of the court under any law for the time being in force.
(5) The Authority shall frame rules for the effective implementation of the provisions
of sub-section (1) and (2) and disbursement of monetary assistance within one month from
the commencement of this Act.
(6) The designated court may order, where applicable, any back wages due to the
victim to be paid to them, in addition to any relief extended to the victim under this section.
(7) In case of the death of the victim caused by or as a consequence of the acid attack
the children or any other dependent of the victim may apply to the State Authority for relief
in accordance with the rules notified under this Act.
12. (1) Free medical treatment shall be provided to the victim at all the private,
government, and municipal corporation hospitals and the hospitals and medical facilities,
as may be notified, shall provide free and life-long care to the victims.
(2) Free psychological help shall be provided to the victim and their family for such
period as the concerned psychologist deems fit.
(3) The Authority shall provide funds for any elective surgery opted for, by a victim, to
alleviate the harm caused by or as a consequence of the acid attack which may include skin
grafting or plastic surgery as per the rules prescribed by the authority:
Provided that in the opinion of the operating surgeon and one other surgeon, the
procedure does not cause substantial risk to the victim.
(4) The treating doctor shall inform the nearest police station in case of an acid attack
and it shall be the duty of the police officer in charge of the station to inform the District Legal
Services Authority as well as the State Authority.
(5) On receipt of such information, the District Legal Services Authority, shall along
with a representative send a mental trauma team to provide psychological and mental relief to
the victim and their family.
(6) The State Authority along with either District Legal Services Authority or State
Legal Services Authority shall ensure that the victim is provided free counseling at a medical
facility or a doctor of their choice and under circumstances where the victim is unable to
choose, a psychologist may be appointed as may deem necessary.
(7) The State Authority shall mandate the creation of skin banks at the medical facilities
to be notified under the Act and ensure that there is at least one skin bank in every district.
(8) The State Authority shall, through either District Legal Services Authority or State
Legal Services Authority provide free legal aid and support through all the stages of the trial
and also in case if the victim wants to initiate civil action for claiming damages against
material and non material sufferings caused by any offence under this Act.

8
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
13. (a) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, set up
skill development institutes to provide skill training opportunities for those acid attack
victims seeking educational resources in order to re-integrate themselves into society.
(b) The state Governments shall contribute to the funding of the unit set up under
sub-section (1) in such manner as may be prescribed.
(c) The appropriate Government shall encourage private firms to set up enterprise-
based training institutes as a part of corporate social responsibility for imparting high-
quality job-oriented training to youth and ensure sufficient opportunities for employment to
acid attack victims on completion of training.
14. (1) The Central Government shall, within one month of the commencement of this
Act, establish and maintain a fund to be called the Acid Attack Rehabilitation and Support
Fund, for the relief and rehabilitation of acid attack victims.
(2) The Central Government, after receiving due reports from the Authority, shall
provide adequate funds, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, for
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(3) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in
such manner as may be decided by the Authority.
(4) The Authority may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the fund of the
Authority.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
15. (1) In case the State Authority rejects or fails to provide compensation or relief,
either immediate or interim, or any further compensation within the prescribed period then
such victim may apply to the Authority, for compensation or relief in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) In case of applications received under sub-section (1), the Authority shall ensure
disbursal of funds in a time-bound manner, not later than fifteen days after receiving the
application.
16. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson
or any other member or any officer of the State Authority, subject to such conditions and
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under
this Act, as it may deem necessary.
17. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government,
the Authority or any State Authority, or any member of the authority or any officer or
employee of the Central Government or the Authority or any other person authorised by that
Government or the Authority, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
18. (1) The Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act
be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in
writing to it from time to time.
(2)The decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy or
not shall be final.
19. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the official gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Setting up of
skill
development
institutes.
Acid Attack
Rehabilitation
and Support
Fund.
Appellate
Authority.
Delegation of
powers and
functions.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Directions by
the Central
Government.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

9
5
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
20. The provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any inconsistency, the
provisions of this Act shall have an overriding effect on the provisions of any such law to
the extent of the inconsistency.
21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make rules
and regulations for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule and regulation or both
the Houses agree that the rule and regulation should not be made, the rule and regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule and regulation.
Provision not
in derogation
of any other
law.
Power to
make rules and
regulations.
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The report of National Crime Records Bureau published in 2020 indicates that there
has been no decline in the number of acid attack victims even after amending the criminal
laws to curtail such abhorring attacks. There is an impending need to support these victims
as they have suffered enough and alleviation of the suffering of victims of such horrendous
crimes is the duty of the state. International Human Rights law requires Governments to act
affirmatively and with due diligence to protect human rights and adequately respond to
human rights violations. Due diligence imposes upon Governments the obligations to enact
legislation designed to combat acid attack violence, ensure effective implementation of laws,
and provide redress to victims.
Although the Government has recognized the need for the formulation of a
compensation scheme for victims of acid attacks, it has come up with a scheme that is too
complicated for a victim who has already suffered enough. Many victims have reported that
they have not received the compensation in full or there have been arbitrary cuts. Although,
certain States have been efficaciously disbursing relief funds, there is a need to address the
issue with a central legislation. This legislation aims to create a single window for compensation
for the victims of acid attack so as to alleviate their suffering. The legislation mandates the
creation of skin banks and also provides necessary measures to deal with psychological
trauma as well. Many acid attack survivors must undergo numerous complicated surgical
procedures. These medical procedures are very costly and require specialized expertise and
facilities. Thus the Bill provides medical treatment and elective surgeries to be conducted
free of cost.
Further, as a result of disfigurement, victims are either temporarily or permanently
incapacitated and are forced to give up their lives, their livelihood, and their education. In
this regard, compensation to cover vital surgeries for victims who can no longer support
themselves becomes imperative. There is also a need to prevent the supply of such corrosive
acids in the ordinary consumer market. Hence, the Authority under this Bill shall also aid in
the creation of policy to prevent acid attacks and shall also formulate rules for the import or
production of acid. There is a need for comprehensive legislation which provides holistic
relief to victims of acid attacks and does so in a gender-neutral manner. Under the current
laws, there are barriers to access to relief and rehabilitation for male, transgender and non-
binary persons.
Hence, this Bill.
DR.  FAUZIA  KHAN
10

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Central Victims of Acid Attack
Rehabilitation Authority. Clause 9 Bill provides for constitution of a State Victims of Acid
Attack Rehabilitation Authority. Clause 11 provides for monetary assistance and clause 12
provides for free medical and legal assistance for the victims. Clause 13 provides for setting
up of skill development institutes for the victims and clause 14 provides for Acid Attack
Rehabilitation and Support Fund to be established for the relief and rehabilitation of acid
attack victims. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to give an estimate of recurring or
non-recurring expenditure involved.
11

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and regulations
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the matters in respect of which rules may be made
are matters of procedure and details only and it is not practicable to provide for them in the
Bill itself the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
12

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to ensure proper rehabilitation and relief to victims of acid attacks and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2028RS(S3)—07-02-2022.