1
THE TRIBUNALS,  APPELLATE TRIBUNALS AND OTHER
AUTHORITIES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for uniform conditions of service of the Chairman and Members, by whatever
name called, of certain Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and other authorities and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:–
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tribunals,  Appellate Tribunals and Other Authorities
(Conditions of Service) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No. VII of 2014
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means appellate tribunal mentioned in column (2) of the
First Schedule established or constituted under the provisions of any of the
corresponding specified Acts mentioned in column (3) of the said Schedule;
(b) “Authority” means an authority mentioned in column (2) of the First Schedule
established or constituted under the provisions of any of the corresponding specified
Acts mentioned in column (3) of the said Schedule;
(c) “Board” means a board mentioned in column (2) of the First Schedule
established or constituted under the provisions of any of the corresponding specified
Acts mentioned in column (3) of the said Schedule;
(d) “Chairman” means a Chairman of a Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, Board,
Commission or Authority, by whatever name called, appointed under the provisions of
the specified Acts;
(e) “Commission” means a Commission  mentioned in Colum ( 2) of the First
Scheduled, established or constituted under the provisions of any of the Corresponding
specified Acts mentioned in cloumn (3) of the said Schedule;
(f) “Member” means a Member, other than ex officio Member, of a Tribunal,
Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission or Authority, appointed under the provisions
of the specified Acts;
(g) “Schedule” means any of the Schedules annexed to this Act;
(h) “specified Acts” means Acts specified in column (3) of the First Schedule;
(i) “Tribunal” means a tribunal mentioned in column (2) of the First Schedule
established or constituted under the provisions of any of the corresponding specified
Acts mentioned in column (3) of the said Schedule.
CHAPTER II
C
ONDITIONS OF SERVICE
3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the provisions of the specified
Acts, the provisions of this Act shall apply to the Chairman and Members appointed under
the specified Acts:
Provided that the provisions of this Act shall not apply to the Chairman and other
Members, as the case may be, holding such office immediately before the commencement of
the said Act.
4. The Chairman and every other Member shall hold office as such for a term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for reappointment
for another term:
Provided that no Chairman or other Member shall hold office as such after he has
attained,—
(a) in the case of Chairman or Member who has been a Judge of the
Supreme Court, the age of seventy years;
(b) in the case of the Chairman or Member who has been a Chief Justice or Judge
of a High Court, the age of sixty-seven years;
(c) in the case of any other Chairman or Member, the age of sixty-five years.
5. A person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Chairman or,
as the case may be, a Member, was in service of the Government, shall be deemed to have
retired from service on the date on which he enters upon his office as such Chairman or
Member.
Definitions.
Application
of Act.
Term of
office.
Chairman and
Members
deemed to
retire from
service.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. If a person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Chairman or
other Member, as the case may be, was in receipt of, or being eligible so to do, has opted to
draw, a pension, other than a disability or wound pension, in respect of any previous service
under the Government, his salary in respect of service as the Chairman or other Member, as
the case may be, shall be reduced–
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion of the pension
due to him in respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the
amount of that portion of the pension.
7. No person while holding office as the Chairman or Member shall act as an arbitrator
in any matter:
Provided that the Central Government may, on a request made in this behalf and after
examining the request on a case to case basis, permit a Chairman or Member to complete his
uncompleted arbitration work at the time of his appointment.
8. On ceasing to hold office, the Chairman or a Member, as the case may be, shall not
appear, act or plead before the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission or Authority
of which he has been such Chairman or Member.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the Chairman and Members
shall be entitled to the allowances specified in the Second Schedule and travelling allowance
specified in the Third Schedule.
10. The Chairman or Member who is not a sitting or retired Judge or a retired Central
Government servant shall also be eligible to avail the benefit of Central Government Health
Scheme for the duration of his tenure as Chairman or Member of such bodies.
11. The Chairman or Member shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe
to an oath of office and secrecy in the form specified in the Fourth Schedule.
12. The Chairman and Member shall, before entering upon his office, declare his
assets and liabilities and financial and other interests.
13. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do,
it may by notification published in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule and thereupon
the Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly:
Provided that only such Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission or Authority,
shall be included in the First Schedule which has a sitting or retired Supreme Court or
High Court Judge as Chairman or Member.
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is issued.
CHAPTER III
LEAVE
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, leave granted to a Chairman or Member
may be at his option either,—
(a) leave on full allowances (including commuted leave on half allowances on
medical certificate); or
(b) leave on half allowances; or
(c) leave partly on full allowances and partly on half allowances.
Suspension of
pension.
Prohibition
of acting as
arbitrator.
Prohibition
of practice.
Allowances of
Chairman and
Members.
Medical
facilities.
Oath of
office and
secrecy.
Declaration
of financial
and other
interests.
Power to
amend
Schedules.
Kinds of
leave
admissible.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, any period of leave on full allowance shall be
reckoned as double that period of leave on half allowance.
15. (1) A leave account shall be kept showing therein the amount of leave due to the
Chairman or Member in terms of leave on half allowance.
(2) In the leave account,—
(a) there shall be credited to such Chairman and Member—
(i) one-fourth of the time spent by him on actual service;
(ii) where by reason of his having been detained for the performance of
duties not connected with the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission
or Authority, he could not enjoy any vacation which he would otherwise have
been entitled to enjoy had he not been so detained, a period equal to double the
period by which the vacation enjoyed by him in any year falls short of one
month as compensation for the vacation not enjoyed;
(b) there shall be debited to him all leave with allowances taken by him.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section the expression “actual service” shall
include—
(a) time spent by a Chairman or Member on duty;
(b) vacations, excluding any time during which the Chairman or Member is
absent on leave.
16. A Chairman or Member shall be entitled in  his entire service including the period
of service rendered in a pensionable post under the Union or State or on re-employment, if
any, to claim the cash equivalent of leave salary on full allowances on his retirement in
respect of the period of earned leave at his credit to the extent of maximum period of three
hundred days.
17. Leave on half allowances, not exceeding more than six months, may be granted in
excess of the amount at his credit during the whole period of his service:
Provided that no such leave shall be granted if he is not expected to return to duty at
the end of such leave and earned leave so granted.
18. Extraordinary leave may be granted for a period not exceeding six months, during
the whole period of his service in excess of any leave permissible under the provisions of this
Chapter, but no salary or allowances shall be payable during, or in respect of, such leave.
19. Casual leave not exceeding fourteen days may be granted in a calendar year.
20. (1) Leave sanctioning authority for Members shall be Chairman and for Chairman,
it shall be the Minister of the concerned Ministry, who will also be the sanctioning authority
for Members, in case of absence of Chairman.
(2) Sanctioning authority for foreign travel shall be the Minister of the concerned
Ministry.
Leave
account.
Leave
encashment.
Extra-
ordinary
leave.
Casual leave.
Sanctioning
authority for
leave and
foreign travel.
Leave not
due.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

5
FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 2 (a), (b), (c), (e), (g) and (i)]
S. Tribunal/Appellate Tribunal  / Specified Acts
No. Authority/Board/Commission
(1) (2) (3)
1. Company Law Board The Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)
2. Cyber Appellate Tribunal The Information Technology Act, 2000
(21 of 2000)
3. Central Administrative Tribunal The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
(13 of 1985)
4. State Administrative Tribunal The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
(13 of 1985)
5. Joint Administrative Tribunal The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985
(13 of 1985)
6. Income-Tax Appellate T ribunal The Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961)
7. Authority for Advance Rulings The Income-tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961)
8. Telecom Disputes Settlement and The Telecom Regulatory Authority of
Appellate Authority. India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997)
9. Coastal Aquaculture Authority The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act,
2005 (24 of  2005)
10. Appellate Tribunal for Electricity The Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of  2003)
11. Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange The Foreign Exchange Management Act,
1999 (42 of  1999)
12. Film Certification Appellate Tribunal The Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952)
13. National Green Tribunal The National Green Tribunal Act, 2010
(19 of  2010)
14. Securities Appellate Tribunal The Securities and Exchange Board of
India  Act, 1992 (15 of 1992)
15. Customs, Excise and Service Tax The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962)
Appellate Tribunal
16. Authority for Advance Rulings The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962)
(Central Excise, Customs and Service Tax)
17. Armed Forces Tribunal The Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007
(55 of  2007)
18. Competition Appellate T ribunal The Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003)
19. National Consumer Disputes Redressal The Consumer Protection Act, 1986
Commission ( 68 of 1986)
20. Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal The Recovery of Debts due to Banks and
Financial Institutions Act, 1993
(51 of 1993)

6
21. Intellectual Property Appellate Board The T rade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999)
22. Railway Claims Tribunal The Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987
(54 of 1987)
23. National Industrial Tribunal The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14
of 1947)
24. Press Council of India The Press Council Act, 1978 (37 of 1978)
25. National Highways Tribunal The Control of National Highways (Land
and Traffic) Act, 2002 (13 of 2003)
26. Airports Economic Regulatory Authority The Airports Economic Regulatory
Appellate Tribunal Authority of India Act, 2008 (27 of 2008)
(1) (2) (3)

7
SECOND  SCHEDULE
[See section 9]
ALLOWANCES OF CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS OF TRIBUNALS, ETC.
Allowances Chairman Members
(1) (2) (3)
Free furnishing at official Consolidated sum of Consolidated sum of
residence Rs. 3,00,000 Rs. 2,00,000
Sumptuary allowance Rs. 5,000 per month Rs. 2,000 per month
Water and electricity 3,600 kilo litres per annum 3,600 kilo litres per annum and
and 10,000 units per annum 10,000 units   per annum
Conveyance facility Staff car with up to 200 litres Staff car with up to 200 litres
of fuel per month of fuel per month
Leave Travel Concession Twice a year Twice a year
Telephone facility Rs. 2,800 per month (exclusive Rs. 2,800 per month (exclusive
of taxes) with permission to of taxes) with permission to
reimburse up to thirty per cent. reimburse up to thirty per cent.
additional additional.

8
THIRD  SCHEDULE
[See section 9]
TRA VELLING ALLOWANCE OF CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS OF TRIBUNALS, ETC.
S.No. Type Admissibility
1. Air Business/Club class
2. Rail A reserved two-berth compartment of the highest
class, and take his wife along with him without
payment of the fare if such a compartment is
provided; or actual fare paid, whichever is less.
3. Daily allowance Not exceeding Rs. 5,000 per day for hotel/guest
house accomodation and food bill not exceeding
Rs. 500 per day or actual expenses whichever is
less.
Note.— The daily allowance shall be increased
by 25 per cent. as and when the Dearness
Allowance reaches fifty per cent. of the basic
salary.
4. Ship One reserved first class cabin, if available or the
fair actually paid for himself.
5. Mileage allowance Actual air conditioned taxi fare.

9
FOURTH  SCHEDULE
[See section 11]
FORM OF OA TH OF OFFICE AND SECRECY
“I, _____________________________, having been appointed as the Chairman/
Member (strike out which is not applicable) do solemnly affirm and do swear in the name of
God that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as the Chairman/Member
(strike  out which is not applicable), of the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission
or Authority (strike out which is not applicable)  namely ________________________, to
the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and
that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws of the land.
Dated:  (Signatures and name of the Chairman/Member)
                                        Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, Board, Commission or Authority
(strike out which is not applicable), namel y
                                      _________________________________”.

10
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The question of having uniform service conditions of the Chairpersons and Members
of  the various Tribunals at the national level has been engaging attention of the Government
for quite some time. Recently, the Supreme Court, in the case of Rajiv Garg  vs. Union of India
(Civil Writ Petition No. 120/2012), has also passed an order that decision in this regard may
be taken at the highest level.
2. The Government considered all issues relating to uniform service conditions
particularly with regard to retirement age, tenure of appointment, re-appointment and
provisions concerning residential and office accommodation for Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals
and other Authorities performing quasi-judicial functions manned by the sitting or retired
Judges of the Supreme Court or High Courts and also the ones manned by persons who are
not the sitting or retired Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts keeping in view all
related aspects including the issues that have arisen in different cases before the Supreme
Court and functions entrusted to such bodies.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; KAPIL SIBAL
The 11th February, 2014.

11
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Chairman and Members shall be entitled to the
allowances specified in the Second Schedule and travelling allowance specified in the Third
Schedule. The total recurring annual expenditure towards the allowances of the Chairman
and Members is estimated at rupees 3 crore. The administrative Ministries or Departments
bear the expenditure  in respect of the Tribunals, etc., under their control.
2. The Bill does not involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for uniform conditions of service of the Chairman and Members, by
whatever name called, of certain Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and other
authorities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Law and Justice)
GMGIPMRND—4380RS(S3)—13-02-2014.