THE PARLIAMENT (ENHANCEMENT OF PRODUCTIVITY)
BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an effective system to prevent and address the decline in
productivity of Parliament due to disruptions of sittings, by means of an appropriate
legal frame work to fix the minimum number of days in a year for which Parliament
shall be in Sessions introduction of special Session in addition to the existing three
Sessions, compensation for the hours unutilised due to disruptions, and to provide
obligations of the Presiding Officers of both Houses and the Members of Parliament
and matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Parliament Enhancement of Productivity Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. VII of 2017
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON  THE 24TH MARCH, 2017

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Committee" means the Business Advisory Committee of each House
established under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Council of States and rule 287 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha;
(b) "disruption" means shouting of slogans, coming to the well, and such other
actions as may be specified by the Chairman of Rajya Sabha and the Speaker of
Lok Sabha, as the case may be either Leading to adjournment or hindering the normal
business of the House; and
CHAPTER II
MINIMUM NUMBER OF DAYS OF PARLIAMENT SESSIONS
3. (1) Each House of the Parliament shall compulsorily sit for not less than one hundred
days in a year.
(2) The sittings of each House of Parliament shall be distributed in four Sessions
including a special Session, in such manner,  as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
CHAPTER III
SPECIAL SESSION OF EACH HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT IN A YEAR
4. The special Session of each House of Parliament in a year shall entail the following
namely:—
(i) the Session shall be of minimum fifteen days duration;
(ii) the Session shall only be devoted to deliberation on at least two most urgent
matters of public importance and no other business including government legislative
business  shall be conducted;
(iii) agenda for the Session may be decided by all political parties represented in
each House of Parliament;
(iv) each political party may submit at least two matters for intended discussion
in the special Session to the Business Advisory Committee of the respective Houses
in accordance with the rules as may be prescribed;
(v) the parties may also seek suggestions from public to decide the subject
matters for discussion;
(vi) the Committee shall collate the list of topics submitted by each political party
and shall decide the final topics for discussion; and
(vii) the Committee shall also recommend allocation of time for such discussions:
Provided that the Committee shall alocate at least half of the total speaking time to the
members of the non-ruling parties, irrespective of the strength of the parties in the House.
CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS
5. (1) The number of hours unutilised due to disruptions shall be compensated by
extending each Session by as many hours at the sitting were adjourned due to disruptions.
Explanation.— A productive day in Parliament shall be at least of seven hours and for
calculating as number of days for which the session has to extended the number of adjourned
hours shall be converted into number of days, after adjusting the hours when the Houses sat
beyond seven hours.
Definitions.
Minimum
number of
days in a year
for Sessions
of
Parliament.
Features of
the special
Session.
Extension of
Sessions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) For the purposes of section 5, the Chairman of Rajya Sabha and the Speaker of
Lok Sabha shall have inherant powers to extend the Session.
6. The Rules of Procedure and conduct of Business in the Council of States and the
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha may be amended, as deemed
necessary, for the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
7. The Chairman of Rajya Sabha or the Speaker of Lok Sabha or the Central Government,
as the case may be, may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
Amendment
of the Rules
of Procedure.
Power to
make rules.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Since the inception of Parliament of India in 1952, Parliament used to devote one
hundred to one hundred and twenty day of a year to sit in Sessions. This trend, however,
witnessed a decline over decades, bringing down this number to seventy to eighty days in
a year. Over the years, disruptions in the smooth functioning of the Parliament Sessions
have become a rather common feature in the Indian democracy. This causes grave monetary
loss, wastage of time and most importantly, delay in the decision-making on vital issues of
public importance of hasty passing of laws without sufficient deliberation. Various issues
which resonate strongly within the society are not paid enough attention, get overlooked, or
are not adequately discussed. Due to these reasons, productivity of Parliament is on a
decline and the people of the country are gradually losing faith in the relevance of this
supreme law-making institution.
2. More time should be allotted for debate and discussion on important subjects so as
to arrive at solutions and increase productivity of the Parliament. There is no rule to dictate
the minimum number of days the Parliament should mandatorily be in Sessions.
3. In India, as a practice, usually the Government overshadows the selection of the
topics of discussion in Parliament. To avoid logjams in the smooth functioning of Parliament
and to prevent washout of Parliament Sessions, it is crucial that the opposition also gets
equal and adequate voice in Parliament. Therefore, opposition parties should also have an
adequate say in deciding the agenda of Parliament so as to increase accountability of the
Government.
4. In the light of the above, the proposed Parliament Enhancement of Productivity Bill,
2017, inter alia, provides for the following namely:—
(a) The minimum number of days for which the Parliament compulsorily sits in
one year shall be not less than one hundred days;
(b) an additional two-week long specials Session of Parliament only to deliberate
over at least two matters of public importance, exclusive of all Government and legislative
business;
(c) modification in the structure of deciding the Parliament agenda during the
special Session to provide stronger voice to the non-ruling parties to propose topics
of discussion. These topics can also be critical of some aspect of Government policy
or administration; and
(d) disruptions of Sessions of Parliament be prevented, and the lost time be
compensated.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NARESH GUJRAL
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3(2) of the Bill provides for a special Session to be held in Parliament every year
in addition to the three Sessions. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one
hundred and twenty crores per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 empowers Chairman Rajya Sabha or speaker Lok Sabha the Central Government
as the case may be to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. The matters in
respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are of procedure  and administrative
details and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—5507RS(S3)—24.03.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an effective system to prevent and address the decline
in productivity of Parliament due to disruptions of sittings, by means of an appropriate
legal frame work to fix the minimum number of days in a year for which Parliament
shall be in Sessions introduction of special Session in additional to the existing
three Sessions, compensation for the hours unutilised due to disruptions and
to provide obligations of the Presiding Officers of both Houses and the
Members of Parliament and matter connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Naresh Gujral, M.P .)