THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution, existing entries 3 to 22 shall be re-
numbered as entries 4 to 23 respectively and before entry 4 as so re-numbered, the following
entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"3. Bhoti."
Short title and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. VII of  2011
Amendment
of Eighth
Schedule.
5

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Boti is spoken in the Himalayan regions of India from Laddakh to Tawang spreading
through Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttrakhand, West Bengal, Sikkim and
Arunachal Pradesh. The glory and grace of this language is not only confining to the
Himalayan regions of India but also in Bhutan, Nepal, Tibet, China, Mongolia and Pakistan.
People from different religions, regions cultures and countries are using this language which
clearly shows that this language is a symbol of 'Unity in Diversity'. The right of language is
a basic cultural right of the people and interlinked with their economy, culture, social system
and political right. UNESCO recognizes the concept of language equality among all languages,
irrespective of whether they have a script or not.
A nation marked by acute socio-cultural and linguistic diversity must lay down
structures and processes that safeguard its unity and integrity. Keeping people out, denying
them the basic human rights because of their region and language is unjustifiable and
inhumane. As per 1991 census, even Assamese, Sindhi, Nepali, Konkani, Manipuri and
Kashmiri speaking population were less than Bhoti speaking population. Bhoti is a language
spoken by large number of people in the Himalayan regions and it is blessed and bestowed
with wisdom and prosperity. It is a language of saint and poets, language of the hills and
valleys, language which unites people by heart and mind, and also a language of peace and
compassion. Five States including Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, West Bengal, Himachal
Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh have recognised the Bhoti language. The collection of
Buddha's teachings, Tripitaka that comprises 108 volumes and Tantras is also available in
Bhoti language.
Lanugage is not only a medium of communication, but it also reflects the history,
culture, people, relationship, system of governance, ecology, religion, politics, etc.
Unfortunately, the Bhoti language has not been included in the Eighth Schedule of the
Constitution. Moreover, for eliminating the feelings of alienation and indifference from the
minds of people of the Himalayan regions, it is utmost necessary to include this language in
the Eighth Schedule for want of oneness and national integration.
Hence  this Bill.
TARUN  VIJAY
S3\E\BILL2011\RS\7388RS

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
* * * * * *

GMGIPMRND—982RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Tarun Vijay, M.P.)