Short title,
extend and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
THE VIOLENT AND INDECENT VIDEO GAMES (PROHIBITION ON
DISTRIBUTION, SALE AND ADVERTISEMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on distribution, sale and advertisement of video games showing
violence and indecency in their operations in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Violent and Indecent Video Games (Prohibition on
Distribution, Sale and Advertisement) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into effect with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State the Government of that
State and for all other purposes the Central Government;
(b) "sale" includes giving on rent or allowing free access to game on internet;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Bill No. VII  of 2007
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007

2
Prohibition
on
distribution,
sale and
advertisement
of violent
and indecent
video games.
(d) words and expressions used in this Act but not defined and defined in the
Indecent Representation of women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 and the India Penal Code
shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in these Acts.
3. (1) No person shall distribute, sell or advertise such video games in the country
which contain violence, bloodshed and indecent material or representation.
(2) The Central Government shall not allow import of such video games in the country
which are showing violence and indecency.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to monitor the contents of
video games available with in its territorial jurisdiction and notify such video games which
certain violence and indecency.
(2) The appropriate Government shall from time to time, issue directions to the concerned
authority and the police about the procedure to be followed in monitoring violent and
indecent games in the market in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. If any portal or website is selling any violent or indecent video games the Central
Government shall block the portal or the website:
Provided that the Central Government shall not block any portal or website without
giving their representatives a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
6. It shall be the responsibility of each parent to check the content of the video game
they are giving to their children or the games being acquired by children themselves and
evaluate the ratings given on these video games.
7. Every school shall design/create curricula to guide advice children to reduce their
total screen time and the type of games to be played.
8. Every new game launched in the country in any manner shall be subject to the
approval of Children Films Society of India.
9. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to
three years or with fine, which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
10. Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
Appropriate
Government
to monitor
the contents
of games.
60 of 1986.
45 of 1860.
The Central
Government
to block the
portals/
websites
selling violent
and indecent
games.
Parents to
check the
contents of
games.
Schools to
issue
guidelines to
students on
games.
Games to be
launched with
the approval
of Children
Films Society
of India.
Penalty.
Offences by
companies.

3
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section:—
(i) “company” means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficult:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to violent and indecent video
games.
13. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Children in today’s world are growing in a totally different kind of environment. The
tools for play and entertainment are video games many of which are violent and indecent.
Duke Nankeen, Max, Payne, Elite Warriors, Hitman, Commandoes, Dooms are all names of
most popular video games in the market right now. All these are war or killing games which
children are exposed to from the age of three years and above. These games are highly
engaging and interactive unlike watching programmes on T.V.
Apart from this, there are a host of free video games available on internet many with
warning that the games may contain explicit scenes of blood and gore. According to medical
experts, recurrent viewing of scenes of blood and gore causes defiance in child so with
slight  provocation, anger or hostility, the defiance is often directed at parents. It further
says that children also develop insensitivity to pain and bloodshed in the absence of
adequate inputs from parents and teachers about the basic human right of letting other
persons to live. These children become less caring and helpful towards their peers.
As a result, the new kid on the block is an angry young child. He devotes hours before
screen playing these violent and indecent games. Most of the parents do not check the
contents of the games and just give into the demands of the children which come very
cheap at 50 rupees a game. Parents here have an important role to play. Psychologists have
found that when parents limit the time as well as the type of game their children play,
children are less likely to show aggressive behaviour. It is otherwise also reflecting bad on
the kids as instead of going to play out door games, they are sitting hours together before
the TV or computer screen. Children are not born violent; they are made violent. They
become conditioned to associate violence with fun, as part of normal life. The end result of
unmonitored video violence is that we are training an army of kids. There were several
incidents in other countries where children went into unprovoked shooting spree killing
many innocents. The same is the case with indecent games which are, at times, marked for
adults but land in the hands of children due to apathy of the shop keeper in selling those
games to right kind of persons. These games allow player to watch strip shows, depict
nudity, sexual conduct and other contents harmful to minors. There is an urgent need to ban
these games containing violence, bloodshed and indecent material from the reach of the
children and save the future of the society.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN
SERVER 5 \ BILL2004 \ RAJYA  SABHA \ 413RS
4

5
SERVER 5 \ BILL2004 \ RAJYA  SABHA \ 413RS
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers is
of normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on distribution, sale and advertisement of video games showing
violence and indecency in their operations in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)
MGIPMRND— 1219RS—16-03-2007.