1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In sub-section (5) of section 62 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, for
the words “or transportation or otherwise,”, the words “or facing trial for a non-bailable
offence punishable with imprisonment for more than seven years” shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. VII of  2023
Amendment of
Section 62.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
5

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
During the Constituent Assembly Debates of 1946 to 1949, one of the few proposals 
that were agreed upon through near-unanimous consensus was Universal Adult Franchise. 
India, which was well on its path to becoming a buoyant democracy, r ecognised the 
significance of choosing one's own representatives as far back as pre-independence. Yet, 
75 years later, we continue to be one of the few countries with a blanket ban on the voting 
rights of prisoner s.
Data from the 2021 report of the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) show that 
the number of undertrial prisoners in jails across th e country r egistered a 15% increase, 
from 3.7 lakh in 2020 to 4.2 lakh in 2021. Under Section 62(5) of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951, this entire class of people is excluded from the ambit of casting their vote 
in elections to any legislative body - apart from convicted prisoners. The undertrial prisoners 
form around 77 per cent of the total number of inmates, many of whom are facing charges 
for petty crimes with mild punishment in case of conviction. Even the detainees in Civil 
Prisons are deprived of their right to vote.
In Satender Kumar Antil Vs. CBI & Anr (2 022), the Supreme Court noted that "the 
majority of undertrial prisoners may not even be required to be arrested despite registration 
of a cognizable offence… they are not only poor and illiterate but also in clude women". 
Indeed, NCRB data records 25 per cent. of the undertrial population as being illiterate. In the 
absence of data on the economic standing of prisoners, education level and social background 
can stand in as useful proxies for gauging the degree o f backwardness and vulnerability. 
The poor find it difficult to furnish  bail even without sureties because v ery often the 
amount of the bail fixed by the courts is so excessive that in a majority of cases the poor are 
unable to satisfy the police or the Magistrate about their solvency for the amount of the bail 
and where the bail is with sureties, as is usually the case, it becomes an almost impossible 
task for the poor to find persons sufficiently solvent to stand as sureties. So th e end result 
would be that the accused persons, having poor economic background, of even bailable 
offences languish in jails.
Section 436A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 stipulates that a person having 
undergone detention for half as much time as the maximum period of imprisonment for the 
alleged offence, for which the punishment of death has not been specified as one of  the 
punishments, is entitled to be released on bail with or without sureties. In Hussain and Anr. 
v/s Union of India & Ors. (2017), the Apex Court had ordered expeditious disposal of bail 
applications on the principle of bail being the norm and jail the exception. However, the 
implementation continues to be a challenge.
The ban on undertrial prisoners to exercise their right of franchise, including those 
being tried for bailable offences, lacks any reasonable classification based on the nature of 
crime or duration of sentence unlike some countries such as South Africa, Germany, France, 
Canada, etc. Another stark contradiction in this regard is that th e undertrials who are out 
on bail, even in n on-bailable offences,  can enjoy the r ight to vote. This is anathema to 
articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
At several junctures, the Election Commission of India has found its hands tied by 
such laws. Even though many petitions have sought to challenge this restriction on universal 
adult suffrage, it continues to pose a threat to the democratic ethos of our nation. In light of 
the above, there is a pressing need to amend section 62(5) of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951, so as to ensure the right to vote to undertrial prisoners facing charges of 
all bailable offences or of non-bailable offences punishable with imprisonment of 7 years or 
less.
The Bill seeks to achieve the said objective.
JOHN BRITTAS

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE REPRESENTATION  OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
ACT NO. 43 OF 1951.
* * * * *
62. (1) No person who is not, and except as expressly provided by this Act, every
person who is, for the time being entered in the electoral roll of any constituency shall
be entitled to vote in that constituency.
(2) No person shall vote at an election in any constituency if he is subject to any
of the disqualifications referred to in section 16 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1950 (43 of 1950).
(3) No person shall vote at a general election in more than one constituency of the
same class, and if a person votes in more than one such constituency, his votes in all
such constituencies shall be void.
(4) No person shall at any election vote in the same constituency more than once,
notwithstanding that his name may have been registered in the electoral roll for that
constituency more than once, and if he does so vote, all his votes in that constituency
shall be void.
(5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison, whether
under a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful
custody of the police:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected
to preventive detention under any law for the time being in force:
Provided  further  that  by  reason  of  the  prohibition  to  vote  under  this
sub-section, a person whose name has been entered in the electoral roll shall not
cease to be an elector.
(6) Nothing contained in sub-sections ( 3) and (4) shall apply to a person who has
been authorised to vote as proxy for an elector under this Act in so far as he votes as a
proxy for such elector.
* * * * *
Right to vote.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Dr. John Brittas, M.P. )
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—061—08-12-2023.