Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  VIII of  2023
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Constitution, for the word "Chairman", wherever it occurs, the word
"Chairperson", shall be substituted.
3. In article 371A of the Constitution, in sub-clause (d) of clause (1), in the proviso to
paragraph (i), for the word "Vice-Chairman", the word "Vice-Chairperson", shall be substituted.
General.
Amendment
of article
371A.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The discriminatory approach on the basis of gender, either expressively or impliedly, is
not appreciated in the modern egalitarian society. India, being a nation with higher
constitutional values on equality, particularly on gender, have a greater role in setting a
model for the gender inclusive approach in letter and spirit. In this context, the State, legislature
and the law, should all reflect the comprehensive and inclusive approach towards gender,
particularly in relation to women and transgenders.
2. It is also to be noted that the Indian representatives have succeeded in changing the
draft proposal of article 1 of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR) in
1948, from "All men are born free and equal" to "All human beings are born free and equal"
with much gender-neutral consciousness even imbibed in the literal manifestations. But this
spirit of literal manifestation of gender neutrality has not reflected in several povisions in the
Constitution of India, except certain amendments made to it in the later period.
3. Article 51A(e) of the Constitution of India also provides that it shall be the duty of
every citizen of India to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, lingustic and regional or sectional diversities; to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women. This value has to be reflected in its
true sense of literal articulations in the Constitution itself, in a more inclusive and convincing
manner.
4. The legislative intent at the time of passing of the Constitution was very clear as to
renouncing of practices which are derogatory to the dignity of women and tansgenders. But
in the present context, this constitutional aspiration has to be supplemented through express
articulations. An explicit mandate will provide more confidence and recognition to women
and transgenders. Hence, a gender neutral and gender inclusive language need to be
introduced in the Constitution of India.
5. The skewed gender terminologies used to address certain constitutional offices
need to be amended at par with the inclusive gender-neutral terminologies as adopted in the
recent enactments including constitutional amendments and statutes.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
A.A. RAHIM.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
22 * * * * * *
(4) * * * * * *
Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two
other members, and the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the appropriate High Court and
the other members shall be serving or retired Judges of any High Court:
* * * * * *
64. The Vice-President shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of the States and
shall not hold any other office of profit:
Provided that during any period when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges
the functions of the President under article 65, he shall not perform the duties of the office of
Chairman of the Council of States and shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable
to the Chairman of the Council of States under article 97.
* * * * * *
89. (1) The Vice-President of India shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States.
(2) The Council of States shall, as soon as may be, choose a member of the Council to
be Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of Deputy Chairman becomes vacant,
the Council shall choose another member to be Deputy Chairman thereof.
90. A member holding office as Deputy Chairman of the Council of States—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;
(b) may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman,
resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council passed
by a majority of all the then members of the Council:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved
unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the
resolution.
91. (1) While the office of Chairman is vacant, or during any period when the
Vice-President is acting as, or discharging the functions of, President, the duties of the office
shall be performed by the Deputy Chairman, or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also
vacant, by such member of the Council of States as the President may appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council of States the
Deputy Chairman, or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of
procedure of the Council, or, if not such person is present, such other person as may be
determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.
92. (1)  At any sitting of the Council of States, while any resolution for the removal of
the Vice-President from his office is under consideration, the Chiarman, or while any resolution
for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is under consideration, the Deputy
Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions of clause (2) of article
91 shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which
the Chairman, or, as the case may be, the Deputy Chairman, is absent.
3
Protection
against arrest
and detention
in certain
cases.
The Vice-
President to
be ex-officio
Chairman of
the Council of
States.
The Chairman
and Deputy
Chairman of
the Council of
States.
Vacation and
resignation of,
and removal
from, the
office of
Deputy
Chairman.
Power of the
Deputy
Chairman or
other person
to perform
the duties of
the office of,
or to act as,
Chairman.
The Chairman
or the Deputy
Chairman not
to preside
while a
resolution for
his removal
from office is
under
consideration.

4
(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of, the Council of States while any resolution for the removal of the
Vice-President from his office is under consideration in the Council, but, notwithstanding
anything in article 100, shall not be entitled to vote at all on such resolution or on any other
matter during such proceedings.
* * * * * *
97. There shall be paid to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of
States, and to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, such salaries
and allowances as may be respectively fixed by Parliament by law and, until provision in that
behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule.
98. * * * * * *
(3) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause ( 2), the President may, after
consultation with the Speaker of the House of the People or the Chairman of the Council of
States, as the case may be, make rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of
service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the House of the People or the
Council of States, and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any
law made under the said clause.
* * * * * *
100. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at any sitting of
either House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be determined by a majority of votes of the
members present and voting, other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker.
The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the first instance,
but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
* * * * * *
(4) If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of
the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend
the meeting until there is a quorum.
101. * * * * * *
(3) If a member of either House of Parliament—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 3 clause (1) or
clause (2) of article 102, or
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman or the
Speaker, as the case may be, and his resignation is accepted by the Chairman or the
Speaker, as the case may be, his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b) if from
information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, is satisfied that such resignation is not
voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.
* * * * * *
112. * * * * * *
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund
of India—
* * * * * *
Salaries and
allowances of
the Chairman
and Deputy
Chairman and
the Speaker
and Deputy
Speaker.
Secretariat of
Parliament.
V oting in
Houses, power
of Houses to
act
notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum.
V acation of
seats.
Annual
financial
statement.

5
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the
Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People;
* * * * * *
118. * * * * * *
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and standing orders in
force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature
of the Dominion of  India shall have effect in relation to Parliament subject to such
modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman of the Council of
States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be.
(3) The President, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council of States and the
Speaker of the House of the People, may make rules as to the procedure with respect to joint
sittings of, and communications between, the two Houses.
* * * * * *
120. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article
348, business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the
People,  or person acting as such,  as the case may be, may permit any member  who cannot
adequately express himself in Hindi or in English to address the House in his mother-tongue.
* * * * * *
182. The Legislative Council of every State having such Council shall, as soon as may
be, choose two members of the Council to be respectively Chairman and Deputy Chairman
thereof and, so often as the office of Chairman or Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the
Council shall choose another member to be Chairman or Deputy Chairman, as the case may
be.
183. A member holding office as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Legislative
Council—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is the
Chairman, to be Deputy Chairman, and if such member is the Deputy Chairman, to the
Chairman, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council passed by a
majority of all the then members of the Council:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless
at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution.
184. (1) While the office of Chairman is vacant, the duties of the office shall be
performed by the Deputy Chairman or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by
such member of the Council as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council the Deputy
Chairman or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure
of the Council, or if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by
the Council, shall act as Chairman.
185. (1) At any sitting of the Legislative Council, while any resolution for the removal
of the Chairman from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while any resolution
for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is under consideration,  the Deputy
Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions of clause (2) of article
184 shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from
which the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Deputy Chairman is absent.
Rules of
procedure.
Language to
be used in
Parliament.
The Chairman
and Deputy
Chairman of
the Legislative
Council.
Vacation and
resignation of,
and removal
from the
offices of
Chairman and
Deputy
Chairman.
Power of the
Deputy
Chairman or
other person
to perform
the duties of
the office of,
or to act as,
Chairman.
The Chairman
or the Deputy
Chairman not
to preside
while a
resolution for
his removal
from office is
under
consideration.

6
(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of, the Legislative Council while any resolution for his removal from office is
under consideration in the Council and shall, notwithstanding anything in article 189, be
entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during
such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes.
186. There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly, and to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council, such
salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislature of the State by law
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as are specified
in the Second Schedule.
187. * * * * * *
(3) Until provision is made by the Legislature of the State under clause (2), the Governor
may, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or the Chairman of the
Legislative Council, as the case may be, make rules regulating the recruitment, and the
conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the Assembly or the
Council, and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any law made
under the said clause.
* * * * * *
189. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at any sitting of
a House of the Legislature of a State shall be determined by a majority of votes of the
members present and voting, other than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such.
The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the first instance,
but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
* * * * * *
(4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative
Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker or Chairman, or
person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a
quorum.
190.* * * * * *
(3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of a State—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 2 clause (1) or
clause (2) or article 191; or
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the speaker or the
Chairman, as the case may be, and his resignation is accepted by the Speaker or the
Chairman, as the case may be, his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b), if from
information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the
Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, is satisfied that such resignation is not
voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.
* * * * * *
202. * * * * * *
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund
of each State—
* * * * * *
Salaries and
allowances of
the Speaker
and Deputy
Speaker and
the Chairman
and Deputy
Chairman.
Secretariat of
State
Legislature.
V oting in
Houses, power
of Houses to
act
notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum.
V acation of
seats.
Annual
financial
statement.

7
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly and, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, also of
the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council.
* * * * * *
208. * * * * * *
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and standing orders in
force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature
for the corresponding Province shall have effect in relation to the Legislature of the State
subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly, or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be.
(3) In a State having a Legislative Council the Governor, after consultation with the
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of the Legislative Council, may make
rules as to the procedure with respect to communications between the two Houses.
* * * * * *
210. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article 348,
business in the Legislature of a State shall be transacted in the official language or languages
of the State or in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or Chairman of the Legislative
Council, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot
adequately express himself in any of the languages aforesaid to address the House in his
mother-tongue.
* * * * * *
280. (1) The President shall, within two years from the commencement of this
Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time as the
President considers necessary, by order constitute a Finance Commission which shall consist
of a Chairman and four other members to be appointed by the President.
* * * * * *
312A. (1) Parliament may by law—
(a) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the conditions of
services as respects remuneration, leave and pension and the rights as respects
disciplinary matters of persons who, having been appointed by the Secretary of State
or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India before the
commencement of this Constitution, continue on and after the commencement of the
Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, to serve under the Government
of India or of a State in any service or post;
(b) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the conditions of
service as respects pension of persons who, having been appointed by the Secretary of
State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India before the
commencement of this Constitution, retired or otherwise ceased to be in service at any time
before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972:
Provided that in the case of any such person who is holding or has held the
office of the Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court, the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, the Chairman or other member of the Union
or a State Public Service Commission or the Chief Election Commissioner, nothing in
sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) shall be construed as empowering Parliament to vary
or revoke, after his appointment to such post, the conditions of his service to his
disadvantage except in so far as such conditions of service are applicable to him by
reason of his being a person appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State
in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India.
* * * * * *
Rules of
procedure.
Language to
be used in the
Legislature.
Finance
Commission.
Power of
Parliament to
vary or
revoke
conditions of
service of
officers of
certain
services.

8
316. (1) The Chairman and other members of a Public Service Commission shall be
appointed, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, by the President, and
in the case of a State Commission, by the Governor of the State:
Provided that as nearly as may be one-half of the members of every Public Service
Commission shall be persons who at the dates of their respective appointments have held
office for at least ten years either under the Government of India or under the Government of
a State, and in computing the said period of ten years any period before the commencement
of this Constitution during which a person has held office under the Crown in India or under
the Government of an Indian State shall be included.
(1A) If the office of the Chairman of the Commission becomes vacant or if any such
Chairman is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his
office, those duties shall, until some person appointed under clause (1) to the vacant office
has entered on the duties thereof or, as the case may be, until the Chairman has resumed his
duties, be performed by such one of the other members of the Commission as the President,
in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor of the State in
the case of a State Commission, may appoint for the purpose.
317. (1) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), the Chairman or any other member of
a Public Service Commission shall only be removed from his office by order of the President
on the ground of misbehaviour after the Supreme Court, on reference being made to it by the
President, has, on inquiry held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf
under article 145, reported that the Chairman or such other member, as the case may be, ought
on any such ground to be removed.
(2) The President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the
Governor in the case of a State Commission, may suspend from office the Chairman or any
other memeber of the Commission in respect of whom a reference has been made to the
Supreme Court under clause (1) until the President has passed orders on receipt of the report
of the Supreme Court on such reference.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the President may by order remove from
office the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission if the Chairman or
such other member, as the case may be,—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties
of his office; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of
infirmity of mind or body.
(4) If the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service Commission is or becomes
in any way concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the
Government of India or the Government of a State or participates in any way in the profit
thereof or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in
common with the other members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the purposes of
clause (1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.
* * * * * * *
319. On ceasing to hold office—
(a) the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be ineligible for
further employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of
a State;
(b) the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall be eligible for
appointment as the Chairman or any other member of the Union Public Service
Appointment
and term of
office of
members.
Removal and
suspension of
a member of a
Public Service
Commission.
Prohibition as
to the holding
of offices by
members of
commission
on ceasing to
be such
members.

9
Commission or as the Chairman of any other State Public Service Commission, but not
for any other employment either under the Government of  India or under the Government
of a State;
(c) a member other than the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission
shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of the Union Public Service
Commission or as the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission, but not for any
other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a
State;
(d) a member other than the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall
be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any other member of the Union Public
Service Commission or as the Chairman of that or any other State Public Service
Commission, but not for any other employment either under the Government of India
or under the Government of a State.
* * * * * *
324. * * * * * *
(3) When any other Election Commissioner is so appointed the Chief Election
Commissioner shall act as the Chairman of the Election Commission.
* * * * * *
344. (1) The President shall, at the expiration of five years from the commencement of
this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such commencement, by
order constitute a Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and such other members
representing the different languages specified in the Eighth Schedule as the President may
appoint, and the order shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
* * * * * *
371A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
* * * * * *
(d) as from such date as the Governor of Nagaland may by public notification in
this behalf specify, there shall be established a regional council for the Tuensang
district consisting of thirty-five members and the Governor shall in his discretion make
rules providing for—
(i) the composition of the regional council and the manner in which the
members of the regional council shall be chosen:
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner of the Tuensang district shall be
the Chairman ex officio of the regional council and the Vice-Chairman of the
regional council shall be elected by the members thereof from amongst
themselves.
* * * * * *
SECOND SCHEDULE
* * * * * *
PART C
Provisions as to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the people and
the chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the
Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of
the Legislative Council of a State
7. There shall be paid to the Speaker of the House of the People and the Chairman of
the Council of States such salaries and allowances as were payable to the Speaker of the
Superintendence,
direction and
control of
elections to be
vested in an
Election
Commission.
Commission
and
Committee of
Parliament on
official
language.
Special
provision with
respect to the
State of
Nagaland.

10
Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately before the commencement of
this Constitution, and there shall be paid to the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People
and to the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States such salaries and allowances as were
payable to the Deputy Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India
immediately before such commencement.
8. There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
and to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State such
salaries and allowances as were payable respectively to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly and the President and the Deputy President of the Legislative
Council of the corresponding Province immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution and, where the corresponding Province immediately before the commencement
of this Constitution and, where the corresponding Province had no Legislative Council
immediately before such commencement, there shall be paid to the Chairman and the Deputy
Chairman of the Legislative Council of the State such salaries and allowances as the Governor
of the State may determine.
* * * * * *
FIFTH  SCHEDULE
* * * * * *
PART B
ADMINISTRATION AND CONTROL OF SCHEDULED AREAS AND SCHEDULED
TRIBES
4. Tribes Advisory Council. *                          *                                  *                              *
(3) The Governor may make rules prescribing or regulating, as the case may be,—
(a) the number of members of the Council, the mode of their appointment and the
appointment of the Chairman of the Council and of the officers and servants thereof;
* * * * * *
SEVENTH  SCHEDULE
* * * * * *
List I - Union List
* * * * * *
73. Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and Deputy
Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the
People.
* * * * * *
List II - State List
* * * * * *
38. Salaries and allowances of members of the Legislature of the State, of the Speaker
and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, if there is a Legislative Council, of the
Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof.
* * * * * *
TENTH  SCHEDULE
* * * * * *
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, a person who has been
elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People of the
Exemption.

11
Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the
Legislative Council of a State or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
of a State, shall not be disqualified under this Schedule,—
(a) if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluntarily gives up the
membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before such election
and does not, so long as he continues to hold such office thereafter, rejoin that political
party or become a member of another political party; or
(b) if  he, having given up by reason of his election to such office his membership
of the political party to which he belonged immediately before such election, rejoins
such political party after he ceases to hold such office.
6. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to
disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the
Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final:
Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or the
Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualification, the question shall be
referred for the decision of such member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf
and his decision shall be final.
* * * * * * *
8. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the Chairman or
the Speaker of a House may make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Schedule,
and in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may
provide for—
(a) the maintenance of registers or other records as to the political parties, if any,
to which different members of the House belong;
(b) the report which the leader of a legislature party in relation to a member of a
House shall furnish with regard to any condonation of the nature referred to in
clause (b) of sub-paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 2 in respect of such member, the time
within which and the authority to whom such report shall be furnished;
(c) the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to admission to
such political party of any members of the House and the officer of the House to whom
such reports shall be furnished; and
(d) the procedure for deciding any question referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of
paragraph 6 including the procedure for any inquiry which may be made for the purpose
of deciding such question.
(2) The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of  a House under sub-paragraph
(1) of this paragraph shall be laid as soon as may be after they are made before the House for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions and shall take effect upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days
unless they are sooner approved with or without modifications or disapproved by the House
and where they are so approved, they shall take effect on such approval in the form in which
they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be, and where they are so disapproved,
they shall be of no effect.
(3) The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to the provisions
of article 105 or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any other power which he may have
under this Constitution direct that any wilful contravention by any person of the rules made
under this paragraph may be dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the
House.
Decision on
questions as to
disqualification
on ground of
defection.
Rules.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri A. A. Rahim, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–042–05.02.2024.