TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. VIII of  2002
5
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE BLIND AND OTHER PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS
(REHABILITATION, EMPLOYMENT AND WELFARE) BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation, reservation of jobs and other welfare measures for the
blind and other physically handicapped persons in the country and for matter
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Blind and other Physically Handicapped Persons
(Rehabilitation, Employment and Welfare) Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means,—
(i) the Central Government,
(1) in relation to any establishment owned, controlled or managed by the
Central Government or a department of the Central Government; or
(2) any company in which not less than fifty percent, of the shares are
held by the Central Government or partly by the Central Government and
partly by one or more State Governments; or
Definitions.
10
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4853RS.PM5

2
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4853RS.PM5
2
(3) any corporation including a co-operative society established by or
under a Central Act or owned, controlled or managed by the Central Govern-
ment.
(ii) in relation to any other establishment the Government of the State in which
that establishment is situated;
(b) “blind person” means any person who has total absence of sight or vision;
(c) “disabled or physically handicapped person” means any person having
physical, mental or any other disability leading to a substantial handicap to his
normal daily activities and to employment and hindering his normal life;
(d) “employer” means any person who employs fifty or more persons to do
any work in an establishment for remuneration;
(e) “establishment” means any office or any place where any industry, trade,
business or occupation is carried;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “registering authority” means the authority appointed under section 5 of
this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette,
establish a National Council for the Blind and Handicapped Persons (hereinafter
referred to as the National Council):
(2) The National Council shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) The Union Ministers of Health and Family Welfare, Labour, Welfare, Finance
and Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission;
(ii) A representative of the Central Social Welfare Board;
(iii) A representative from each of the State Governments and Union
territories;
(iv) Two representatives of the blind and handicapped persons;
(v) two representatives representing the associations or voluntary organisations
engaged in the welfare of blind and other handicapped persons;
(vi) four members of Parliament, two from each House to be nominated by
the Speaker of the House of the People and Chairman of the Council of States.
(3) The Union Minister of Welfare shall be the Chairman of the National Council.
(4) It shall be the duty of the National Council to—
(a) evolve a national policy for the rehabilitation of blind and other handi-
capped persons;
(b) start new programme, services and pilot projects for the rehabilitation of
handicapped and blind persons;
(c) review and suggest amendments to the existing laws or suggest new
legislation for the welfare of blind and other handicapped persons;
(d) review the facilities available to the blind and other handicapped persons
from time to time.
(5) The national Council shall meet at least once in every six months.
Establishment
of National
Council for the
Blind and
Handicapped.
2
5
10
15
20
25
35
40
30

4. Every employer shall, from the commencement of this Act, reserve not less than
six percent of the vacancies occurring in any calendar year in any employment in the
establishment to be filled in from among persons who are blind or physically handicapped
in an equal ratio.
5. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint
as many authorities as it deems necessary as Registration Authorities for the purpose of
registration of blind and other physically handicapped persons and may also define the
area within which each of such authority shall exercise its jurisdiction.
6. (1) Any blind or physically handicapped person, if he possesses the prescribed
qualifications and desires to get himself registered under this Act, shall make an applica-
tion in such form containing such particulars as may be prescribed, to the registration
authority within whose jurisdiction he resides and such authority shall register his name in
a register and issue him a certificate of registration.
(2) The register shall be maintained by the Registering Authority in such form and
in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. Every employer shall notify every vacancy to the Registering Authority within
whose jurisdiction his establishment is situated.
8. As soon as may be, after the notification under section (7), the Registration Au-
thority shall furnish a list of blind and other handicapped persons registered with it to the
employer notifying the vacancies who shall fill up the percentage of vacancies reserved for
the blind and other handicapped persons from the list furnished to him.
9. (1) Every employer shall maintain such records giving such particulars of the
blind and other handicapped persons in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The records so maintained by the employer shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable hours by such persons as may be authorised by the appropriate Government.
10. The appropriate Government shall give financial assistance of rupees three
hundred per month to every unemployed blind or physically handicapped person
whose name appears in the register maintained under section 6 of this Act till such
time he is given an employment.
11. Any employer who contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
12. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person
who, at the time of committing the offence was incharge of and was responsible to the
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence under this Act.
13. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any department of the
Government, the head of such department shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
14. Every blind and handicapped person shall have the right and be eligible to re-
ceive free of cost medical, surgical and other kinds of treatment, aids, appliances and
equipments which may be helpful in reducing the adverse effects of disablement and re-
store the functional abilities of the blind and handicapped persons.
Employers to
reserve
vacancies in
employment.
Appointment of
Registering
Authorities.
Registration of
blind and other
handicapped
persons.
Employers to
notify
vacancies to
Registering
authorities.
Authorities to
furnish list of
blind and other
handicapped
persons to
employers.
Employer to
maintain
records of blind
and other
handicapped
persons.
Financial
assistance in
case of
unemployment.
Penalty.
Offences by
Companies.
Offences by
Government
departments.
Other right of
the blind and
other
handicapped
persons.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

15. For the welfare of the blind and other handicapped persons, the appropriate
Government shall—
(a) reserve five percent, of all housing units constructed by it;
(b) provide training and other facilities to enable them to participate in sports,
social and cultural activities;
(c) provide training for gainful employment in the institutions to be set up for
the purpose;
(d) provide free passage for travel by road, inland  navigation or by air;
(e) provide all aids, appliances, equipments and other articles used in the
treatment, training, employment or in their economic resettlement;
(f) provide interest free loans and other financial assistance for self employ-
ment;
(g) undertake measures for the prevention of blindness and disability as may
be found necessary.
16. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Welfare
measures for
the blind and
handicapped
persons.
Power to make
rules.
4
5
10
15

5
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4853RS.PM5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The worst disability that a human being can suffer from is blindness. Darkness
becomes the fate of such a person. There are millions of blind persons in the country
suffering from this worst disability. Though many of them are talented they are unable to
secure suitable employment. As such, they are financially crippled. They have no
independent or adequate means of livelihood and they spend their lives in agony and
distress. The same is the fate of other physically and mentally handicapped persons in the
country who number in crores.
The nation has a responsibility to look after the blind and other disabled persons so
as to make them useful citizens of the country. There is a need for a national body to evolve
a national policy for the care and rehabilitation of the blind and disabled persons and to
coordinate the activities of the different agencies functioning in this field. It is also necessary
that adequate job opportunities are provided to the blind and other disabled persons through
various schemes, including reservation of jobs in Government organisations and public as
well as Private Sector Organisations.
For this they should be given adequate training in various fields and vocations. They
should also be given proper treatment in hospitals, and should also be provided with
necessary equipments and para-medical support to improve their general well being.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
S. S. AHLUWALIA.

6
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4853RS.PM5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Council for the
blind and handicapped persons. Clause 5 provides for the appointment of Registration
Authorities. Clause 10 provides for financial assistance to blind and other handicapped
persons in case of unemployment. Clause 14 provides for some facilities to the blind and
disabled persons and clause 15 provides for other welfare measures for them. The Bill, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crores is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

7
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4853RS.PM5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. As such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

8
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4853RS.PM5
RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation, reservation of jobs and other welfare measures for the
blind and other physically handicapped persons in the country and for matter connected
therewith.
(Shri S. S. Ahluwalia, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—4853RS—14-02-2002.