Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE TRADERS, BUSINESSMEN, PROFESSIONALS AND SELF-
EMPLOYED PERSONS (WELFARE AND SOCIAL SECURITY)
BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare and protection of such citizens, who are in business or trade,
including small trades, commerce and industry, small and medium scale industries and
professionals like doctors, advocates architects, artists, artisans, actors, sportsmen,
including a large number of self-employed persons and pay taxes to the Government
but are not covered under any of the existing welfare schemes in respect of their
social and financial security, by providing them facilities of pension,
family pension,  medical assistance, etc., and to provide them
a life of dignity, peace and  financial security in their old
age or disability, and for the welfare  measures
to be undertaken by the State for the said
category of   citizens and for matters
connected therewith  or incidental
thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Traders, Businessmen, Professionals and Self-
Employed Persons (Welfare and Social Security) Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. VIII  of 2007
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(b) “authority” means the Department/Ministry authorized to calculate, decide
or disburse pension, including family pension and provide medical and other facilities
to the traders, businessmen, professionals and self-employed persons and their
spouses.
(c) “eligible member” means any person who is eligible to avail benefits under
the provisions of this Act and also includes their spouses.
(d) “fund” means the Contributory Welfare Fund created under section 3;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
Contributory Welfare Fund for the purpose of providing pension, family pension, medical
and other facilities to traders, businessmen, professionals and self-employed persons and
their spouses.
(2) The fund shall be administered by a Board comprising:—
(a) a Chairperson, who possesses adequate knowledge of the problems related
to people in business, trade, commerce, industry, etc., to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(b) two representatives of trade and industry and two representatives from
amongst eminent financial or tax experts to be nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The fund shall contain such sum of money as shall be earmarked by the Central
Government from the portion of the income-tax, paid annually, by the persons who are in
business, trade, profession or self-employed and who are not covered under any of the
existing welfare schemes in respect of their social and financial security.
4. (1) The fund shall be administered by the appropriate Government.
(2) The appropriate Government before administering the fund shall conduct a survey
in order to estimate the number of eligible members availing bnefits under this Act.
(3) The Central Government shall provide requisite funds from the fund to the
appropriate Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. (1) Any trader, businessman, professional or self-employed person who had been
paying income-tax for at least ten years till he attains the age of sixty years or becomes
disabled or retired or relinquished work/profession earlier for any valid reason whatsoever,
shall be entitled to receive pension and medical facilities, etc. and in the case of death of an
eligible member, his/her spouse shall be eligible for family pension and medical facilities,
etc., in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, from time to
time, after the commencement of this Act.
(2) The eligible members shall be provided the facility of free medical treatment in
the Government hospitals and dispensaries or other dispensaries, nursing homes and
clinics recognized by the appropriate Government, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The calculation of family pension, etc., shall be done by the concerned authority
taking into account the total period for which the person has worked and paid income-tax in
one or more work(s) profession(s), taken together, total amount of income-tax paid by him/
her during that period and/or during the last ten years till the date of his/her attaining the
age of sixty years or relinquishment of work/profession or disability or death of the eligible
member.
Definitions.
Establishment
of
Contributory
Welfare Fund.
Administration
of Fund.
Utilisation of
Funds.

3
6. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of
commencement of this Act, review the existing policy, if any, and formulate a National Policy
for the overall welfare and protection of the traders, businessmen, professionals and self-
employed persons so as to provide them a life of dignity, peace and financial security at the
fag end of their lives.
7. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time begin applicable to the proposed traders,
businessmen, professionals and self-employed persons who had been working in any part
of the country.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Miscellaneous
Provisions.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The people, who are in business, trade, commerce and industry, including small trades,
small and medium scale industries, professionals like doctors, advocates, architects, artists,
artisans, shopkeepers, actors, sportsmen, including a large number of self-employed persons
and others have got no welfare scheme formulated for them by the Government. These
sectors have been totally neglected in the matter of social security. They contribute towards
income-tax regularly, and during their day-to-day dealings, also pay all other taxes such as
sales tax, service tax, customs, and excise duty, VAT, etc. to the Government either directly or
indirectly. Apart from that, a large number of such persons work as agents for collecting
these taxes from the public and depositing the same with the Govt. Besides, many of them
provide employment to thousands of people in their business, trade, profession, etc., and in
a way, help the Government to solve the problem of unemployment upto some extent. Such
employers deserve special appreciation and need to be encouraged and rewarded suitably.
Thus, the persons belonging to the above said categories contribute maximum to the
Government revenue. Government should therefore, make appropriate provisions to safeguard
their interests and  compensate them suitably in their old age. It is proposed that while they
are working and contributing  taxes to the Government regulary, certain portion of the income-
tax paid by them, may be earmarked separately for their future social security which shall be
repaid to the beneficiaries by way of pension and medical facilities, etc., when they attain the
age of sixty years or become incapacitated due to any reason whatsoever, or quit their work,
profession or business due to any valid reasons after continuously contributing towards
income-tax for at least ten years, whether they were in a single business/trade, etc. or
otherwise.
If the proposed Bill is passed, this will inspire and encourage all the beneficiaries, to
pay more and more taxes to the Government and would attract and motivate a large number
of tax evaders and non-taxpayers to voluntarily opt to pay taxes and join the Scheme, in
order to be eligible to enjoy the benefits thereof in future. This would certainly keep adding
to the Government's revenue year after year.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above obejctives
GIREESH KUMAR SANGHI
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the facility of pension and medical facilities, etc. shall
be provided from the Contributory Welfare Fund to be set up and organized by the Central
Government; Clause 5 provides for free medical treatment in Government hospitals and
dispensaries or other dispensaries, nursing homes and clinics recognized by the appropriate
Government. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupess eighty thousand crores may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum. On the other hand, a sum of about rupees fifty thousand crores,
which may further increase in future, may be added to the Government’s revenue each year
if the proposed Bill is passed.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare and protection of such citizens, who are in business or trade,
including small trades, commerce and industry, small and medium scale industries and
professionals like doctors, advocates architects, artists, artisans, actors, sportsmen,
including a large number of self-employed persons and pay taxes to the Government
but are not covered under any of the existing welfare schemes in respect of their
social and financial security, by providing them facilities of pension,
family pension,  medical assistance, etc., and to provide them
a life of dignity, peace and  financial security in their old
age or disability, and for the welfare  measures
to be undertaken by the State for the said
category of   citizens and for matters
connected therewith  or incidental
thereto.
—————
(Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND— 1213RS—16-03-2007.