AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026 
B ill No. VIII of  2026 
THE ONLINE MATRIMONIAL AND DATING SERVICES 
(PROMOTION AND REGULATION) BILL, 2026 
_ _______________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
________________ 
C
HAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II 
PROHIBITION OF CASUAL DATING SERVICES 
3. Prohibition of casual dating services.
4. Prohibition of advertisements and promotions.
5. Prohibition on financial facilitation.
CHAPTER III 
PROMOTION AND REGULATION OF MATRIMONIAL SERVICES 
6. Promotion of matrimonial services.
7. Registration and regulation of matrimonial services.
8. Establishment of Matrimonial Services Authority.
9. Functions and powers of the Authority.
CHAPTER IV 
ENFORCEMENT 
10. Power to block access.
11. Investigation and search.
CHAPTER V 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
12. Punishment for offering casual dating services.
13. Punishment for advertisements.
14. Punishment for financial facilitation.
15. Enhanced punishment for repeat offences.
16. Offences to be cognisable and bailable.
17. Offences by companies.

(ii) 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
CLAUSES 
18. Provision of funds.
19. Accounts and Audit.
20. Annual Report.
21. Annual Report and Audit Report to be laid before Parliament.
22. Act to have overriding effect.
23. Protection of action taken in good faith.
24. Power to make rules.
25. Power to remove difficulties.
26. Amendments to the Information Technology Act, 2000.
27. Savings for existing matrimonial services.
28. Repeal and transitional provisions.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026 
B ill No. VIII of  2026 
THE ONLINE MATRIMONIAL AND DATING SERVICES 
(PROMOTION AND REGULATION) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the prohibition of casual online dating services that promote transient 
and superficial relationships, while promoting and regulating serious 
matrimonial services aligned with cultural and familial 
ethos of the country; to protect users, particularly 
women and youth, from exploitation, harassment, 
and social harms; to preserve family 
structures and national social 
fabric, and for matters 
connected therewith 
or incidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5
 
10 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Online Matrimonial and Dating Services
(Promotion and Regulation) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act:
Provided that upon commencement of provisions relating to the 
prohibition of casual online dating services, a grace period of three 
months shall be provided for existing casual dating services to cease 
operations and migrate user data in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Short title a nd 
commencement. 

 
2 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "Authority" means the Matrimonial Services Authority 
established under section 8; 
(b) "casual dating service" means any online platform, application 
or intermediary that primarily facilitates transien t, superficial, or non-
committal romantic or sexual encounters through fea tures such as 
swipe-based matching, algorithmic promotion of shor t-term 
interactions, or lack of mandatory family or matrim onial intent 
verification;  
(c) "matrimonial service" means any online platform, ap plication 
or intermediary focused on facilitating long- term marital alliances with 
emphasis on cultural, familial, religious, and comp atibility-based 
matching, including verified family endorsements an d marriage-
oriented outcomes;  
(d) "online intermediary" means any platform offering d ating or 
matrimonial services, as defined under clause (w)  of section 2 of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000; 
(e)  "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under t his Act; 
and 
(f) "user" means any person accessing, registering or a vailing 
services of a matrimonial service or casual dating service within the 
territory of India.  
Explanation. — The expressions used but not defined in this Act 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to th em in the 
Information Technology Act, 2000, as amended by this Act. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
21 of 2000 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 of 2000 . 
  CHAPTER II 
PROHIBITION OF CASUAL DATING SERVICES  
  
Prohibition of 
casual dating 
services.  
 
 3. No person, intermediary, or entity shall offer, hos t, advertise, or facilitate 
any casual dating service in India, whether operate d domestically or 
targeting users in the country from outside the territory. 30 
 
Prohibition of 
advertisements 
and promotions.  
 4. No person shall publish, display or disseminate any  advertisement, 
endorsement, or promotional material for casual dat ing services through any 
medium, including digital platforms. 
  
Prohibition on 
financial 
facilitation.  
 5. No bank, financial institution, payment system oper ator or digital payment 
intermediary shall process any transactions related  to casual dating services, 
including subscriptions or in-app purchases. 
35 
 
  CHAPTER III 
 PROMOTION AND REGULATION OF MATRIMONIAL SERVICES  
  
Promotion of 
matrimonial 
services.  
 6. The Central Government shall take such steps as it considers necessary to 
promote matrimonial services as constructive platforms, by — 
(a)  providing integration with government digital portals; 
(b)  launching public awareness campaigns on healthy mat rimonial 
practices, digital literacy, and family harmony; and 
(c) recognising matrimonial services which comply with cultural 
ethos and user safety standards. 
40 
45 
 
Registration and 
regulation of 
matrimonial 
services.  
 
 
 
7. (1) No matrimonial service shall operate in the country unless it is registered 
with the Authority established under section 8 in s uch manner as may be 
prescribed. 
  

3 
5 
(2) Every matrimonial service shall adhere to the guidelines on verified
profiles, family involvement, anti-harassment measures, and data privacy, as
may be prescribed.
(3) Every matrimonial service shall provide for age-appropriate matching,
cultural sensitivity, a nd grievance redressal, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
1
0 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an
Authority to be known as the Matrimonial Services Authority to
perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of the following Members, to be appointed
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette,
namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence, integrity
and standing, having not less than twenty years’ experience in law, 
public administration, social policy, digital governance, or regulation of 
technology platforms; 
(b) one Member (Legal), who shall be a person qualified to be
appointed as a Judge of a High Court or who has held the office of 
Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Law and 
Justice, or possesses at least fifteen years’ experience in cyber law, 
constitutional law, or regulatory adjudication; 
(c) one Member (Technology and Digital Platforms), having at
least fifteen years’ experience in information technology, platform 
governance, algorithmic accountability, data security or digital public 
infrastructure; 
(d) one Member (Women and Child Safety), drawn from persons
having demonstrated experience of not less than fifteen years in the 
fields of women’s rights, child protection, social welfare, gender justice 
or victim support systems; 
(e) one Member (Sociology an
d Family Studies), being a
recognised academic or practitioner with substantial experience in 
sociology, demography, family studies, or social psychology, with 
particular expertise in Indian social institutions; 
(f) one Member (Consumer Protection and Grievance Redressal),
having experience in consumer law, public grievance mechanisms, or 
regulatory compliance and enforcement; 
(g) one Member ex-officio, not below the rank of Joint Secretary
to the Government of India, to be nominated by the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology; and 
(h) one Member ex-officio
, not below the rank of Joint Secretary
to the Government of India, to be nominated by the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development. 
(3) The Chairperson and Members, other than ex-officio Members, shall
hold office for a term of five years or until attaining the age of sixty- five
years, whichever is earlier, and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one
further term:
Provided that no person shall be appointed as Chairperson or 
Member after attaining the age of sixty-two years. 
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service including resignation by the Chairperson and
members or removal from Office shall be such as may be prescribed.
Establishment of 
Matrimonial 
Services 
Authority. 

4 
(5) No Chairperson or Member shall, during their term of office or for a
period of two years thereafter,—
(a) hold any office of profit in, or
(b) have any financial or managerial interest in any matrimonial
service, online intermediary, or digital platform regulated under this 
Act: 
Provided that a declaration of assets and interests shall be 
made at the time of appointment and annually thereafter. 
(6) The quorum for a meeting of the Authority shall be one- half of the total
number of Members, and decisions shall be taken by majority vote of the
Members present and voting, and in the event of equality of votes, the
Chairperson shall have a casting vote.
(7) The Authority shall be assisted by a Secretariat consisting of officers
and employees appointed by the Central Government, and the terms and
conditions of their service shall be such as may be prescribed.
5 
10 
15 
Functions and 
powers of the 
Authority. 
9. (1) The Authority shall oversee registration, categorisation, and compliance
of matrimonial services, issue codes of practice, and address public
grievances and promote innovation in matrimonial services, and ensure
alignment with familial values of the society.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing functions, the
Authority shall have powers to —
(a) register, suspend or cancel registration of casual dating and
matrimonial services; 
(b) issue binding codes of practice, advisories and compliance
directions; 
(c) conduct audits, inspections and inquiries;
(d) adjudicate complaints and impose penalties in accordance with
this Act; and 
(e) recommend policy measures to the Central Government.
20 
25 
CHAPTER IV 
ENFORCEMENT 
30 
Power to block 
access. 
10. The Central Government may, under section 69A of the Information
Technology Act, 2000, as amended by this Act, direct blocking of access to
any casual dating services.
21 of 2000. 
Investigation and 
search. 
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the
time being in force, the Central Government may, by notification, authorize
any officer or class of officers of the Central Government, Authority or
State Government to exercise the power to investigate, search, seize, and
arrest without warrant for offences under this Act, in accordance with the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
35 
40 46 of 2023. 
CHAPTER V 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
Punishment for 
offering casual 
dating services. 
12. Whoever offers or facilitates a casual dating service shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine
which may extend to one crore rupees. 45 
Punishment for 
advertisements. 
13. Whoever advertises a casual dating service shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine
which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
Punishment for 
financial 
facilitation. 
14. Whoever facilitates financial transactions for casual dating services shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years
and with fine which may extend to one crore rupees.
50 

 
5 
  15. For subsequent convictions under sections 12, 13 and 14, imprisonment may 
extend to five years and fine to two crore rupees. 
 Enhanced 
punishment for 
repeat offences.  
  16. All offences under this Act shall be cognisable and bailable.  Offences to be 
cognisable and 
bailable.  
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
17. (1)  Where an offence has been committed by a company, e very person who, 
at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of that part of the  business of the company 
as well a s the company, shall be liable to be proceeded agai nst and punished 
accordingly. 
(2)  Nothing contained in sub-section (1)  shall render any such person liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly un der this act, if he 
pr oves that the offence was committed without his kno wledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , where an offence 
under this act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or conn ivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any dire ctor, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manage r, secretary or other  
officer shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence  and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall hold an independent 
director or a non-executive director of a company w ho is not involved 
in the actual decision making, liable for such offence. 
Explanation .— for the purposes of this section, the expressions— 
(a)  “company” means a body corporate, and includes— 
(i)  a firm; and 
(ii)  an association of persons or a body of individuals  
whether incorporated or not; and 
(b)  “director”, in relation to— 
(i)  a firm, means a partner in the firm; 
(ii)  any association of persons or a body of individual s, 
means any member controlling its affairs thereof. 
 Offences by 
companies.  
  CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
  
 
35 
18. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriati on made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority, 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 Provision of 
funds.  
 
40 
 (2)  The amounts levied under the Act for the following  purposes shall be 
credited to the Authority—  
(a)  registration fees payable by matrimonial services;  
(b)  renewal fees and compliance-related charges;  
(c) fines imposed for contraventions under the Act; and  
(d)  such other fees as may be prescribed by rules. 
  
 
45 
19. (1)  The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and o ther relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such  form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultatio n with the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India.  
 
 
 
 
 
Accounts  and 
audit.  

 
6 
(2)  The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by hi m and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.  
(3)  The Comptroller and Auditor- General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the  Authority under this Act 
shall have the same rights and privileges and the a uthority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor- General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts an d, in particular, shall 
have the right to demand the production of books, a ccounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to insp ect any of the offices 
of the Authority. 
(4)  The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the  Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in thi s behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be for warded annually to the 
Central Government by the Authority. 
5 
10 
15 
Annual Report.   20. The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at su ch time, for each 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual re port, giving a full account 
of its activities during the previous financial yea r and forward a copy 
thereof to the Central Government. 20 
 
Annual report and 
audit report to be 
laid before 
Parliament.  
 21. The Central Government shall cause the annual repor t together with a 
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in 
so far as they relate to the Central Government, an d the reasons for the non-  
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and the audit report to 
be laid as soon as may be after the reports are rec eived, before each House 
of Parliament. 
25 
 
Act to have 
overriding effect.  
 22. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwit hstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force. 
  
Protection of 
action taken   in 
good faith.  
 23. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings sha ll lie against the 
Government or Authority or its members or its offic ers for actions taken in 
good faith in pursuance of this Act or of rules made thereunder. 
30 
 
Power to make 
rules.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for promotion, registration, enforcement  and to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoin g powers, such rules 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a)  the form and manner of registration of matrimonial services 
with the Authority;  
(b)  the  eligibility  conditions,  verification  proto cols  and 
compliance requirements for matrimonial services;  
(c)  standards for user safety, grievance redressal, da ta protection, 
and prevention of harassment;  
(d)  the fees payable for registration, renewal and othe r regulatory 
purposes;  
(e)  the powers, functions and procedure to be followed by the 
Authority;  
(f)  the manner of conducting inspections, audits and in quiries by 
the Authority;  
(g)  the conditions subject to which exemptions, if any , may be 
granted; and  
(h)  any other matter which is required to be, or may b e, prescribed 
under the Act. 
35 
40 
45 
50 
 

 
7 
5 
10 
(3)  Every rule made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parli ament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which ma y b e comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or th e successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica tion in the rule, or both 
Houses agre e that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effec t, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment sh all be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 
15 
25. (1)  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the pr ovisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the O fficial Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provision s of this Act as may 
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the  expiry of a period 
of two years from the date of commencement of the Act. 
(2)  Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 Power  to 
remove 
difficulties.  
21 of 2000. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
26. (1)  In section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 200 0 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1) :— 
(i)  after clause (f) , the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(fa)  “casual dating service” shall have the same meanin g as 
assigned to it under clause (a)  of section 2 of the Online 
Matrimonial and Dating Services (Promotion and Regu lation) 
Act, 2026;”; 
(ii)  after clause (y) , the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(ya)  “matrimonial service” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it under clause (b)  
of section 2 of the Online 
Matrimonial and Dating Services (Promotion and Regu lation) 
Act, 2026;”; 
(iii)  after clause (zb) , the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(zba)  
“prohibited online dating intermediary” means any 
intermediary offering or facilitating a casual dati ng service as 
defined under the Online Matrimonial and Dating Ser vices 
(Promotion and Regulation) Act, 2026;”. 
 (2)  In section 69A of the principal Act, in sub-sectio n (1) , after the words 
“or intermediary”, the words “including any prohibi ted online dating 
intermediary” shall be inserted. 
(3)  After section 79A of the principal Act, the follow ing section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“79B.  Liability of prohibited online dating intermediaries.— 
(1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 79, no 
intermediary shall claim safe harbour protection un der this section 
if it hosts, facilitates, or enables access to a ca sual dating service 
as defined under the Online Matrimonial and Dating Services 
(Promotion and Regulation) Act, 2026. 
(2)  Any intermediary found in violation shall be liabl e for 
penalties under the said Act and shall forthwith ce ase operations 
within India.” 
 Amendments to 
the Information 
Technology Act, 
2000.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
Savings for 
existing 
matrimonial 
services. 
27. Any intermediary operating as a matrimonial service existing on the date of
commencement of this Act shall be deemed provisionally registered for a
period of three months, within which it must obtain registration under
section 7.
Repeal and 
transitional 
provisions. 
28. All existing guidelines, circulars, or advisories issued by the Ministry of
Electronics and Information Technology or any authority in respect of
online dating platforms inconsistent with this Act stand repealed from the
date of commencement of this Act.
5 

 
9 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS   
   The rapid proliferation of online casual dating applications in India demands 
urgent intervention to protect the nation's familial ethos and social fabric.  This Bill 
seeks to ban casual dating services while promoting regulated matrimonial 
platforms aligned with Indian values. 
2. The dating app sector is projected to reach $1.42 billion by 2030, with user 
numbers surging 293 per cent. from 20 million (2018) to 82.4 million (2023). 
Adoption is widespread, with 70 per cent. of users from tier-2/3 cities (e. g., Pune, Ahmedabad), where 54 per cent. reside and contribute 45 per cent. of revenues, 
clashing with traditional values by prioritising superficial, swipe- driven encounters 
over lasting commitments. 
3. These apps promote westernised fleeting relationships, undermining India's 
heritage of family, mutual respect, and collective well- being. A sociological study highlights erosion of familial ties coupled with urban isolation, emotional voids, 
and strained bonds from transient connections. 
4. Women face heightened risks of harassment, catfishing, stalking, and 
assault; 83 per cent. report online abuse (one in three weekly). A Delhi case 
involved a 30-year-old woman raped and defrauded of  rupees twenty two lakh via 
a dating app, deterring justice due to stigma. 
6. Apps foster non-marital intimate partnerships linked to depression, low self-
esteem, and commodification of worth; a Jaipur study found 33.3 per cent. of youth 
struggling with meaningful relationships. Patriarchal norms amplify harassment, 
leading to withdrawal. NCRB data shows less than 29.6 per cent. cybercrime 
conviction rates, strained by underreporting and probes. 
7. Transient relationships weaken family structures, exposing children to  mental health risks like anxiety and depression. Western parallels show adolescents 
from single-parent families exhibit more behavioral issues and lower life quality, a 
cautionary trend for India where stable units are vital for resilient generations. 
8. Blind adoption of Silicon Valley's individualism risks rising divorce rates and youth alienation, as seen in Western societies. India must prioritise dharma, 
harmony, and community over fleeting models. 
9. In conclusion, regulation is insufficient; an outr ight ban on casual dating services is imperative to shield youth, preserve families, and reaffirm cultural 
ethos, while promoting matrimonial alternatives fosters a value- aligned digital 
ecosystem. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
 
FAUZIA KHAN. 
  
 
  
5. Gender imbalance (70 per cent. male users)leads to heightened competition, 
emotional vulnerability and susceptibility to manipulation; This structural 
imbalance has been systematically exploited by organised criminal networks which 
deploy fabricated profiles to induce users into fraudulent engagements.

10 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Matrimonial Services 
Authority, its composition including appointment of Chairperson, Members, 
officers and employees of the Authority, their salaries and allowances. These 
expenses shall be met from the Consolidated Fund of India, to the extent such 
expenditure is not otherwise met by the Authority through fees or fines levied 
under the Act. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve recurring and non- recurring 
expenditure from t he Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is 
difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 

11 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
As the rules or orders will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 
Clause 24  of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
 carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue orders, by
 notification, for removing difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act
 for a period of two years from the commencement thereof. 

RAJYA SABHA 
______________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the prohibition of casual online dating services that promote transient 
and superficial relationships, while promoting and regulating serious 
matrimonial services aligned with cultural and familial 
ethos of the country; to protect users, particularly 
women and youth, from exploitation, harassment, 
and social harms; to preserve family 
structures and national social 
fabric, and for matters 
connected therewith 
or incidental 
thereto. 
______________ 
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–073–10.02.2026.