1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
Bill No. VIII of  2018
5

2
2. For article 48A of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"48A. (1) The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment so
as to ensure a pollution-free environment for its citizens and to safeguard the forests
and wild life of the country.
(2) The State shall strive hard to ensure that thirty-five per cent. of the total
geographical area of the country be covered under forest or trees.".
3. In article 51A of the Constitution, for clause ( g), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers
and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures and to actively participate in the
State's endeavour to promote the forest cover of the country to thirty-five per cent. of the
total geographical area."
Amendment
of article 51A.
Substitution of
article 48A.
Protection and
improvement
of
environment
and
safeguarding
forests and wild
life.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Forest is a biological entity in the fascinating web of nature and always in a state of
dynamic equilibrium. Forestry sector is an important ingredient in the economic and social
fabrics of a country. The role of forests is significant in maintaining ecological balance. They
provide for the continuity of the world's biodiversity which is necessary for economic
development, human livelihood, medical discoveries, and to provide environment adaptive
responses. Forests are also important because they stabilize climate, prevent soil erosion,
watershed protection and provides habitat to thousands of life forms.
India accounts for about 24 per cent. of the total geographical area of the world and is
also home to 17 per cent. of the world population. India is one of the richest countries in the
world in terms of biodiversity making it one of the megadiverse countries accounting for
nearly 8 per cent. of the species of the world. It is estimated that nearly 1/3rd of Indian plants
are endemic, being found nowhere else in the world.
The National Forest Policy, 1988 embodies the principles of sustainable forest
management and mandated an increase in the forest or tree cover in the country to
33 per cent. of the land area. However, according to the India State of Forest Report (ISFR)
2015, the total forest and tree cover is 79.42 million hectare, which is only 24.16 of the total
geographical area of the country. The over-exploitation of forest products to meet the various
demands, including unrecorded removal, overgrazing and encroachments have led to poor
productivity and degradation of forests.
The Bill proposes to conserve the natural heritage of the country by preserving the
remaining natural forests and at the same time also promote the increase in the forest cover
with the vast variety of flora and fauna by ensuring that the State with active participation of
the citizens will be able to preserve and promote the remarkable biological diversity and
genetic resources of the country.
Hence this Bill.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE CONSTITUTION  OF INDIA
* * * * *
48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to
safeguard the forests and wild life of the country.
* * * * *
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
* * * * *
(g) To protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers and wild life and to have compassion for living creatures;
Protection and
improvement
environment
and safeguards
of forests and
wild life.
4
Fundamental
duties.

5
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4314RS(S3)—11-12-2019.