AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. VIII of 2025 
THE DIGITAL HEALTH RECORDS (MANDATORY USE) 
BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to mandate the use of digital health records for patients in government 
healthcare establishments, and for public servants, to ensure 
transparency, improve healthcare efficiency, and build  
a comprehensive health data ecosystem and  
for matters connected therewith  
and incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Digital Health Records (Mandatory Use) Act,
2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title  and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “ABHA” or ‘ABHA ID’ means the Ayushman Bharat Health
Account, a unique electronic identifier for a patient, under the Ayushman 
Bharat Digital Mission administered by the Union Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare; 
(b) “digital health record” means electronic documentation of a
patient’s medical history, treatment, diagnostic test results, 
prescriptions, and such other health related data, as may be prescribed; 
(c) “government healthcare establishment” or “healthcare
establishment” or “healthcare service provider” means any clinical 
establishment, as defined under the Clinical Establishments 
(Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010, owned, controlled, or funded 
by the Central Government, State Government, or any local authority, 
and provides healthcare services to the general public; 
(d) “helpdesk” means a designated service centre within healthcare
establishments to assist patients with the creation and use of ABHA 
accounts; 
(e) “patient” means an individual who seeks healthcare facility in
a government healthcare establishment on account of a real or 
perceived illness or for disease prevention or health promotion; 
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “public servant”, shall be any person as defined in clause (28)
of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023); and 
(h) “telemedicine service” means use of digitally stored
information and communication technologies to provide healthcare 
services, especially in cases where distance is a critical factor. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
 
23 of 2010. 
Mandatory 
Digital Health 
Records. 
3. (1) Every patient at a government healthcare establishment shall be required
to create and use an ABHA ID for accessing medical services.
(2) All public servant shall create and maintain their health records digitally
through ABHA. 30 
Prohibition of 
unauthorized 
use of ABHA 
ID. 
4. No healthcare provider, authority, or entity shall collect, store, or process a
patients’ ABHA ID or associated digital health records without prior consent
of the patient, except as provided under this Act or other applicable laws.
Responsibilities 
of government 
healthcare 
establishments 
5. (1) Every government healthcare establishment shall:
(a) integrate its systems with the Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission
to facilitate the seamless creation and use of ABHA accounts; 
(b)  facilitate the creation of ABHA IDs for patients at no cost
through designated helpdesks; and
(c) undertake regular awareness programs to educate patients about
the benefits of digital health records and encourage voluntary adoption.
(2) Every government healthcare establishment shall comply with standards
for data security, interoperability, and privacy as prescribed under this Act
and other applicable laws.
35 
40 
Rights and 
Safeguards. 
6. (1) The digital health records generated or maintained under this Act shall be
subject to the provisions of the Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, and other
applicable data protection laws.
(2) Every patient shall retain the following rights concerning his digital health
records, in such manner as may be prescribed:
(i) the right to access the digital health records, free of charge;
45 

3 
5 
(ii) the right to request corrections to inaccuracies in their health
records; and 
(iii) the right to seek erasure of their health records or restrict
processing, subject to applicable laws. 
(3) The Central Government may prescribe additional safeguards to ens ure
rights of a patient.
10 
15 
20 
7. (1) The Central Government shall, —
(a) institute a mechanism for monitoring the implementation of the
provisions of this Act by such nodal authority, as may be prescribed; 
and 
(b) periodically review global standards and best practices in digital
health records and incorporate relevant measure s to strengthen the 
Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission. 
(2) The State Governments shall, —
(a) collaborate with the nodal authority of the Central Government
to ensure seamless integration of the Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission
with healthcare service providers under the State Government; 
(b) establish state-level help desks to assist patients in creating and
managing ABHA IDs; and 
(c) ensure that all healthcare service provides under State
Government comply with the provisions of this Act and provide 
necessary infrastructure for the generation and use of ABHA IDs. 
Responsibility of 
Central and State 
Government. 
25 
30 
8. (1) The Central Government may incentivise the adoption and use of ABHA
IDs for patients who create and actively use ABHA ID, which may include,
but not limited to, —
(a) preference in sc heduling appointments in Outpatient
Departments (OPD) of government healthcare establishments; 
(b) eligibility for discounts or financial assistance for treatments in
government healthcare facilities, as may be prescribed; and 
(c) access to telemedicine services facilitated by the government,
enabling consultations via phone or digital platforms. 
(2) The continuation of such incentives provided in accordance with sub -
section (1) shall be subject to active usage of the ABHA account.
Incentives for 
adoption and use of 
ABHA ID. 
35 
40 
9. (1)  Every healthcare establishment, —
(a) shall make efforts to simplify the process of  creating ABHA
accounts, particularly for  patients unfamiliar with digital systems; and 
(b) may use Artificial Intelligence (AI) -driven analytics to provide
personalized healthcare insights and improve treatment accuracy. 
(2) The Central Government shall make efforts to integrate ABHA usage with
existing healthcare schemes such as Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-
JA
Y) and Employees' State Insurance Scheme (ESI) for seamless benefits.  
Provisions for 
User-Friendliness. 
45 
10. (1) The digital health records shall serve as the foundation for telemedicine
services, enabling healthcare service providers to access patient histories,
diagnostic reports, and treatment plans remotely.
(2) Every Government healthcare establishment and tele medicine service
provider shall integrate with the Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission to provide
real-time access to patient health records for consultations.
Digital Health 
Records and 
Telemedicine. 

4 
Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State
Governments, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
Penalty. 12. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act shall be liable to such
penalties as specified under section 40 and section 45 of the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010.
5 
23 of 2010. 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency.
10 
Power to 
make rules. 
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for the proper implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule sha ll thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
15 
20 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 The objectives of the provisions of this Bill are the following: 
1. Enhancement of He althcare Quality: Access to comprehensive
health records improves diagnosis and treatment. 
2. Promotion of Efficiency: D i gitalization reduces redundancies
and administrative burdens. 
3. Empowerment of Pa tients: Patients can make informed
decisions about their health. 
4. Public Health Insights: Aggregated, anonymized data aids
disease monitoring and policy formulation. 
5. Alignment with Global Standards: Ensures India’s healthcare
sys
tem is on par with developed nations. 
6. Incentives to D rive Adoption: Encouraging adoption through
priority services and financial assistance. 
7. Integration of Telemedicine with Digital Health Records :
Telemedicine services have been recognized as a critical tool in 
improving access to healthcare, especially in rural and remote areas.  
  Drawing inspiration from countries like Australia, where digital health 
records are seamlessly integrated into telehealth systems, India can significantly 
improve healthcare delivery through this model. By linking digital health records 
to telemedicine, it can be ensured that patients receive consistent, efficient, and 
high-quality care regardless of location. 
He
nce, this Bill. 
SHAKTISINH GOHIL 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 11 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to 
the State Governments, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
  Thus, the Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India of an annual recurring expenditure of the estimated amount of rupees 
two hundred crore and a non -recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred 
crore. 

7 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purpose of this Bill. As the rules relate to the matters of details 
only the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______________ 
A 
BILL 
to mandate the use of digital health records for patients in government 
healthcare establishments, and for public servants, to ensure 
transparency, improve healthcare efficiency, and build  
a comprehensive health data ecosystem and  
for matters connected therewith  
and incidental thereto. 
_______________ 
(Shri Shaktisinh Gohil, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–107–10.02.2025. 