Bill No. VIII of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
THE INCEST OFFENCES AND SEXUAL ABUSE OF FEMALES IN
FAMILY (PREVENTION) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
to define the offences relating to incest and sexual abuse of females in family and
prescribe the special procedure for punishment for the offences relating
to incest and sexual abuse of females in family and matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Incest Offences and Sexual Abuse of females in
Family  (Prevention) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'appropriate Government' means in the case of a State, the Government of that State
and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) 'child' means any female below the age of 12 years;
(c) 'family member' means grand-mother, mother, daughter, sister, sister-in-law and
daughter-in-law;
(d) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2020
Definitions.Definitions.
5
10

2
(e) 'sexual abuse' includes sexual remarks, lewd gestures, inappropriate physical contact,
touching and patting, molestation and displaying pornographic material to a family member;
(f) words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined in the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 or Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the same meanings respectively
assigned to them in those laws.
3. Any person who has sexually intercourse with his family member or attempts to
have sexual intercourse with such family member shall be guilty of the offence of incest and
shall be punished as per the provisions of this Act.
4. Any person who sexually abuse any of his family member shall be guilty of the
offence of sexual abuse and shall be punished as per the provisions of this Act.
Explanation—For the purposes of sections 3 and 4, the consent of the family member
shall not be available as defence to the accused.
5. Whoever is found guilty of offence under:
(i) section 3, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term for life and
shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that if the victim is a child, offender shall be punished with death.
(ii) section 4, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term of five
years which may extend upto seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force, in
the trial under this Act, the burden of proof as to the innocence shall be on the accused and
the victim shall have the right to lead evidence in rebuttal.
7. The procededings under this Act, shall be tried by Special Courts by a woman
magistrate and the Court shall follow such procedure as may be determined by it in consultation
with District Judge.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
9. Save as provided under this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, shall be applicable to the trial under this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to incest and sexual
abuse.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under that rule.
45 of 1860.
1 of 1974.
Incest
Offences.
Sexual abuse
of family
member.
Penalty.
Burden of
proof.
Special Court.
Offences to
be cognizable
and non-
bailable.
Provisions of
the Code of
Criminal
Procedure to
be applied.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
1 of 1976.
1 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Incest and sexual abuse of family members is deviant behaviour. Every day the news of
incestuous relations and sexual abuse of females in the family is heard and read about in the
media. This kind of gender-based violence threatens the wellbeing, rights and dignity of
women.
The society is in a state of denial that incest and sexual abuse in the family exists.
Victims are often reluctant to report incest or sexual abuse by a family member as the offender
in most of the cases is a close family member. This problem is made worse by the fact that
there is no law adequate to prosecute such criminals. There is a complete absence of any
support system outside the family to help the victims. The problem gets worse by the fact
that family in our Indian system is considered sacred, and any abuse that happens, is met
with complete disbelief. As of today, there is no law on offenses relating to incest and sexual
abuse within the family in India.
In many developed countries, incest is considered a crime. The United Kingdom has a
law on it since 1908, which provides punishment for fourteen years and many other countries
have laws on incest and sexual abuse in the family. In the United States also a separate law
is there.
There is a consistent demand for a definite law on incest and sexual abuse in the family
for quite some time. It is, therefore, extremely imperative and crucial that a separate and strict
law should be enacted to counter this kind of gender violence in India.
Hence this Bill.
DR. SASMIT PATRA

MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill and the rules with relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to define the offences relating to incest and sexual abuse of females in family and
prescribe the special procedure for punishment for the offences relating
to incest and sexual abuse of females in family and matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—6007RS(S3)—16-03-2020.