THE PROMOTION OF CYCLING AND PROVISION OF COMPULSORY
DEDICATED CYCLE CORRIDOR ALONG MAJOR ROADS AND
HIGHWAYS BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of cycling by way of giving incentives to the employees by
employers including Government, providing subsidy on purchase of bicycles
to the general public and for the provision of compulsory dedicated
cycle corridor along major public roads and highways in the
country and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of Cycling and Provision of Dedicated
Cycle Corridor along Major Roads and Highways Bill, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. VIII of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 26TH FEBRUARY, 2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for
different—
(a)  provisions of this Act;
(b)  areas;
(c)  roads or highways.
2. Unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)  ''appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to promote eco-friendly and healthy practice
of cycling in a big way and also provide dedicated cycle corridors along major roads and
highways passing through its territorial jurisdiction in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1)
the appropriate Government may for the purposes of this Act,—
(a) provide subsidy to the general public for purchasing bicycles;
(b) give incentives and attractive cycle allowance to its employees for
commuting to office and back home;
(c) consider giving tax exemptions to promote cycling;
(d) provide and construct dedicated cycle tracks along arterial streets, main
roads and highways;
(e) make provision for compulsory cycle lanes along all major roads including
flyovers;
(f) prepare and implement bicycle master plans for major cities and urban
areas;
(g) focus on the bicycle as a mode of transport;
(h) ensure that cycle tracks are not taken over for unauthorised parking by
motor vehicles or to become dumps for waste; and
(i) make such other provisions as it may deem necessary and expedient for the
purposes of this Act.
4. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provi-
sions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty
and any such order shall be final and binding.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States and Union Territories for implementing
the provisions of this Act.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Appropriate
Government
to promote
cycling and
provide
dedicated
cycle
corridors.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
These days environmental pollution is the hot topic of debates on television channels,
newspapers, magazines and other fora. The National Capital and National Capital Region
(NCR) have been dubbed as one of the most polluted in the globe. The Judiciary has
declared that we are living in the gas chamber. In an effort to meet the twin objectives of
limiting vehicular pollution and curbing road congestion Delhi Government wants to
promote cycling by giving subsidy for bicycle purchases. But unfortunately Delhi's urban
culture refuses to recognize the bicycle as a mode of transport. This is mainly because
there is lack of cycle readiness of the capital and NCR roads. There are only a few
dedicated lanes for cycling and even they are not fit for cycling for various reasons. The
streets are also dangerous for cyclists because buses and cars do not respect their rights.
Cycles are not given way on main roads and they are often at risk when attempting to
evade the heavy flow of traffic. This kind of situation prevails not only in the National
Capital and NCR but throughout the country.
This situation exist despite the fact that our country is the second largest bicycle
producing country in the world after China and this 1.5 billion dollar industry produced
nearly 15.5 million bicycles in 2012-13 that is 10 percent of the total bicycles manufactured
globally and employed about one million people. But despite these figures cycling as an
alternative mode of urban transport has not really taken off in our country. Around half a
century ago almost 60 percent or road trips in the National Capital involved bicycles but
today experts reckon they constitute at best 4 percent of the city's commuters.
However, it is not the case everywhere. Some cities across the globe have made it
easier to ride bicycles. Ten famous cities of the globe which have bicycle lanes, dedicated
bicycle only paths and drivers who are generally more than willing to share the road are
Copenhagen and Amsterdam in Demark; Utrecht and Eindhoven in Netherlands; Strasbourg,
Nantes and Bordeaux in France; Malmo in Sweden; Antwerp in Belgium and Seville in
Spain. Germany has recently become the first nation in the globe to start cycle highways
with all the necessary facilities. There are separate lanes, each lane is 13 feet wide with
provision to overtake. There are no red lights along the highways and bicycle rider can
ride at high speed as he desires.
The success of odd and even car number formula in the National Capital has again
proved that where there is a will there is a way. Promoting cycling to contain environmental
pollution is also possible for which several steps are needed to be undertaken.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR DHOOT

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 provides for subsidy, allowance and tax exceptions for promotion of
cycling.
Clause 6 of the Bill makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide
adequate funds to the States and Union Territories for implementing the provisions of the
Bill. The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
not possible to quantify the expenditure at this juncture but it is estimated that a sum of
rupees one lakh crore may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees two lakh crore may also be involved as non recurring expenditure
for creation of assets throughout the country.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause  7 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of cycling by way of giving incentives to the employees by
employers including Government, providing subsidy on purchase of bicycles
to the general public and for the provision of compulsory dedicated
cycle corridor along major public roads and highways in the
country and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4603RS(S3)—26-02-2015.