THE WORKING WOMEN (PREVENTION OF SEXUAL
HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACES) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of sexual harassment or exploitation of working women at
their work places by their employers, superiors, fellow colleagues or by anyone who is
directly or indirectly connected with such work place through deterrent punishment
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Working Women (Prevention of Sexual Harassment
At Workplaces) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of State the Government of that
State and in other cases the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MARCH, 2006
Bill No. VIII of  2006
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "employer" means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment under the control of the appropriate
Government, the head of the Department or Ministry as the case may be;
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local authority or Local Self
Government, the Chief Executive Officer by whatever designation called.
(iii) in relation to other cases, the person or the authority who has the
ultimate control over the affairs of the work place.
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "sexual exploitation or harassment" includes any unwanted or unwarranted
gesture or verbal sexual advances, sexually explicit and derogatory statements or
remarks, avoidable and unwarranted physical contacts, willfully touching or patting,
suggestive sexual remarks, sexually slanted and obscene jokes, vulgar comments about
physical appearance, indecent invitations, use of pornographic material, demand for
sexual favours, demanding sexual favour by making telephone calls or sending SMS,
threats of physical assault or molestation on refusal by the women workers by their
male superiors, colleagues or any one who for the time being is in a position to sexually
exploit or harass the working women at any work place;
(e) "working woman" means any woman who is employed, whether directly or
through any agency for wages or for similar other considerations at any work place;
(f) "work place" includes a factory, mine, plantation, agricultural field, livestock
rearing site including poultry, hospital or nursing home, shop or business establishment,
brick kiln, construction site, banking or financial institutions including cooperative
ones, Government or semi-Government establishments or departments including post
offices and telecommunication, private office or service provider, cyber cafes and call
centres, mobile phone companies, schools, colleges, universities and like institutions
and such establishments wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of equestrian,
acrobatic and other performances, airlines, film industry and any such other place
where a woman is employed for any work whatsoever.
3. (1) Sexual exploitation or harassment of any working woman at her work place is
hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code or any other law for
the time being in force whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but may extend to five
years and also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the onus of proving the innocence shall be on the accused and the sexually harassed woman
shall have the right to lead evidence in rebuttal.
(2) The trial of an offence committed under this Act shall be held in camera if the
harassed woman so desires.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the case of a sexually harassed woman at a work place shall be pleaded either by herself or
with her consent by any women's organisation or the trade union of which she is a member.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall as soon as may be set up adequate number of
Complaint Committees in all its Ministries and Departments, Semi Government
Organizations, Public Sector Enterprises, Banking and Financial Institutions, Trusts and
local self bodies and in all the district Headquarters and Block levels for redressal of the
complaints made by the sexually exploited and harassed working women at their work places.
Prohibition of
sexual
exploitation
or harassment
of working
women at
workplace.
Penalty.
Burden of
proof and
trial in
camera etc.
Setting up of
Complaint
Committees.
45 of 1960

3
(2) The Complaint Committees shall consist of such members and the Committee
shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Half of the population of the nation is women who have been exploited for centuries.
However, with the change of time there is awakening amongst the women and, today, in
almost every field of economic activity, women form a good part of the workforce. As a result,
the number of working women is increasing very fast. Women have now to work under the
most disadvantageous service conditions in certain establishments and cases of their sexual
exploitation are also increasing day by day. Working women are very often sexually harassed
at the work places by their male employers, bosses, colleagues, and others but more often
these cases are not reported by them for fear of social ostracism, family pressure or reprisal
through threats and discriminatory treatment. As a result the working women often feel
insecure at their work places. The Supreme Court of India has taken this issue very seriously.
In the case of Vishaka and Others vs. State of Rajasthan and others, the Supreme Court has
laid down norms and guidelines to be followed by employers or other responsible persons in
the work places or other institutions to prevent or deter the commission of acts of sexual
harassment as also to provide the procedures for resolution , settlement or prosecution of
acts of sexual harassment by taking all steps required including setting up of Complaints
Committees for redressal of the complaint made by the victim. The National Commission for
Women has also taken up this issue very seriously. It has, however been found that the
Complaint Committees have not been formed in a number of cases.
Though the Supreme Court judgement is there, no law however, has been enacted to
deal  exclusively with  this issue, which is of vital importance for the working women throughout
the country.
Hence this Bill.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for setting up of Complaint Committees. The Bill if enacted
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees fifty crore may involve as recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India
per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of sexual harassment or exploitation of working women at their
work places by their employers, superiors, fellow colleagues or by anyone  who is
directly or indirectly connected with such work place through  deterrent punishment
and for matters connected therewith or  incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5995RS(S-5)—03.03.2006.