1
 Bill  No.  VIII  of  2008
THE AGRICULTURAL  AND OTHER UNORGANISED WORKERS
(PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the protection from exploitation and anti-labourers practices of the
agricultural and other unorganized workers and for the welfare measures to be
implemented by the Central and State Governments for such workers by way of
establishing a Welfare Authority alongwith a Welfare Fund to ensure minimum wages,
pension and provident facilities, compensation in case of accidents, maternity and
creche facilities and medical care to the women workers and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural and Other Unorganized Workers (Protection
and Welfare) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural workers" means a person who works as a labourer on hire or in
exchange whether in cash or kind or partly in cash and partly in kind working in any of
the agricultural operations of other person or employer;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Authority" means the Agricultural and other Unorganized Workers Welfare
Authority established under Section 3;
(d) "employer" means any person who employs whether directly or through any
other person or contractor, whether on behalf of himself or on behalf of any other
person, one or more worker for any work or the work connected with the agricultural or
horticulture operations;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "unorganized workers" means those workers who are unorganized and are
not members of any labour or trade union and hired to do any work by any other
person or employer;
(g) "Welfare Fund" means the Agricultural and Other Unorganized Workers
Welfare Fund established under this Act.
3. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government shall, as soon as may be
but within six months from the commencement of this Act, by notification in the official
gazette, establish the Agricultural and other Unorganized Workers Welfare Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and Common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Thiruvananthapuram in the State of
Kerala and the Authority may establish offices at other places in the country as it may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having the
background and authority of labour related issues or of a farmer or of the judiciary;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having
such qualification as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding officers of the
Houses;
(d) for members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the
Union Ministries of Agriculture, Labour and Employment, Finance and Rural
Development respectively;
(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst the agricultural and other unorganized workers covered under this Act;
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated
amongst the States in alphabetical order.
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such officers and members of staff
and with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed from time to time.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to promote and undertake by such measures
as it thinks fit or deem necessary and expedient, welfare measures for the agricultural and
other unorganised workers.
Establishment of
the Agricultural
and  Other
Unorganized
Workers Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.

3
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the
measures referred to therein may provide for:—
(a) maintaining district-wise register of all the agricultural and other unorganised
workers with such particulars and in such manner, as may be prescribed;
(b) maintaining land records from village level to district level in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(c) maintaining district-wise register of employers employing agricultural workers
of unorganised workers, as the case may be, with such particulars and in such manner
as may be prescribed;
(d) making available of work round the year to the agricultural and other
unorganised workers;
(e) maintaining district-wise list of physicians and clinics and hospitals recognised
for treatment, both indoor and outdoor facilities, of agricultural and other unorganised
workers;
(f) maternity and creche facilities for the female agricultural and other unorganised
workers covered under this Act;
(g) payment of old age pension to the agricultural and other unorganised
workers;
(h) provident fund facility to the agricultural and other unorganised workers;
(i) educational facilities for the children of agricultural and other unorganised
workers;
(j) insurance cover for the agricultural and other unorganised workers for such
works and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(k) such other provisions as the Authority may deem necessary for the purposes
of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
the Agricultural and other Unorganised Workers Welfare Fund for the purposes of this
Act with initial corpus of rupees two thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government
by due appropriation made by law by Parliament in this behalf and thereafter the Central
Government, State Governments and the employers shall contribute to the Welfare Fund to
such extent and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Welfare Fund may also receive moneys from Corporate houses, financial
institutions both domestic and international ones, individuals and bodies in the form of
contributions or donations.
(3) All moneys received in the Welfare Fund shall be utilized for the welfare of the
Agricultural and other unorganised workers by the Authority in such manner as may be
prescribed from time to time.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force:—
(a) no employers shall engage any agricultural worker or other unorganised
worker, as the case may be, unless such worker has registered himself with the Authority;
(b) every employer shall pay minimum wages to the worker engaged by him or
such wages in cash or kind as may be voluntarily agreed by such worker;
(c) no employer shall deduct the wages of his worker in case he mets with an
accident, or falls ill or has to take leave for maternity purposes.
The
Agricultural
and other
Unorganised
Workers
Welfare Funds.
Provisions
relating to
employers.

4
7. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf requisite funds for the expenditures of the Secretariat
and other purposes of this Act.
8. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide necessary assistance
to the Authority in executing the provisions of this Act within the territorial jurisdiction of
such Governments.
9. The Authority shall submit an Annual Report in such form and in such manner as
may be prescribed, of its activities pertaining to welfare of agricultural and unorganised
workers covered under this Act to the President of India, who shall cause the Report to be
laid before both the Houses of Parliament along with action taken by the Central Government
thereon after its receipt, as soon as may be.
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act shall be guilty of an offence and
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment, which shall not be less than three months
but may extend to one year and also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupee.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Funds of the
Authority.
Appropriate
Government to
ensure
compliance of
the provisions.
Annual Report.
Penalty.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has rightly been said that our country lives in villages because nearly 80 per cent of
our country's population is living in the rural areas and in one way or the other depends on
agriculture. The agricultural workers who are unorganized too constitute majority of rural
labour in the country. Similarly, the unorganized workers of both the urban and rural areas
constitute the major chunk of the working classes in the country. Unfortunately, the
agricultural workers and other unorganized workers remain exploited and hapless. It has
been observed that whereas the organized workers through their Trade Unions manage in
most of the cases to get their genuine demands fulfilled from their employers but the
unorganized workers can not even think of getting their reasonable and just demands like
minimum wages, availability of work round the year, pension, PF, maternity benefits, creche,
medical care, accident insurance, etc. fulfilled by their employers. They don't even get
two square meals and remain hand to mouth and indebted throughout their lives. Their
condition in the society is going from bad to worse every day and there is no legal protection
for these poor workers. The Central Government has introduced a Bill for the protection
of unorganized workers in Parliament, but it does not cover the entire gamut of the
unorganized workers and it will take its own time to become an Act of Parliament and its
commencement. Since our democracy is wedded to Welfare State it is high time that the
unorganized workers too get their share in the development of the nation and State should
implement various welfare measures for them by establishing an independent Authority
for the purpose and extend all possible legal protections to the vast section of the society.
Hence this Bill.
A. VIJAYARAGHAVAN
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Agricultural and other
Unorganised Workers Welfare Authority. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the Agricultural
and other Unorganised Workers Welfare Fund with initial corpus of rupees two thousand
crore to be provided by the Central Government. Clause 7 of the Bill makes it obligatory for
the Central Government to provide requisite funds from time to time. The Bill, if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
twenty thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India per annum.
A sum of rupees two thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide for the  protection from  exploitation and anti-labourers practices  of  the
agricultural  and  other unorganized  workers  and  for  the welfare measures  to
be implemented by the Central and State Governments for such workers
by way of establishing a Welfare Authority along with a Welfare
Fund to ensure minimum wages, pension and provident
facilities, compensation in case of accidents,
maternity and creche facilities and medical
care to the women workers and  for
matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri A. Vijayaraghavan,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4742RS(S-5)—29.12.2008.