Bill No.  VIII  of  2013
TO BE  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON
THE 8TH MARCH, 2013
THE BAN ON OBSCENE ADVERTISEMENTS BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for a ban on obscene advertisements in any form in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Obscene Advertisements Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "advertisement" means any pamphlet, writing, drawing, painting, photograph,
bill, circular, notice, label, poster, hoarding, banner or other document and also includes
any communication by means of recorded telephone messages or transmitted on radio,
television, the Internet, or similar communication media, including film strips, motion
pictures, videos, slides by means of light, and gas published, disseminated, circulated,
or placed directly to the public;
(b) "Agency" means the Banning of Obscene Advertisement Agency established
under section 4 of this Act.
(c) "complaint" means an objection filed by any Indian citizen or institution to
the agency;
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
10
15

2
(d) "obscene advertisement" means depiction of women body in nude or
semi-nude postures, and is considered objectionable, double-entendre and may
reasonably be construed immoral and against decency; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, all
obscene advertisements are hereby banned in the country even if no objection certificate
has been obtained from any authority.
4. ( 1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government shall establish an Agency
to be known as Banning of Obscene Advertisement Agency.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Agency shall be constituted in such
manner as may be prescribed and the terms and conditions of service of persons employed
in the agency shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The headquarters of this Agency shall be at such place as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Agency shall perform the following functions:—
(a) Hearing public grievances and registering complaints with regard to obscene
advertisements;
(b) Conducting inquiry on the basis of a complaint lodged;
(c) Imposing a ban on the advertisement on the basis of the findings of the
inquiry; and
(d) Derecognising the advertisement agency/agencies making obscene
advertisements.
6. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term that shall not be less than two years but may extend to five years and
with fine which shall not be less than rupees one lakh but may extend to rupees three lakh.
7. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this  Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Banning of
obscene
advertisements.
Establishment
of Banning of
Obscene
advertisement
Agency.
Functions of
the Agency.
Penalty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Due to rapidly growing consumerism several types of perversities are taking root in
the Indian society. As a result, the cultural values of the Indian society are eroding and the
safety of dignity of women is also under threat. In metropolitan cities and even in the small
towns, the number of crimes arising out of the degradation of our culture is increasing
rapidly. Obscene advertisements broadcasted or brought out by the different media have
contributed nothing less in this regard. There is a rat race in depicting obscenity in the
country in the name of advertisements. The Government has so far done a mere formality to
check or ban obscene advertisements.
Keeping in view the gravity of the problem, it is imperative that a new legislation be
enacted to impose a complete ban on the obscene advertisements and for this purpose a new
agency be put in place so as to stop broadcasting or publication of obscene advertisements
in the country.
Hence this Bill.
PRABHAT JHA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Banning of Obscene Advertisement
Agency and appointment of officers and staff of the agency. Clause 7 provides that Central
Government shall provide funds to the Agency after due appropriation. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
a recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of rupees four hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a ban on obscene advertisements in any form in the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5529RS(S4)—8.03.2013.