 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No. VIII of 2024
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR PROTECTION FROM
HONOUR CRIME BILL, 2024
A
BILL
to provide for protection from honour crime by establishing a National Commission for                        
Protection from Honour Crime and prescribing punishments for honour crime 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:–
CHAPTER I
Preliminary
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Protection from Honour
Crime Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) “aggrieved person” means any person against whom an honour crime is
committed;
Short title and 
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10

(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State; in the case of a Union Territory, the Union Territory
Administration and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “citizen” means any Indian citizen;
(d) “Commission” means the National Commission for Protection from
Honour Crime, constituted under section 11 of the Act;
(e) “economic abuse” includes deprivation of all or any economic or financial
resources to which the aggrieved person(s) is entitled under any law or
custom whether payable under an order of a court or otherwise;
(f
) “honour crime” means the crime defined under section 3 of the Act;
(g) “physical abuse” means any act or conduct which is of such a nature as
to cause bodily pain, harm, or danger to life, limb, or health or impair the
health or development of the aggrieved person(s) and includes assault,
criminal intimidation and criminal force;
(h
) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(i) “sexual abuse” means any conduct of a sexual nature that abuses, humiliates,
degrades or otherwise violates the dignity of a woman;
(j) “verbal and emotional abuse” includes—
(i) insults, ridicule, humiliation, name calling and insults or ridicule
specially with regard to not having a child or a male child; and
(ii) repeated threats to cause physical pain to any person in whom the
aggrieved person is interested.
CHAPTER II
OFFENCE OF HONOUR CRIME AND PUNISHMENTS
3. (1) Any person or several persons in furtherance of common intention, who indulges
in or incites acts of violence against any person or persons, who has gone against or hurt the 
sentiments of religious, cultural or societal norms being followed by them, shall be guilty of 
the offence of honour crime.
(2) The acts of violence referred to in sub-section (1) may include the following:
(a) doing any such act which causes death of the aggrieved person(s);
(b) attempting any such act which may cause death of the aggrieved person(s);
(c) abetting in any such act which may cause death of the aggrieved person(s);
(d) conspiring to do any such act which may cause death of the aggrieved per-
son(s);
(e) destroying or causing to destroy evidence relating to honour crime;
Honour crime
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2

(f) causing or attempting to cause disruption of any of the functions of the
Commission.
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, “act” means,-
(a) harming or injuring or endangering the health, safety, life, limb or well-
being, whether mental or physical, of the aggrieved person(s) or attempting
to do so and includes causing physical abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and
emotional abuse and economic abuse; or
(b) harassing, harming, injuring or endangering the aggrieved person(s) with
a view to coerce that person or any other person related to that person to
meet any unlawful demand for any dowry or other property or valuable
security; or
(c
) such act that has the effect of threatening the aggrieved person(s) or any
person related to him or her by any conduct mentioned in clause (a) or (b);
or
(d
) otherwise injuring or causing harm, whether physical or mental, to the
aggrieved person(s).
(2) Honour crime shall be a non-bailable offence under any law for the time being in
force and the burden of proof shall be on the accused.
4. Whoever commits an honour crime resulting in the death of a person or persons
shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine .
5. Whoever does any act of honour crime with such intention or knowledge, and under
such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would  be guilty of murder, shall 
be punished with imprisonment  of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years and shall also be liable to fine;  and if  hurt is caused to any person or persons by such 
act, the offender shall be liable   either to imprisonment for life, or to such punishment as is 
hereinbefore mentioned.
6.
Whoever abets the commission of an honour crime resulting in death of the aggrieved
person(s), shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
7.
Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit an honour crime resulting
in death of the aggrieved person(s) shall be punished with imprisonment for life or rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or upwards.
8.
Whoever secrets or destroys any document or electronic record, which he may
be lawfully compelled to produce as evidence in a Court of Justice, or in any proceeding 
lawfully held before a public servant, as such, or obliterates or renders illegible the whole 
or any part of such document or electronic record with the intention of preventing the same 
from being produced or used as evidence before such Court or public servant as aforesaid, or 
after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce the same for that purpose, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both.
Punishment for 
honour crime 
resulting in 
death.
Punishment 
for attempt of 
honour crime 
resulting in 
death.
Punishment for 
abetment of 
honour crime 
resulting in 
death.
Punishment for 
conspiracy to 
honour crime 
resulting in 
death.
Punishment 
for destruction 
of evidence 
relating to 
honour crime.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
3

9. Whoever voluntarily obstructs the Commission in the discharge of its functions,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
10. (1) Any person who is aware of an honour crime resulting in death or an attempt or
conspiracy thereof should inform the Commission without expectation of payment or reward 
and without any duty of care or special relationship, voluntarily come forward to inform them 
about the same.
2
( ) If it is proved that one had knowledge of an honour crime being committed or 
attempt or conspiracy thereof and refused to share the same with the Commission or other 
concerned authorities, it would amount to abetment and shall be punishable accordingly 
under the provisions of this Act. 
CHAPTER III
THE NATIONAL C
OMMISSION FOR PROTECTION FROM HONOUR CRIME
11. (1) The Central Government shall, with effect from the appointed day, by
notification in the official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the National 
Commission for Protection from Honour Crime to exercise the powers conferred upon 
and to perform the functions as assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
(3) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
12. The Commission shall consist of the following to be appointed by the Central
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed:-
(a) a person of eminence who has done outstanding work for the eradication of
honour crime – Chairperson;
(b) eight Members, having knowledge and experience in dealing with issues of
such severity as of honour crime;
Provided that at least two of the Members shall be women.
13. (1) The Chairperson and Members of the Commission shall hold office for a period
of five years:
Provided that no Chairperson or any other member shall hold office after he 
or she has attained:
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty-five years; and
(b) in the case of a Member, sixty years.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government:
Punishment for 
disruption of 
the functions 
of the 
Commission.
Duty of the 
citizens.
Constitution 
of the National 
Commission 
for Protection 
from Honour 
Crime.
Composition of 
the Commis-
sion.
Term of 
office and other 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson 
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
4

Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions 
of service of the Chairperson or any Member, as the case may be, shall be varied to his or her 
disadvantage after his or her appointment.
14. (1) The Chairperson or a Member may, by writing given under his or her hand to the
Central Government, resign from his or her office at any time.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the Chairperson may be removed
from his office by an order of the Central Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour 
or incapacity.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), the Central
Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or any other Member, if the 
Chairperson or, as the case may be, such other Member, -
(a
) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his or her term of office in any paid employment
outside the duties of his or her office; or
(c) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable of acting
in his or her official capacity; or
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(e) has so abused his or her office as to render his or her continuance in
office detrimental to the public interest; or
(f) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in
the opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude; or
(g) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent
from three consecutive meetings of the Commission:
Provided that no person shall be removed from office under sub-sections (2) and 
(3), unless that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
15. (1) If the Chairperson or, as the case may be, a Member,--
(a) is removed under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 7; or
(b) tenders his or her resignation under sub-section (1) of section 7;
his or her seat shall thereupon become vacant.
(2) If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a Member, whether by
reason of his or her death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled within a 
period of ninety days by making a fresh appointment in accordance with the provisions of 
section 3 and the person so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office 
for which the Chairperson, or a Member, as the case may be, in whose place he or she is so 
appointed would have held that office.
Resignation 
and removal.
Vacancies
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
5

16. (1) The Commission may appoint such number of officers and staff as it may
consider necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The mode of recruitment, the salary and allowances payable to, and other
terms and conditions of service of the officers and staff of the Commission appointed 
under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
17. The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:-
(a) examine and review the safeguards provided by or under any law for the time
being in force for the protection of citizens from honour crime and recommend
measures for their effective implementation;
(b
) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other intervals, as the
Commission may deem fit, reports on the working of those safeguards;
(c) inquire into violation of human rights and recommend initiation of proceedings
in such cases;
(d) examine all factors that inhibit the enjoyment of rights of citizens due to
religious, cultural or societal norms and recommend appropriate remedial
measures;
(e
) study treaties and other international instruments and undertake periodical
review of existing policies, programmes and other activities on honour crime
and make recommendations for their effective implementation in the best
interest of citizens;
(f)
undertake and pr omote research in the field of abolition of honour crime;
(g) spread human rights literacy amongst various sections of the society and
promote awareness of the safeguards available for protection of these
rights through publications, media, seminars and other available means;
(h
) inquire into complaints and take suo motu notice of matters relating to,-
(i) deprivation and violation of human rights relating to honour crime;
(ii) non-implementation of laws providing for protection from honour crime;
(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed at
mitigating hardships to and ensuring welfare of the victims of honour
crime and to provide relief to such victims,
and take up the issues arising out of such matters with appropriate authorities; and
(i) such other functions, as it may consider necessary, for the promotion of
rights against honour crime and any other matters incidental to the above
functions.
18. The Commission may take any of the following steps upon the completion of an
inquiry held under clause (c) of section 17 of this Act, namely:-
(i
) where after inquiry, the Commission finds any violation of a serious nature
of any of the provisions of this act or contravention of the provisions of
any law for the time being in force, it may recommend to the appropriate
Government or authority, the initiation of proceedings for prosecution
or such other action, as it may deem fit, against the concerned person or
persons;
Officers and 
staff of the 
Commission..
Powers and 
functions of the 
Commission.
Inquiry by the 
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
6

(ii) approach the Supreme Court or the High Court concerned for such
directions, orders or writs as that Court may deem necessary;
(iii) recommend to the appropriate Government or authority for the grant of
such interim relief to the victim or the members of his or her family as it
may consider necessary.
19. (1) The Commission shall prepare every year, in such form and within such time as
may be prescribed by the Central Government an annual report giving a true and full account 
of its activities during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central 
Government.
(2) The Commission shall also from time to time, prepare and submit to the Central
Government, special reports on any matter which, in its opinion, is of such urgency or 
importance that it should not be deferred till submission of the annual report.
(3) The Central Government shall cause the annual and special reports of the
Commission to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum of action 
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Commission and the reasons 
for non-acceptance of the recommendations, if any, within a period of one year from the date 
of receipt of such report(s).
20. (1)  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the 
Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed and the accounts 
shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India at such intervals as may be 
specified by him.
(3) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report 
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall 
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
21. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
22. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
23. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty.
24. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
Central Government
to provide 
funds.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
7
Annual and 
Special Reports.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law.
Act to have an 
overriding effect.
Power to remove 
difficulties.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Young couples, particularly women, who go against the religious, cultural norms and/
or societal norms being followed by a person or a group of persons are often subjected to 
various crimes like harassment, violence, sexual abuse and even murder, under the pretext 
of preserving honour. Recently, there has been a significant increase in the number of such 
crimes across the country.  Such horrendous honour crimes need to be eradicated from the 
society. A clear message should be given to the perpetrators that they will be severely dealt 
with. 
This Bill aims to achieve the said objective by creation of a mechanism, which will 
work efficiently to address this social malady and for this purpose it is proposed to declare 
honour crime as a non-bailable offence, prescribing punishments for various honour crimes 
and constitute a National Commission for Protection from Honour Crimes Board to look into 
such matters.
Hence this Bill.
V. SIVADASAN
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 11 provides for the constitution of the National Commission for Protection from 
Honour Crime and appointment of a Chairperson and Members therein. Clause 13 provides 
for the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members of the Commission, whereas Clause 16 provides for the salary 
and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and 
staff of the Commission. Clause 17 inter alia provides that the Commission shall undertake 
and promote research in the field of eradication of honour crime as well as spread human 
rights literacy and promote awareness of the safeguards available for protections of these 
rights amongst various sections of the society through all available means. Clause 20 of the 
Bill provides that the Central Government, shall after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the Commission, as it may think fit for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is difficult to 
estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
10

RAJYA SABHA
_______________
A
BILL
to provide for protection from honour crime by establishing a National Commission for              
Protection from Honour Crime and prescribing punishments for honour crime 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental ther
eto.
______________
(Dr. V . Sivadasan, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-GB(E)–056―05.02.2024.