THE INCEST OFFENCES  BILL, 2009
A
 BILL
to provide for punishment for  the offences relating to incest and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Incest Offences Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "sexual exploitation" includes fondling, sexually explicit remarks, avoidable
and unwarranted physical contact, willfully touching and patting, forcing for  the use
of pornographic material and molestation;
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 31ST  JULY, 2009
Bill No. X of 2009
5
10

2
(d) terms used in this Act and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian
Penal Code,  1860 or the Code of Criminal Procudure, 1973 shall have the same mean-
ings respectively assigned to them in those laws.
3. Whoever knowingly has or attempts to have sexual intercourse with another person,
who is a close family member shall be guilty of incest  and shall be punished with riegorous
imprisonment for  a term which shall not be less than ten years and shall also be liable to a fine:
Provided that if the close family member is a child under eighteen years of age, the
offender shall be punished with life imprisonment.
(2) Whoever knowingly does or attempts to sexually exploit any other person, who is
a close family member shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than
five years, which may extend upto seven years, and shall also be liable to a fine.
(3) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) & (2) the Court shall not take cognizance of
the fact that the act of sexual intercourse or attempt of sexual intercourse or sexual exploitation
has happened with the consent of the person.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Act "close family members" means following
persons who are members of a victim’s family by birth:—
(a) a parent or grandparent, of either sex.
(b) a child or other lineal descendent.
(c) a brother or sister inlcuding half-brother or half-sister.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force, in
any trial under this Act, the burden of proof as to the innocence shall be on the accused and
the victim shall have the right to lead evidence in rebuttal.
5. The proceedings under this Act shall be tried by Special Courts as far as possible
before a woman magistrate and in-camera if it is so desired by the victim.
6. Any statement of the victim under this Act shall be recorded at her or his residence
or at the place of her or his choice and as far as possible by a woman police officer in the
presence of the victim's guardian or social worker of the locality.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force, no
court other than a High Court or the Supreme Court of India shall have the authority to grant
anticipatory bail to any person accused of committing an offence under this Act.
9. Save as provided under this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 shall be applicable to any trial under this Act.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Gazette of India, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as it deems necessary or expedient for removing
the difficulty.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to incest.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make rules for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
Incest
offences.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Burden of
proof.
Proceedings to
be in-camera.
Statement of
victim to be
recorded at
residence.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
Bar on
granting
anticipatory
bail.
Provisions of
the Code of
Criminal
Procedure to
be applied.
Power to
remove any
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS   AND  REASONS
As of today, there is no law on incest offences in India. Any incidence of incest is
treated as rape and if it is the abuse of a boy, it is covered under Section 377 of the Indian
Penal Code (that criminalises homosexuality). Last year, a Mumbai court let off a father who
raped his daughter as the heinousness of his crime was not recognised as a separately
punishable offence in our country. Also, the particular problem of incest going under-reported
is more prevalent in India because the family is almost considered sacred and abuse, if it
happens, is met with disbelief and denial. At times, even the judges do not believe that a girl
or boy can be abused by her or his father or relatives. Activists demanding a law to tackle
incest believe that it is a reflection of the society’s refusal to acknowledge that it exists. The
society is in a state of denial that incest does exist, whereas the bare truth is that it is
prevalent in our society and only a miniscule number of cases are reported.
In contrast, many developed countries recognise incest as a serious crime.
The United Kingdom has had a law on it since 1908, which provides punishment with
imprisonment  up to 14 years, as do laws in Canada, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
the Netherlands, Brazil and a host of other countries have laws pertaining to incest. In the
United States, punishment varies from State to State. Incest is more common in India then in
other countries as there is no fear of the law of the land.
Children's rights activists have been demanding a specific law on incest for quite some
time now. The demand was more vociferous, when Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code
(pertaining to rape) was amended, to include policemen and hospital and prison staff who
abuse women in their custody, the issue of incest—where a parent or relative abuses a child
in his or her care—was over looked. It is difficult to fathom the agony and trauma of a child
who goes through molestation at the hands of a trusted one. The child suffers this stigma
throughout his or her life and has to re-live the pain and trauma over and over again. It is high
time, therefore, that a strict and separate law is enacted to counter incest in our society.
Hence this Bill.
SHOBHANA BHARTIA

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of this Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

RAJY A   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for punishment for the offences relating to incest and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3544RS(S5)—31.07.2009.