THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 246 of the Constitution,—
(i) clause (2) shall be omitted.
(ii) for clause (3), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) Subject to clause (1), the Legislature of any State has exclusive power to make
laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated
in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the "State List")."
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of article 246.
Bill No. X of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 26TH FEBRUARY, 2016
5
10

2
3. For article 248 of the Constitution, the following shall be substituted, namely,—
"248. (1) Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any
matter not enumerated in the State List.
(2) Such power shall include the power of making any law imposing a tax not
mentioned in that List."
4. For article 254 of the Constitution, the following shall be substituted, namely,—
"254. If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to
any provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to
enact, then, the law made by Parliament, whether passed before or after the law
made by the Legislature of such State, or, as the case may be, the existing law,
shall prevail and the law made by the Legislature of the State shall, to the extent
of the repugnancy, be void."
5. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) for entries in List I—Union List, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“1. Defence of India and every part thereof including preparation for
defence and all such acts as may be conducive in times of war to its prosecution
and after its termination to effective demobilisation.
2. Naval, military and air forces; any other armed forces of the Union.
3. Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force subject
to the control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State in aid
of the civil power; powers, jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the members
of such forces while on such deployment.
4. Delimitation of cantonment areas, local self-government in such areas,
the constitution and powers within such areas of cantonment authorities and
the regulation of house accommodation (including the control of rents) in such
areas.
5. Naval, military and air force works.
6. Arms, firearms, ammunition and explosives excluding civil use.
7. Atomic energy and mineral resources necessary for its production.
8. Industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for the purpose
of defence or for the prosecution of war.
9. Central Bureau of Intelligence and Investigation.
10. Preventive detention for reasons connected with Defence, Foreign
Affairs, or the security of India; persons subjected to such detention.
11. Foreign affairs; all matters which bring the Union into relation with any
foreign country.
12. Diplomatic, consular and trade representation.
13. United Nations Organisation.
14. Participation in international conferences, associations and other bodies
and implementing of decisions made thereat.
15. Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and
implementing of treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign countries.
16. War and peace.
17. Foreign jurisdiction.
Substitution of
new article for
article 248.
Substitution of
new article for
article 254.
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
18. Citizenship, naturalisation and aliens.
19. Extradition.
20. Admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, India; passports
and visas.
21. Pilgrimages to places outside India.
22. Piracies and crimes committed on the high seas or in the air; offences
against the law of nations committed on land or the high seas or in the air.
23. Transport for carriage of goods and persons by Highways, Shipping
and navigation on inland waterways or Railways declared by or under law made
by Parliament to be national highways, waterways or railways respectively in
mechanically propelled vehicles.
24. Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation
on tidal waters; provision of education and training for the mercantile marine
and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other
agencies.
25. Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons and other provision for
the safety of shipping and aircraft.
26. Ports declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law to be
major ports, including their delimitation, and the constitution and powers of port
authorities therein.
27. Port quarantine, including hospitals connected therewith; seamen's
and marine hospitals.
28. Airways; aircraft and air navigation; provision of aerodromes; regulation
and organisation of air traffic and of aerodromes; provision for aeronautical
education and training and regulation of such education and training provided
by States and other agencies.
29. Posts and telegraphs; telephones; wireless, broadcasting and other
like forms of communication.
30. Property of the Union and the revenue therefrom, but as regards
property situated in a State subject to legislation by the State, save in so far as
Parliament by law otherwise provides.
31. Courts of wards for the estates of Rulers of Indian States.
32. Public debt of the Union.
33. Currency, coinage and legal tender; foreign exchange.
34. Foreign loans.
35. Reserve Bank of India.
36. Post Office Savings Bank.
37. Trade and commerce with foreign countries; import and export across
customs frontiers; definition of customs frontiers.
38. Inter-State trade and commerce.
39. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of trading corporations,
including banking, insurance and financial corporations, but not including
co-operative societies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
40. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, whether
trading or not, with objects not confined to one State, but not including
universities.
41. Banking.
42. Bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes and other like instruments.
43. Stock exchanges and futures markets.
44. Patents, inventions and designs; copyright; trade-marks and
merchandise marks.
45. Establishment of standards of weight and measure.
46. Establishment of standards of quality for goods to be exported out of
India or transported from one State to another.
47. Industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament
by law to be expedient in the public interest.
48. Regulation and development of oilfields and mineral oil resources;
petroleum and petroleum products; other liquids and substances declared by
Parliament by law to be dangerously inflammable.
49. Regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which
such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
50. Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to
the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the
Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
51. Fishing and fisheries beyond territorial waters.
52. Sanctioning of cinematograph films for exhibition.
53. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as
the National Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the Victoria
Memorial and the Indian War Memorial, and any other like institution financed
by the Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law
to be an institution of national importance.
54. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as
the Benaras Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the Delhi
University; the University established in pursuance of article 371E; any other
institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national
importance.
55. Institutions for scientific or technical education financed by the
Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be
institutions of national importance.
56. Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeological
sites and remains, declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national
importance.
57. The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological and
Anthropological Surveys of India; Meteorological organisations.
58. Census.
59. Union Public Service; All-India Services; Union Public Service
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
60. Union pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the Government of
India or out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
61. Elections to Parliament, to the Legislatures of States and to the offices
of President and Vice-President; the Election Commission.
62. Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and
Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker
of the House of the People.
63. Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and of
the members and the Committees of each House; enforcement of attendance of
persons for giving evidence or producing documents before committees of
Parliament or commissions appointed by Parliament.
64. Emoluments, allowances, privileges, and rights in respect of leave of
absence, of the President and Governors; salaries and allowances of the Ministers
for the Union; the salaries, allowances, and rights in respect of leave of absence
and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
65. Audit of the accounts of the Union and of the States.
66. Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme
Court (including contempt of such Court), and the fees taken therein; persons
entitled to practise before the Supreme Court.
67. Extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force
belonging to any State to any area outside that State, but not so as to enable the
police of one State to exercise powers and jurisdiction in any area outside that
State without the consent of the Government of the State in which such area is
situated; extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force
belonging to any State to railway areas outside that State.
68. Inter-State migration; inter-State quarantine.
69. Taxes on income other than agricultural income.
70. Duties of customs including export duties.
71. Taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land,
of individuals and companies; taxes on the capital of companies.
72. Taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and
futures markets.
73. Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, promissory
notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares,
debentures, proxies and receipts.
74. Taxes on the sale or purchase of newspapers and on advertisements
published therein.
75. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where
such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
76. Taxes on the consignments of goods (whether the consignment is to
the person making it or to any other persons), where such consignment takes
place  in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
77. Bankruptcy and insolvency
78. Actionable Wrongs
79. Relief and rehabilitation of persons displaced from their original place
of residence by reasons of setting up of the Dominion of India and Pakistan.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
80. Prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or
contagious disease or pests affecting men, animals  or plants.
81. Price Control.
82. Newspapers, books and printing presses.
83. Gas and gas-works.
84. Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at
the commencement  of this Constitution but excluding offences against laws
with respect to any of the matters specified in  List I  and excluding the use of
naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid of the
civil power excluding state specific laws not contrary to the Central Law.
85. Criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Criminal
Procedure at the commencement of this  Constitution excluding state specific
laws not contrary to the Central Law.
86. Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a
State, the maintenance of public order, or the maintenance of supplies and services
essential to the community; persons subjected to such detention excluding
state specific laws not contrary to the Central Law.
87. Trust and Trustees.
88. Administrators-general and official trustees.
89. Evidence and oaths, recognition of laws, public acts and records, and
judicial proceedings.
90. Civil procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil
Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution,  limitation and arbitration.
91. Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts.
92. Charities and charitable institutions, charitable and religious
endowments and religious institutions.
93. Recovery in a State of claims in respect  of taxes and other public
demands, including arrears  of land-revenue and sums recoverable as such
arrears, arising outside that State.
94. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.
95. Inquires, surveys and statistics for the purpose of any of the matters in
this List.
96. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees
taken in any court.
97. Any other matter not enumerated  in List II including any tax not
mentioned in that List.
(ii) for entries in List II-State List, the following shall be substituted namely:—
1. Public order (but not including the use of any naval, military or air force
or any other armed force of the Union or of any other force subject to the control
of the Union or of any contingent or unit thereof in aid of the civil power).
2. Police (including railway and village police) subject to the provisions of
List I.
3. Officers and servants of the High Court, procedure in rent and revenue
courts; fees taken in all courts  except the Supreme Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
4. Prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a
like nature,  and persons detained therein; arrangements with other States for
the use of prisons and other institutions.
5. Local government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of municipal
corportions, improvement trusts, districts boards, mining settlement authorities
and other local authorities for the purpose of lcoal self-government or village
administration.
6. Public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries.
7. Pilgrimages, other than pilgrimages to places outside India.
8. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture,
possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors.
9. Relief of the disabled and unemployable.
10. Burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds.
11. Libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed
by the State; ancient and historical monuments and records other  than those
declared by or under law  made by Parliament to be of national importance.
12. Communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries  and other means
of communication not specified in List I; municipal tramways; ropeways; inland
waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List I with regard to
such waterways; vehicles other than mechanically propelled vehicles.
13. Transport Services by Railways (excluding projects of national
character).
14. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection
against pest  and prevention of plant diseases.
15. Preservation, protection  and improvement of stock and prevention of
animal diseases; veterinary training  and practice.
16. Pounds  and the prevention of cattle trespass.
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of List I.
18. Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures  including the
relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation
of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; colonisation.
19. Fisheries within territories.
20. Courts of wards subject to the provisions of List I; encumbered and
attached estates.
21. Regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the provisions
of List I with respect to regulation and development under the control of the
Union.
22. Industries subject to the provisions of List I.
23. Trade and commerce within the State subject to the provisions of
List I.
24. Production, supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions
of List I.
25. Markets and fairs.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
26. Money-lending and money-lenders; relief  of agricultural indebtedness.
27. Inns and inn-keepers.
28. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than
those specified in List I, and universities; unincorporated trading, literary,
scientific, religious and other societies and associations; co-operative societies.
29. Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions
of List I; sports, entertainaments and amusements.
30. Betting and gambling.
31. Works, lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of the State.
32. Election to the Legislature  of the State subject to the provisions of any
law made by Parliament.
33. Salaries and allowances of members of the Legislature of the State, of
the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislature Assembly and, if there is a
Legislative Council, of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof.
34. Power, privileges  and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of
the members and the committees thereof, and, if there is a Legislative Council, of
that  Council  and of the members and the committees thereof, enforcement of
attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing documents before
committees of the Legislature of the State.
35. Salaries and allowances of Ministers for the State.
36. State public services; State Public Service Commission.
37. State pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the State or out of
the Consolidated Fund of the State.
38. Public debt of the State.
39. Treasure trove.
40. Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, the
maintenance of land records, survey for revenue purposes and records of rights,
and alienation of revenues.
41. Taxes on agricultural income.
42. Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land.
43. Estate duty in respect of agricultral land.
44. Taxes on lands and buildings.
45. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced in
the State and countervailing duties at the same or lower rates on similar goods
manufacutured or produced elsewhere in India:—
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption;
(b) opium, Indian hemps and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, but
not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any
substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry.
46. Taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity.
47. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, subject
to the provisions of List I.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
48. Taxes on advertisements other than advertisements published in the
newspapers and advertisements broadcast by radio or television.
49. Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways
excluding those nationally taxed.
50. Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for
use on roads, including tramcars subject to the provisions of List I.
51. Taxes on animals and boats.
52. Tolls (If State funded).
53. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.
54. Capitation taxes.
55. Taxes on luxuries, including taxes on entertainments, amusements etc.
56. Rates of stamp duty in respect of documents other than those specified
in the provision of List 1 with regard to rates of stamp duty.
57. Jurisdication and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with
respect to any of the matters in this List.
58. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees
taken in any court.
59. Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy
and succession; joint family and partition; all matters in respect of which parties
in judicial proceedings were immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution subject to their personal law.
60. Transfer of property other than agricultural land; registration of deeds
and documents.
61. Contracts, including partnership, agency, contracts of carriage,and
other special forms of contracts, but not including contracts relating to agricultural
land.
62. Contempt of court, but not inclding contempt of the Supreme Court.
63. V agrancy; nomadic and migratory tribes.
64. Lunacy and mental deficiency, inclduing places for the reception or
treatment of lunatics and mental deficients.
65. Prevention of cruetly to animals.
66. Forests. (Excluding declared national status)
67. Protection of wild animals and birds. (excluding declared national status)
68. Adulteration of foodstuffs and other goods.
69. Drugs and poisons
70. Economic and social planning of the state.
71. Population control and family planning.
72. Trade unions; industrial and labour disputes.
73. Social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment.
74. Welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds,
employers; liability, workmen's compensation, invalidity and old age pensions
and maternity benefits excluding measures sanctioned by the Union.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
75. Education, including technical education, medical educatioin and
universities, subject to the provisions of List I; vocational and technical traning
of labour subject to minimum national criterion.
76. Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at
the commencement of this Constitution but excluding offences against laws
with respect to any of the matters specified in List I and excluding the use of
naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid of the
civil power excluding central laws not contrary to the State Law.
77. Criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Criminal
Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution excluding  central laws not
contrary to the State Law.
78. Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a
State, the maintenance of public order, or the maintenance of supplies and services
essential to the community; persons subjected to such detention excluding
central laws not contrary to the State Law.
79. Legal, medical and other professions.
80. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
81. Ports other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament or
existing law to be major ports.
82. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechnically
propelled vessels, and the rule of the road on such waterways, and the carriage
of passengers and goods on inland waterways subject to the provisions of List I
with respect to national waterways.
83. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution
of,—
(a) the products of any industry except where the control of such
industry by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in
the public interest, and imported goods of the same kind as such products;
(b) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils;
(c) cattle fodder, including oil cakes and other concentrates;
(d) raw cotton,  whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seeds; and
(e) raw jute.
84. Custody, management and disposal of property (including agricultural
land) declared by law to be evacuee property.
85. Inquiries and statistics except for the purposes of any of the matters
specified in List I.
86. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees
taken in any court.
87. Factories
88. Boilers.
89. Electricity.
90. Corporation tax.
91. Offences against laws with respect to the any of the matters in this
List.”
(iii) List III—Concurrent list shall be omitted.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Federalism has been part of the public discourse in India for many decades, before and
after independence in 1947, but it has gained greater importance since the 1990s when the
country's national polity saw and advent of the coalition era.
The emergence of regional parties in India has led to a targeted growth ensuring social
security measures to the residents of this respective States. In a maturing democracy, the
core components of nation building lies with solutions that pertain to a local population
rather than a nation-wide policy. Thus, working on the idea of cooperative federlism entails
the transfer of power so as to empower the Union with matters of national and internal
security measures, upliftment of Fundamental Rights and fulfilment of national interest while
the State Governments provide for the provisions of facilities and utilities required for
economic and social growth.
Mahatma Gandhi also favored the decentralised structure and preferred a panchayat/
village based federation. In India, there are two governments in existence, the Union
Government and the State Government. The two governments are not subordinate to each
other rather cooperate with each other while working independently. Though the Indian
constitution has the traits of being a federal constitution, but in its strict sense, it is not. The
presence of features which are necessary for existence of a federation is an unique aspect of
Indian Consitution but on the other side, there are   provisions which give more power to the
Union Government vis-a-vis State governments. Hence, the Indian Constitutional  structure
is a quasi-federal structure and it was made like this in the 1935 Act. This Act laid down the
foundations of federal form of government, in India. It provided for the distribution of
legislative power between the Union and the provinces, the structure at that time. A well
designed, and more important, well-functioning system of federal governance, by virtue of
its manifolds benefits, plays a key role in promoting the stability and prosperity of nations as
the heights attained in development by the leading federations of the world—USA, Canada,
Austriala  and Switzerland—demonstrate.
Former Chief Justice Beg, in State of Rajasthan versus Union of India, 1977 called the
Constitution of India as 'amphibian'. He said that ".... if then our Constitution creates a
Central Government which is 'amphibian', in the sense that it can move either on the federal
or on the unitary plane, according to the needs of the situation and circumstances of a
case...".
Similarly in S.R. Bommai versus Union of India , "pragmatic federalism" was used.
Quoting Justice Ahmadi, "....It would thus seem that the Indian Constitution has, in it, not
only features of a pragmatic federalism which, while distributing legislative powers and
indicating the spheres of governmental powers of State and Central Governments, is overlaid
by strong unitary features...".
In a truly federal Constitution, there is no need for a concurrent sphere of legislative
powers and now, the time has come for a complete and mutually exclusive division of power
between the Union and State Governments.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA
11

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
SEVENTH  SCHEDULE
(Article 246)
List I—Union List
1. Defence of India and every part thereof including preparation for defence and all
such acts as may be conductive in times of war to its prosecution and after its termination to
effective demobilisation.
2. Naval, military and air forces; any other armed forces of the Union.
2A. Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force subject to the
control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State in aid of the civil power;
power, jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the members of such forces while on such
deployment.
3. Delimitation of cantonment areas, local self-government in such areas, the constitution
and powers within such areas of cantonment authorities and the regulation of house
accommodation (including the control of rents) in such areas.
4. Naval, military and air force works.
5. Arms, firearms, ammunition and explosives.
6. Atomic energy and mineral resources necessary for its production.
7. Industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for the purpose of defence
or for the prosecution of war.
8. Central Bureau of Intelligence and Investigation.
9. Preventive detention for reasons connected with Defence. Foreign Affairs, or the
security of India; persons subjected to such detention.
10. Foreign affairs; all matters which bring the Union into relation with any foreign
country.
11. Deplomatic, consular and trade representation.
12. United Nations Organisation.
13. Participation in international conferences, associations and other bodies and
implementing of decisions made thereat.
14. Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and implementing of
treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign countries.
15. War  and peace.
16. Foreign jurisdiction.
17. Citizenship, naturalisation and aliens.
18. Extradition.
19. Admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, India; passports and visas.
20. Pilgrimages to place outside India.
12

13
21. Piracies and crimes committed on the high seas or in the air; offences against the
law of nations committed on land or the high seas or in the air.
22. Railways.
23. Highways declared by or under law made by Parliament to be national highways.
24. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways, declared by Parliament by law to be
national waterways, as regards mechanically propelled vessels; the rule of the road on such
waterways.
25. Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation on tidal
waters; provision of education and training for the meracantile marine and regulation of such
education and training provided by States and other agencies.
26. Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons and other provision for the safety of
shipping and aircraft.
27. Ports declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law to be major ports,
including their delimitation, and the constitution and powers of port authorities therein.
28. Port quarantine, including hospitals connected therewith: seamen's and marine
hospitals.
29. Airways: aircraft and air navigation: provision of aerodromes: regulation and
organisation of air traffic and of aerodromes; provision for aeronautical education and training
and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other agencies.
30. Carriage of passengers and goods by railways, sea or air, or by national waterways
in mechanically propelled vessels.
31. Posts and telegraphs; telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other like forms of
communication.
32. Property of the Union and the revenue therefrom, but as regards, property situated
in a State subject to legislation by the State, save in so far as Parliament by law otherwise
providers.
* * * * *
34. Courts of wards for the estates of Rulers of Indian States.
35. Public debt of the Union.
36. Currency, coinage and legal tender, foreign exchange.
37. Foreign loans.
38. Reserve Bank of India.
39. Post Office Savings Bank.
40. Lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of a State.
41. Trade and commerce with foreign countries: import and export across customs
frontiers; definition of customs frontiers.
42. Inter-State trade and commerce.
43. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of trading corporations, including banking,
insurance and financial corporations, but not including co-operative societies.
44. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, whether trading or not,
with objects not confined to one State, but not including universities.
45. Banking.
46. Bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes and other like instruments.

14
47. Insurance.
48. Stock exchanges and futures markets.
49. Patents, inventions and designs: copyright: trade-marks and merchandise marks.
50. Establishment of standards of weight and measure.
51. Establishment of standards of quality for goods to be exported out of India or
transported from one State to another.
52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be
expedient in the public interest.
53. Regulation and development of oilfields and mineral oil resources: petroleum and
petroleum products; other liquids and substances declared by Parliament by law to be
dangerously inflammable.
54. Regulation of mines and minerals development to the extent to which such regulation
and development under the control of the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be
expedient in the public interest.
55. Regulation of labour and safety in mines and oilfields.
56. Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent to
which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
57. Fishing and fisheries beyond territorial waters.
58. Manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by Union agencies; regulation and
control of manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by other agencies.
59. Cultivation, manufacture, and sale for export, of opium.
60. Sanctioning of cinematograph films for exhibition.
61. Industrial disputes concerning Union employees.
62. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the National
Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the Victoria Memorial and the Indian
War Memorial, and any other like institution financed by the Government of India wholly or
in part and declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance.
63. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Benares
Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the Delhi University; the University
established in pursuance of article 3711; any other institution declared by Parliament by law
to be an institution of national importance.
64. Institutions for scientific or technical education financial by the Government of
India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be institutions of national
importance.
65. Union agencies and institutions for—
(a) professional, vocational or technical training, including the training of police
officers; or
(b) the promotion of special studies or research; or
(c) scientific or technical assistance in the investigation or detection of crime.
66. Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher education
or research and scientific and technical institutions.
67. Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archacological sites and
remains, declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance.

15
68. The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological and Anthropological
Surveys of India; Meterological organisations.
69. Census.
70. Union Public Service; All-India Services; Union Public Service Commission.
71. Union pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the Government of India or out
of the Consolidated Fund of India.
72. Elections to Parliament, to the Legislatures of States and to the offices of President
and Vice-President; the Election Commission.
73. Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and Deputy Chairman
of the Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.
74. Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and of the members
and the Committees of each House; enforcement of attendance of persons for giving evidence
or producing documents before committees of Parliament or commissions appointed by
Parliament.
75. Emoluments, allowances, privileges, and rights in respect of leave of absence, of
the President and Governors; salaries and allowances of the Ministers for the Union; the
salaries, allowances, and rights in respect of leave of absence and other conditions of
service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
76. Audit of the accounts of the Union and of the States.
77. Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court (including
contempt of such Court), and the fees taken therein: persons entitled to practise before the
Supreme Court.
78. Constitution and organisation (including vacations) of the High Courts except
provisions as to officers and servants of High Courts; persons entitled to practise before the
High Courts.
79. Extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and exclusion of the jurisdiction of
a High Court from, any Union territory.
80. Extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to
any State to any area outside that State, but not so as to enable the police of one State to
exercise powers and jurisdiction in any area outside that State without the consent of the
Government of the State in which such area is situated; extension of the powers and jurisdiction
of members of a police force belonging to any State to railway areas outside that State.
81. Inter-State migration; inter-State quarantine.
82. Taxes on income other than agricultural income.
83. Duties of customs including export duties.
84. Duties of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or produced in India
except—
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption;
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, but including
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in
sub-paragraph (b) of this entry.
85. Corporation tax.
86. Taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land, of individuals
and companies; taxes on the capital of companies.
87. Estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural land.

16
88. Duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land.
89. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers, carried by railway, sea or air; taxes on
railway fares and freights.
90. Taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and futures
markets.
91. Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes,
bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares, debentures, proxies
and receipts.
92. Taxes on the sale or purchase of newspapers and on advertisements published
therein.
92A. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where such sale
or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
92B. Taxes on the consignments of goods (whether the consignment is to the person
making it or any other person), where such consignment takes place in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce.
93. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.
94. Inquiries, surveys and statistics for the purpose of any of the matters in this List.
95. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any
of the matters in this List; admiralty jurisdiction.
96. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any
court.
97. Any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III including any tax not mentioned
in either of those Lists.
List II—State List
1. Public order (but not including the use of any naval, military or air force or any other
armed force of the Union or of any other force subject to the control of the Union or of any
contingent or unit thereof in aid of the civil power).
2. Police (including railway and village police) subject to the provisions of entry 2A of
List 1.
3. Officers and servants of the High Court; procedure in rent and revenue courts; fees
taken in all courts except the Supreme Court.
4. Prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like nature,
and persons detained therein; arrangements with other States for the use of prisons and
other institutions.
5. Local government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of municipal
corporations, improvement trusts, districts boards, mining settlement authorities and other
local authorities for the purpose of local self-government or village administration.
6. Public health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries.
7. Pilgrimages, other than pilgrimages to places outside India.
8. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture, possession, transport,
purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors.
9. Relief of the disabled and unemployable.
10. Burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds.
* * * * *

17
12. Libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the
State; ancient and historical monuments and records other than those declared by or under
law made by Parliament to be of national importance.
13. Communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries, and other means of
communication not specified in List I; municipal tramways; ropeways; inland waterways and
traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List I and List III with regard to such waterways;
vehicles other than mechanically propelled vehicles.
14. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests
and prevention of plant diseases.
15. Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal
diseases; veterinary training and practice.
16. Pounds and the prevention of cattle trespass.
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments,
water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List I.
18. Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the relation of
landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land;
land improvement and agricultural loans; colonization.
* * * * *
21. Fisheries.
22. Courts of wards subject to the provisions of entry 34 of List I: encumbered and
attached estates.
23. Regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the provisions of List I
with respect to regulation and development under the control of the Union.
24. Industries subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I.
25. Gas and gas-works.
26. Trade and commerce within the State subject to the provisions of entry 33 of
List III.
27. Production supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions of entry 33
of List III.
28. Markets and fairs.
* * * * *
30. Money-lending and money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness.
31. Inns and inn-keepers.
32. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than those specified
in List I, and universities; unincorporated trading, literary, scientific, religious and other
societies and associations; co-operative societies.
33. Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60
of List I; sports, entertainments and amusements.
34. Betting and gambling.
35. Works, lands buildings vested in or in the possession of the State
* * * * *
37. Elections to the Legislature of the State subject to the provisions of any law made
by Parliament.
38. Salaries and allowances of members of the Legislature of the State, of the Speaker
and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, if there is a Legislative Council, of the
Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof.

18
39. Powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of the members
and the committees thereof, and, if there is a Legislative Council, of that Council and of the
members and the committees thereof; enforcement of attendance of persons for giving
evidence or producing documents before committees of the Legislature of the State.
40. Salaries and allowances of Ministers for the State.
41. State public services; State Public Service Commission.
42. State pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the State or out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State.
43. Public debt of the State.
44. Treasure trove.
45. Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, the maintenance
of land records, survey for revenue purposes and records of rights and alienation of revenues.
46. Taxes on agricultural income.
47. Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land.
48. Estate duty in respect of agricultural land.
49. Taxes on lands and buildings.
50. Taxes on mineral rights subject to any limitations imposed by Parliament by law
relating to mineral development.
51. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced in the State and
countervailing duties at the same or lower rates on similar goods manufactured or produced
elsewhere in India:—
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption;
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, but not including
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in
sub-paragraph (b) of this entry.
52. Taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or sale therein.
53. Taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity.
54. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, subject to the
provisions of entry 92A of List I.
55. Taxes on advertisements other than advertisements published in the newspapers
and advertisements broadcast by radio or television.
56. Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways.
57. Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on
roads, including tramcars subject to the provsions of entry 35 of List III.
58. Taxes on animals and boats.
59. Tolls.
60. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.
61. Capitation taxes.
62. Taxes on luxuries, including taxes on entertainments, amusements, betting and
gambling.
63. Rates of stamp duty in respect of documents other than those specified in the
provisions of List I with regard to rates of stamp duty.

19
64. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.
65. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any
of the matters in this List.
66. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any
court.
List III—Concurrent List
1. Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at the
commencement of this Constitution but exculuding offences against laws with respect to
any of the matters specified in List I or List II and excluding the use of naval, military or air
forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid of the civil power.
2. Criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Criminal Procedure
at the commencement of this Constitution.
3. Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State, the
maintenance of public order, or the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the
community; persons subjected to such detention.
4. Removal from one State to another State of prisioners, accused persons and persons
subjected to preventive detention for reasons specified in entry 3 of this List.
5. Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and succession;
joint family and partition; all matters in respect of which parties in judicial proceedings were
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution subject to their personal laws.
6. Transfer of property other than agricultural land; registration of deeds and
documents.
7. Contracts, including partnership, agency, contracts of carriage, and other special
forms of contracts, but not including contracts relating to agricultural land.
8. Actionable wrongs.
9. Bankruptcy and insolvency.
10. Trust and Trustees.
11. Administrators-general and official trustees.
11A. Administration of Justice; constitution and organisation of all courts, except the
Supreme Court and the High Courts.
12. Evidence and oaths; recognition of laws, public acts and records, and judicial
proceedings.
13. Civil procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil Procedure at the
commencement of this Constitution, limitation and arbitration.
14. Contempt of court, but not including contempt of the Supreme Court.
15. V agrancy; nomadic and migratory tribes.
16. Lunacy and mental deficiency, including places for the reception or treatment of
lunatics and mental deficients.
17. Prevention of cruelty to animals.
17A. Forests.
17B. Protection of wild animals and birds.
18. Adulteration of foodstuffs and other goods.
19. Drugs and poisons, subject to the provisions of entry 59 of List I with respect to
opium.

20
20. Economic and social planning.
20A. Population control and family planning.
21. Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts.
22. Trade unions; industrial and labour disputes.
23. Social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment.
24. Welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds, employers' liability,
workmen's compensation, invalidity and old age pensions and maternity benefits.
25. Education, including technical education, medical education and universities,
subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical
training of labour.
26. Legal, medical and other professions.
27. Relief and rehabilitation of persons displaced from their original place of residence
by reasons of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan.
28. Charities and charitable institutions, charitable and religious endowments and
religious institutions.
29. Prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or contagious
diseases of pests affecting men, animals or plants.
30. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
31. Ports other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law
to be major ports.
32. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechanically propelled
vessels, and the rule of the road on such waterways, and the carriage of passengers and
goods on inland waterways subject to the provisions of List I with respect to national
water- ways.
33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of,
(a) the products of any industry where the control of such industry by the
Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest, and
imported goods of the same kind as such products;
(b) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils;
(c) cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concentrates;
(d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed; and
(e) raw jute.
33A. Weights and measures except establishment of standards.
34. Price control.
35. Mechanically propelled vehicles including the principles on which taxes on such
vehicles are to be levied.
36. Factories.
37. Boilers.
38. Electricity.
39. Newspapers, books and printing presses.
40. Archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by or under law made
by Parliament to be of national importance.

21
41. Custody, management and disposal of property (including agricultural land) declared
by law to be evacuee property.
42. Acquisition and requisitioning of property.
43. Recovery in a State of claims in respect of taxes and other public demands, including
arrears of land-revenue and sums recoverable as such arrears, arising outide that State.
44. Stamp duties other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial stamps, but
not including rates of stamp duty.
45. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters specified in List II or
List III.
46. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any
of the matters in this List.
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any
court.
* * * * *
* * * * *
246. (1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses ( 2) and ( 3), Parliament has exclusive
power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh
Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the "Union List").
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament, and, subject to clause (1), the
Legislature of any State also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the
"Concurrent List").
(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any State has exclusive power to
make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in
List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the "State List").
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the
territory of India not included [in a State] notwithstanding that such matter is a matter
enumerated in the State List.
* * * * *
* * * * *
248. (1) Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter not
enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.
(2) Such power shall include the power of making any law imposing a tax not mentioned
in either of those Lists.
* * * * *
* * * * *
254. (1) If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any
provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to any
provision of an existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent
List, then, subject to the provisions of clause ( 2), the law made by Parliament, whether
passed before or after the law made by the Legislature of such State, or, as the case may be,
the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislature of the State shall, to the
extent of the repugnancy, be void.
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State with respect to one of the matters
enumerated in the Concurrent List contains any provision repugnant to the provisions of an
Subject-
matter of
laws made by
Parliament
and by the
Legislatures
of States.
Residuary
powers of
legislation.
Inconsistency
between laws
made by
Parliament
and laws
made by the
Legislatures
of States.

22
earlier law made by Parliament or an existing law with respect to that matter, then, the law so
made by the Legislature of such State shall, if it has been reserved for the consideration of
the President and has received his assent, prevail in that State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent Parliament from enacting at any time
any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or
repealing the law so made by the Legislature of the State.
* * * * *
* * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4607RS—26.02.2016.