THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT )
BILL,  2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the  Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2)    It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In  section  5 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words “twenty-two members out of which one-third shall be women”,
the words, brackets and letters “twenty-three members, and out of the members referred
to in clauses (b), (c), (d), (f) and (g), one-third shall be women” shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted,  namely:—
“(aa) Chief Executive Officer of the  Food Authority, Member-Secretary
ex officio;”.
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 5.
34 of 2006.
Bill No. X of 2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
5
10

2
3.   After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“7A. The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and
directions in the conduct of the affairs of the Food Authority and shall, in addition to
presiding over the meetings of the Food Authority, exercise and discharge such other
powers and functions of the Food Authority, as may be assigned to him by the Food
Authority.”.
4.  In section 92 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Central Government may, in the public interest, by order in
writing, dispense with the condition of previous publication in any case.”.
Insertion of new
section 7A.
Powers of
Chairperson.
Amendment
of section 92.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Food Safety and Standards Act was enacted in the year 2006 with a view to
consolidate the laws relating to Food in the country and to establish the Food Safety and
Standards Authority of India for laying down science-based standards for articles of food
and to regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import and to ensure
availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption.
2. Sub-section (1) of section 5 of the said Act provides for the composition of the Food
Authority consisting of a Chairperson and twenty-two members, which does not include the
Chief Executive Officer. It is proposed to include the Chief Executive Officer in the composition
of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India.
3. Further sub-section (1) of section 5 of the said Act provides that one-third of the
members shall be women in the composition of the said Authority. Out of twenty-two Members
of the said Authority 12 members are nominated by the Central Ministries, Departments, the
States or Union territories. It is quite difficult to ensure appointment of 1/3rd women members
out of these 12 members. This makes it imperative to appoint 7 women members out of
remaining 10 part-time members representing food industry, consumers' organisations, eminent
food technologists and scientists, farmers' organisations and retailers' organisations.
Therefore, it is proposed to amend sub-section (1) of section 5 of the said Act so as to
provide that the provision regarding one-third members being women, shall be applicable to
the members referred to in clauses (b), (c), (d), (f) and (g) of sub-section (1) of section 5 of the
said Act.
4. Section 5 of the said Act empowers the Central Government to appoint the Chairperson
in such a menner so as to secure the highest standards of competence and relevant expertise.
The Chairperson is expected to not only guide the organisation in its initial stages but also
help in laying down systems, procedures and structures to enable the said Authority to
function as per the legal mandate. The Act, however, does not specifically provide for this
essential role of guiding and overseeing the work of the said Authority, though under
section 16 of the Act, the said Authority is mandated to regulate and monitor the manufacture,
processing, distribution, sale and import of food so as to ensure safe and wholesome food.
As laid down in the preamble to the Act, it is necessary to provide a single line of command
in the Food Authority to provide direction and accountability. Therefore, it is proposed to
insert section 7A in the said Act to address the need for continuity of policies, enabling the
Chairperson to guide the affairs of the Food Authority.
5. The section 92 empowers the said Authority to make regulations by notification with
the previous approval of the Central Government and after previous publication. It is proposed
to amend the said section so as to empower the Central Government to dispense with the
condition of previous publication in certain cases, in the public interest.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; GHULAM NABI AZAD
The 13th February, 2014.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006
(34 OF 2006)
* * * * *
5.  (1) The Food Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and the following twenty-two
members out of which one-third shall be women, namely:—
(a) seven Members, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of
India, to be appointed by the Central Government, to respectively represent the
Ministries or Departments of the Central Government dealing with—
(i) Agriculture,
(ii) Commerce,
(iii) Consumer Affairs,
(iv) Food Processing,
(v) Health,
(vi) Legislative Affairs,
(vii) Small Scale Industries,
who shall be Members ex officio;
(b) two representatives from food industry of which one shall be from small scale
industries;
(c) two representatives from consumer organisations;
(d) three eminent food technologists or scientists;
(e) five members to be appointed by rotation every three years, one each in
seriatim from the Zones as specified in the First Schedule to represent the States and
the Union territories;
(f) two persons to represent farmers’ organisations;
(g) one person to represent retailers’ organisations.
* * * * *
92. (1) The Food authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Government
and after previous publication, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act
and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.
* * * * *
Composition
of Food
Authority and
qualifications
for
appointment
of its
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Power of
Food
Authority to
make
regulations.
4

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
GMGIPMRND—4446RS(S3)—17.02.2014.