AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. X of 2025 
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:– 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information (Amendment) Act,
2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
22 of 2005 2. In the Right to Information Act, 2005, in section 19, in sub -section (6),
after the words “An appeal under sub -section (1) or sub-section (2)”, the 
words “or a second appeal under sub-section (3)”, shall be inserted. 
Amendment of 
section 19.  

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Right to Information Act, 2005, provides for a specific time-frame for 
the disposal of requests for information made to the Central Public Information 
Officer or the State Public Information Officer under Section 7(1) of the Act. 
Further, the Act provides for a specific time- frame for the disposal of first 
appeals preferred against an order made by a Central Public Information Officer 
or a State Public Information Officer. 
However, the Act, in its present f orm, is lacking when it comes to 
establishing a specific time-frame for the disposal of second appeals made to the 
Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission. 
As a result of this, second appeals made before the Central Information 
Commission or the State Information Commission often remain undisposed for a 
prolonged period of time which results in delay and adversely affects the right of 
a citizen to seek and receive information which is provided for under the Act. 
Therefore, there needs to be a specific time-frame in the Act for disposal of 
an appeal made to the Central Information Commission or the State Information 
Commission. 
Hence, this Bill. 
 SAKET GOKHALE. 

3 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005 
(22 of 2005) 
1
9. 
 * *   * *   * 
(6) An appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be disposed of within
t
hirty days of the receipt of the appeal or within su ch extended period not
exceeding a total of forty-five days from the date of filing thereof, as the case may
be, for reasons to be recorded in writing.
* 
*   * *   * 
Appeal. 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005. 
(Shri Saket Gokhale, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)—273–08.12.2025.