AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. X of 2026 
THE MEDICAL GASES (QUALITY, SAFETY AND REGULATION) 
 BILL, 2026 
_____________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
_____________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1.
Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Guiding principle for interpretation and application.
CHAPTER II 
NATIONAL MEDICAL GASES REGULATORY AUTHORITY
4.
Establishment of the National Authority.
5. Composition of the National Authority.
6. Term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the National
Authority.
7. Powers and functions of the National Authority.
8. Promotion of research and capacity building.
9. Officers and other employees of the National Authority.
CHAPTER III 
S
TATE MEDICAL GASES REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
10
. Establishment of State Authority.
CHAPTER IV 
LICENSING AND MANUFACTURING PRACTICES COMPLIANCE
11.
Licensing of medical gas producers.
12. Manufacturing practices for medical gases.

(ii) 
CHAPTER V 
INSPECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
CLAUSES 
1
3. Powers of inspection.
14. Offences and penalties.
15. Offences by companies.
16. Mandatory reporting of incidents.
17. Recall of unsafe or sub-standard medical gases.
C
HAPTER VI 
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
1
8. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.
C
HAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
19. Grants by Central Government.
20. Constitution of Fund.
21. Accounts and Audit of the National Authority.
22. Annual Reports.
23. Grants by State Government.
24. Accounts and Audit of State Authority.
C
HAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS
2
5. Power of Central Government to make rules.
26. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
27. Power of National Authority to make regulations.
28. Power of State Government to make rules.
29. Transitional provisions.
30. Act to have overriding effect.
31. Power to remove difficulties.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. X of 2026 
THE MEDICAL GASES (QUALITY, SAFETY AND 
REGULATION) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a National Authority and State 
Authorities for regulating quality standards, licensing, 
 inspection, current good manufacturing practices 
 compliance, and safe manufacture, storage, 
 distribution, and use of medical gases, 
 and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental 
 thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seven ty-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:― 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Gases (Quality, Safety and
Regulation) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)    “Appellate Tribunal” means the National Appellate Medical Gases
Tribunal established under section 18;
(b)  “Fund” means the Medical Gases Regulation Fund established
under section 20;
(c) “manufacturing practices” means current good manufacturing
practices applicable to medical gases, including requirements relating to
quality systems, production and process controls, testing and qualit y
assurance, personnel qualifications, premises and facilities, equipment design, 
calibration, cleaning and maintenance, distribution controls and record -
keeping, and as may be prescribed;
(d) “medical gas” means any drug which is manufactured, processed or
stored in a liquefied, non-liquefied, or cryogenic state and is administered to
human beings as a gas for therapeutic, diagnostic or prophylactic purposes,
and includes the following designated medical gases, namely:—
(i) oxygen;
(ii) nitrogen;
(iii) nitrous oxide;
(iv) carbon dioxide;
(v) helium;
(vi) carbon monoxide; and
(vii)medical air;
as recognized in any official pharmacopeia for the time being in force; 
 E
xplanation.— For the purposes of this Act, the  expression “medical 
gas” shall not include gases used solely as excipients in drug products which 
are not medical gases, gases used merely as processing aids, or gases  which 
do not qualify as drugs under any law for the time being in force.  
(e) “medical gas producer” means any person engaged in the
manufacture, processing, filling, refilling, transfilling, packing, repacking, 
storage, or distribution of medical gases; 
( f) “National Authority” means the National Medical Gases Regulatory
Authority established under section 4; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) “
regulations” means regulations made by the National Authority
under this Act; 
( i) “State Authority” means a State or Union territory Medical Gases
Regulatory Authority that may be established in every State and Union 
territory under section 10. 
5 
 
10 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
35 
Guiding 
principle for 
interpretation 
and 
application.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be construed and applied with a view to
ensuring that the quality and safety of medical gases are maintained so as to 
protect human life, particularly in critical care, neonatal care, emergency 
medicine, anaesthesia and during public health emergencies. 
 
40 
. 
CHAPTER II 
NATIONAL MEDICAL GASES REGULATORY AUTHORITY
Establishment 
of the 
National 
Authority
. 
4. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish an Authority to be known as the National Medical Gases
Regulatory Authority to perform the functions assigned to it under this
Act.
(2) The National Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold, and dispose of
 
45 
50 

3 
 5 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said 
name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The headquarters of the National Authority shall be at such place in the
country as the Central Government may, by notification, specify.
(4)  The National Authority shall function as the apex scientific and regulatory 
body for medical gases in the country and shall exercise such powers a nd
pe
rform such functions as are assigned to it under this Act.
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
5. (1) The National Authority shall consist of the following, namely:—
(a ) a Chairperson, being a person of eminence in medical
gases, pharmaceutical sciences, chemical engineering, biomedical 
engineering, or public health regulation; 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, a person shall be 
deemed to be a person of eminence in medical gases if he has demonstrated 
outstanding expertise or experience in the manufacture, regulation, clinical 
use or safety management of medical gases. 
(b) a Vice-Chairperson, possessing special knowledge and
professional experience in regulatory science or industrial gas 
safety; 
(c) five full -time Members, to be appointed from amongst
persons having proven expertise in— 
( i) medical gas manufacturing and manufacturing
practices  compliance, 
( ii) analytical chemistry and quality assurance,
(iii) clinical use of medical gases or anesthesiology,
(iv) industrial safety and pressure systems engineering,
and 
(v) regulatory affairs or public administration;
(d) three ex-officio Members, namely—
(i) the Drugs Controller General of India;
( ii) a representative not below the rank of Joint
Secretary from the Union Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare; and 
(i ii) a representative not below the rank of Joint
Secretary from the Union Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
or the Union Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers; 
( e)  two part-time Members representing academic or research 
institutions, to be nominated by the Central Government. 
(2) The composition of the Authority shall ensure adequate representation of
scientific, technical, clinical and regulatory expertise.
(3) T he Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson and Members, other than the  ex-
officio Members, shall be appointed by the Central Government on the
recommendation of a Search -cum-Selection Committee constituted for the
purpose in such manner as may be prescribed.
Composition of 
the National 
Authority. 
 
45 
6. (1) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and the full-time Members shall hold
office for a term not exceeding four years from the date on which they enter 
upon their office, and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one further term. 
(2) Th e salaries and allo wances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson, and
Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
Term of office and 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson and 
Members of the 
National Authority. 

4 
Powers and 
functions of 
the National 
Authority.
7. (1) The National Authority shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) specify national standards for the quality and safety of medical
gases; 
(b) specify regulatory norms based on manufacturing practices for
the manufacture, processing, filling, equipment control, testing, 
labelling, and distribution of medical gases; 
(c) accredit laboratories for testing of medical gases, including
tests for purity, identity, humidity, contamination, and composition; 
(d) conduct or cause to be conducted scientific inspections and
audits of medical gas production facilities; 
(e) maintain a national registry of licensed medical gas
producers; 
(f) coordinate with State Authorities in matters relating to
compliance, enforcement, investigation and recall of medical gases; and
(g) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it under
this Act or as may be prescribed. 
(2) T
he National Authority may, for the efficient discharge of its functions and
in furtherance of the objects of this Act , issue directions consistent with the
provisions of this Act to any State Authority, manufactu rer, licensee, o r
accredited laboratory.
 
5 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
Promotion of 
research and 
capacity 
building.
8. The National Authority may promote and facilitate research and capacity
building in relation to medical gases, including research on:
(a) causes and prevention of contamination;
(b) technologies for humidity control;
(c) mitigation of risks relating to fungal infections;
(d) development of emergency oxygen surge capacity; and
(e) safe blending, storage and handling practices.
25 
Officers and 
other 
employees of 
the National 
Authority.  
9. (1) The Central Government shall provide the National Authority with
such officers and other employees, as may be necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) The  method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other
employees, so appointed for the purposes of the National Authority shall
be such as may be prescribed.
 
30 
CHAPTER III 
STATE MEDICAL GASES REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
 
35 
Establishment 
of State 
Authority. 
10. (1) There shall be established in every State and Union territory, by th e
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, a body 
to be known as the ------- (name of the State or Union territory) Medical
Gases Regulatory Authority for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Authority shall exercise such powers and perform such functions 
as are conferred upon it under this Act, including—
(a) grant, renewal, suspension and cancellation of licences;
( b) inspection and surveillance of compliance with manufacturing
practices; 
(c) investigation of accidents and safety incidents relating to
medical gases; 
 
40 
45 

5 
 
5 of 1908.
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
20 
(d) monitoring of consumer and patient safety; and
( e) institution of prosecutions for offences under this Act.
(3) The State Authority shall exercise its powers and discharge its functions
within the State, subject to such standards, guidelines and coordination
mechanisms as may be specified by the National Authority under this Act.
(4) T he composition of the State Au thority, the qualifications and
experience, term of office, salary and allowances of the Chairperson and
Members of the State Authority as well as the regulation of its procedure
s
hall be such as may be prescribed by the respective State Government.
(5) The  State Authority shall, while inquiring into any matter referred to it
under this Act, have the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit and, in particular, in respect of the
following, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or document or copy thereof
from any court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and/or
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV 
LICENSING AND MANUFACTURING PRACTICES COMPLIANCE
 
25 
30 
35 
11. (1) No person shall manufacture, process, fill, refill, transfill, store, distribute
or supply any medical gas except under and in accordance with a  licence 
issued by the State Authority  subject to payment of such fees and in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) A licence granted under sub-section (1) shall be valid for a period of one
year and shall be renewable in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed, including—  
(a) compliance with manufacturing practices requirements;
(b ) compliance with requirements of inspection of facilities,
equipment, personnel, and record systems; and 
( c) demonstration of adequate quality systems.
(3) The fees payable for the grant or renewal of a licence shall be such as may
be
 prescribed and shall be credited to the Fund constituted under section 20.
Licensing of 
medical gas 
producers. 
 
40 
45 
12. (1) Every licensed medical gas producer shall comply with the manufacturing
practices applicable to medical gases, as may be prescribed. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), such manufacturing
p
ractices may provide for requirements relating to—
(
a) organisation and personnel, including requirements relating to
adequate qualifications, training, experience and periodic refresher 
training in manufacturing practices, conducted by competent persons, to 
ensure that personnel remain conversant with applicable requirements; 
(b) buildings and facilities, including requirements relating to
adequate space, hygienic design, protection against contamination, 
Manufacturing 
practices for 
medical gases. 

6 
physical segregation to prevent mix -ups, cleanable surfaces and 
appropriate environmental controls; 
(c) equipment, including req uirements relating to appropriate
design, capacity and placement, periodic maintenance, calibration and 
cleaning, use of non -reactive materials, and documented procedures for 
inspection, cleaning and maintenance; 
(d) production and process controls to ensure the identity, strength,
quality, purity and correct filling of medical gases, including validated 
procedures for evacuation of containers, controlled filling, leak detection 
and pressure-temperature safety checks; 
(e) laboratory controls, including test ing for identity, strength,
impurities, contaminants, and humidity , validation of test methods, 
calibration of instruments and maintenance of records; and 
(f) packaging, labelling and distribution controls, including colour
coding, prevention of mix -ups, d istribution traceability and recall 
mechanisms. 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
CHAPTER V 
INSPECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Powers of 
inspection.
13. (1) The State Authority, or any officer authorised by it in this behalf, may, in
such manner as may be prescribed, inspect—
(a) any premises where medical gases are manufactured, processed,
filled, refilled, transfilled or stored; 
(b) filling stations and related facilities;
(c) records, including electronic or computerised records, relating to
the manufacture, testing, storage or distribution of medical gases; 
(d) testing laboratories engaged in the analysis of medical gases; and
(e) containers, closure systems, manifolds, hoses, gauges and any
other equipment that comes into contact with medical gases. 
(2) An officer authorised under sub-section (1) may, for the purposes of this
Act—
(a) take samples of any medical gas for testing or analysis;
(b) seal or seize any stock of medical gases found to be unsafe,
contaminated or non-compliant with the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder; 
(c) order the imm ediate stoppage of manufacture, filling or
distribution, where such activity poses a risk to public health or safety; 
and 
(d) recommend to the competent authority the suspension or
cancellation of a licence, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Offences and 
penalties.
14. (1) Any person who manufactures,  processes, fills, refills, transfills, stores,
distributes or supplies any medical gas which does not conform to the
standards specified under this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be guilty
of an offence.
(2) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) shall be punishable—
(a) for the first offence, with fine which may extend to twenty -five
lakh rupees; 
 
40 
 
45 

7 
 
5 
10 
15 
(b) for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to 
one crore rupees, or with both; and 
(c) with suspension, cancellation or non- renewal of the licence, in
such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) Where the manufacture or supply of any sub -standard, contaminated,
moisture-laden or fungus-conducive medical gas or gas mixture results in, or
is likely to result in, injury to health or death of any patient, such offence shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years,
and with fine.
(4) Any person who—
(a) wilfully contravenes manufacturing practices;
(b) falsifies,   alters  or  suppresses   records   required   to   be
maintained under this Act; or 
(c) mislabels or tampers with containers or cylinders of medical
gases, 
shall be deemed to have committed a cognizable offence punishable under 
sub-section (3). 
 
20 
25 
30 
35 
15. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of that part of the business of the
company as well as the company, shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
        P rovided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided under this Act, if he proves 
that the offence was committed  
without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— 
(a) “company” means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and 
(b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
Offences by 
companies. 
 
40 
45 
16. (1) Every medical gas producer shall, in such manner and within such time as
may be prescribed, report to the appropriate Authority any occurrence of—
(a) contamination or suspected contamination of medical gases;
(b) breach of prescribed humidity or moisture limits;
(c) failure or malfunction of equipment used in the manufacture,
filling or storage of medical gases; 
(d) leakage, filling defect or other defect affecting the integrity or
safety of containers; or 
(e) any adverse event or serious risk to health a ssociated with the
use of medical gases. 
Mandatory 
reporting of 
incidents. 

8 
(2) The obligation under sub -section (1) shall apply irrespective of whether
such occurrence results in actual harm.
Recall of 
unsafe or sub-
standard 
medical 
gases.
17. Where any batch of medical gas is found to be unsafe or sub -standard, the
State Authority, may, in such manner as may be prescribed, direct the
manufacturer or any other person responsible, to forthwith recall such batch
from the market, at his own cost.
 
5 
CHAPTER VI 
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
Establishment 
of Appellate 
Tribunal.
18. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Appellate
Tribunal to be known as the National Appellate Medical Gases Tribunal.
(2) The composition of the Appellate Tribunal, the qualifications and
experience, term of office, salary and allowances of the Chairperson and
Members of the Appellate Tribunal as well as the regulation of its
procedure shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) Any medical gas producer aggrieved by an order of suspension or
cancellation of licence, or imposition of penalty, passed by the National 
Authority or a State Authority under this Act, may prefer an appeal to the 
Appellate Tribunal within such period and in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall, after giving the parties to the appeal a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such order thereon as it thinks fit,
within such time as may be prescribed.
 
10 
 
15 
20 
CHAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
Grants by 
Central 
Government.
19. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the National Authority and the 
State Authority for a Union territory, by way of grants such sums of 
money as the Central Government may think fit for bei ng utlilised for 
the purposes of this Act. 
 
25 
Constitution 
of Fund. 
20. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
constituted for the purposes of this Act, a Fund to be called the Medical 
Gases Regulation Fund, and there shall be credited thereto— 
(a) fees received for the grant or renewal of licences under this
Act; 
(b) penalties realised under this Act;
(c) grants or loans made by the Central Government; and
(d) voluntary contributions, donations or other receipts,
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting the expenditure incurred in the
discharge of the functions under this Act, including— 
(a) strengthening of regulatory and inspection mechanisms;
(b) establishment and accreditation of laboratories;
(c) training and capacity-building of personnel; and
(d) preparedness and response to medical gas emergencies.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the National Authority in such manner
as may be prescribed.
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 

9 
(4) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by such auditor as may be
prescribed every three months and the audit report shall be laid , as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
21. (1) The National Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the National Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
National Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor- General and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the National Authority under
this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally
has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular,
shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of
the National Authority.
(4) The accounts of the National Authority, as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor -General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf,
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the
Central Government by the National Authority and the Central Government
shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
Accounts and 
Audit of the 
National 
Authority. 
 
30 
 
35 
40 
22. (1) The National Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within
such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government, which shall
cause it, as soon as may be after its receipt, to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
(2) T he State Authority shall, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed,
submit annual reports to the Central Government and to the respective State
Government, as the case may be on matters within its jurisdiction:
Provided that the Central Government shall cause such report received by it, 
as soon as may be after its receipt, to be laid before each House of Parliament: 
Provided further that the State Government, shall cause such report, as soon 
as may be after its receipt, to be laid before both Houses of the State 
Legislature, where it consists of tw o Houses, or where such Legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 
Annual Reports. 
23. The State Government shall, after due, appropriation made by Legislature by
law in this behalf, pay to the State Authority for that State by way of grants 
such sums of money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised 
for the purposes of this Act. 
Grants by State 
Government. 
 
45 
 
50 
24. (1) The State Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government or the State Government, as the cas e
m
ay be, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the State Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable  by the
State Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
Accounts and 
Audit of State 
Authority. 

10 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the State Authority under this
Act shall have the same rights and privi leges and the authority in connection
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of
the State Authority.
(4) The accounts of the State Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together
with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government or the State Govern
ment, as the case may be, by the State
Authority and the audit report shall be caused to be laid, as soon as may be
after it is received, before the Houses of Parliament or the State Legislature.
 
5 
10 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
15 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules.
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or a nnulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
 
20 
 
25 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to issue 
directions.  
26. (1) The Central Government may issue directions to the National Authority
or any State Authority as it considers necessary in the public interest,
particularly during pandemics or disasters and such Authority shall be bound
to comply with such directions.
(2) If any question arises as to whether any direction relates to a matter of
policy involving public interest, the decision of the Central Government
thereon shall be final.
 
30 
 
35 
Power of 
National 
Authority to 
make 
regulations.
27. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the
National Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, by notification, make regulations to carry out the provisions of
this Act.
(2) Every regulation made by the National Authority under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the
regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that regulation.
40 
 
45 
Power of 
State 
Government 
to make rules.
28. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature
50 

11 
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House. 
29. The existing medical gas producers shall comply with the provisions of this
Act within two years of the commencement of this Act.
Transitional 
provisions. 
 
5 30. The provisions of this Act shall have over  riding effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being
in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this
Act.
Act to have 
overriding effect. 
 
10 
 
15 
31. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear
to be necessary for removing the difficulty.
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of tw o
y
ears from the date of commencement of the Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to remove 
difficulties. 

12 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        Medical gases such as Oxygen, Nitrogen, Nitrous Oxide, Carbon Dioxide, 
Helium, Carbon Monoxide, and Medical Air are critical life-supporting drugs essential 
for surgical, emergency, and intensive care. Their quality, purity, humidity levels, and 
absence o f contaminants are directly linked to human life and medical outcomes. 
During the second wave of COVID -19, numerous cases emerged where medical 
oxygen containing high humidity and impurities resulted in fungal infections, 
including mucormycosis, leading to tragic loss of eyes, ears, and even life. These 
incidents highlighted the urgent necessity for strict scientific regulation, real -time 
inspections, and Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) enforcement across 
the entire spectrum of medical gas production and distribution. 
        Presently, there is no unified national scientific authority dedicated to 
monitoring medical gas quality across states. This Bill seeks to establish a National 
Scientific Authority and State Authorities to regulate quality 
standards, enforce 
CGMP, inspect facilities, license producers annually, impose penalties for substandard 
quality, and protect patient safety. This Bill further recognizes that medical gases are 
essential medicines whose quality standards must never be com promised, especially 
during pandemics or emergencies. 
 H ence, this Bill.  
AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE. 

13 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
        Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Medical Gases 
Regulatory Authority, Clause 5 for its composition , and Clause 6 and 9 provide for the  
salaries and allowances payable and other terms and conditions of services of the members, 
officers and other staff of the National Authority. Clause 7 provides for maintaining a 
national registry of licensed medical gas producers by the National Authority. Clause 18 
provides for the establishment of the National Appellate Medical Gases Tribun al. Clause 
19 provides that the Central Government shall provide grants to the Authority for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act and Clause 20 provides for establishment of the Medical Gases 
Regulation Fund. 
        The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non -recurring and recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is difficult 
to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved.  

14 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
        Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 27 empowers the National Authority to make 
regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 31 provides that the Central 
Government may make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary for removing any 
difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill.  
        A s the rules, regulations, orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative details only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
______________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a National Authority and State 
Authorities for regulating quality standards, licensing,  
inspection, current good manufacturing practices  
compliance, and safe manufacture, storage, 
 distribution, and use of medical gases,  
and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental  
thereto. 
______________ 
(Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade, M.P.) 
   RS-P&PS—PMB(E)―075― 10.02.2026. 