AS INTRODUCED IN THE RasyA SABHA

Bill No. X of 2001
a
THE HAWKERS, VENDORS, RICKSHAW PULLERS AND ROADSIDE
MECHANICS (FREEDOM OF EARNING LIVELIHOOD) BILL, 2001

A
BL
to provide for the complete freedom to earn livelihood to the hawkers of various household
items including vegetabies, fruits, utensils, wares and clothes etc., vendors of food
items and other small items such as newspapers, books, tools etc., cycle rickshaw
pullers and roadside mechanics of various items hy way of prohibiting the police
and officials of local bodies to impound or take away their wares and stuff so as to

enable the poor and unemployed citizens to feed their families and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Bz it cnacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Hawkers, Vendors, Rickshaw Pullers and Roadside
Mechanics (Freedom of Earning Livelihood) Act, 2001.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government.

Short title, ©
extent and
commencement,

Definitions.


Freedom to
earning
livelihood.

Local Self
overnment
authorities not
to impound the
articles ete.

Certain condi-
tions to be
followed by
hawkers etc.

Appropriate
Government
to ensure
freedom of
earning
livelihood.

Overriding
effect of the
Act.

Power to give
directions.

Power to
remove
difficulties,

Power to make
tules.

2

(8) “hawker” means a person who sells household items such as vegetables,
fruits, clothes, utensils, food items, dry fruits etc. by going from house to house or
street to street hawking on cart, bicycle basket or any other mode;

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

. (व) “rickshaw puller” means a person who physically pulls a cycle rickshaw of
any kind to earn his livelihood;

(e) “roadside mechanic” include the person repairing cycle, cycle rickshaw,
scooters, motor cycles, cars and other motorised vehicles, person repairing footwear,
utensils and other wares by the roadside or under the tree without erecting any
permanent structure at the site;

(f) “vendor” means a person who sells food items, fruits, vegetables and other
small items of household from a stall or place in the open air.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
hawkers, rickshaw pullers, roadside mechanics, vendors and persons carrying similar other
vocations shall have complete freedom to earn their livelihood without any hindrance from
any authority whatsoever including those of Police and Local Self Government,

4, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
authority of any Local Self Government, such as Municipalities, Municipal Corporations,
Municipal Councils or by whatever name called, shall impound the articles, tools, carts, cycle
rickshaws etc. belonging to the hawkers, rickshaw pullers, roadside mechanics, vendors, as
the case maz; be.

5. For earning livelihood under the provisions of this Act; .

(a) ahawker shall not hawk any article which is injurious to health and he shall
not obstruct the public place and traffic flow;

(0) a rickshaw puller and roadside mechanic shall not obstruct the flow of traffic
ot vehicles and pedestrians, as the case may be;

(c) a vendor shall not sell anything which is injurious to health.

6. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure strict compliance of the
provisions of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.

7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.

8. The Central Government may give directions to the Government of any State as to
the carrying into execution in the State of the provisions of this Act.

9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

After the population explosion, the worst problem our country 1s facing today is ever
growing unemployment scenario. The number of unemployed is growing menacingly.
Government services have become scarce due to trimming of Government Departments.
Public Sector Undertakings are resorting to Voluntary Retirement Schemes and moreover
they are being disinvested for ultimate privatisation hence there are no jobs in the Public
Sector Undertakings. Agriculture which used to be biggest emplayment provider 1s also
undergoing slump because of unremunerative price structure and fall in prices of commodities.
The Private Sector is relying more and more on computers. Thus the employment generation
is not commensurate with the growing population.

Sclf-employment seems to be the only way to tackle unemployment but it requires
finance and every one can not afford to have that, Some citizens try to earn their livelihood
through rickshaw pulling or by hawking or vending articles or repairing motor vehicles,
cycles. footwear etc. by the roadside but most of them are hounded by local police and
Municipal employees. They have to grease the palms of the police and Municipal employees
or their articles and other things are taken away and impounded. Thus they remain under
threat and can not earn their livelihood with freedom. When state can not provide employment
to these poor people they should not be denied their right to earn livelihood. So it 1s felt that
there should be complete freedom for these poor people to earn their livelihood and there
should be no interference from police’or local authorities in their vocation.

Hence this Bill.

DR. DASARI NARAYANA RAO


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the complete freedom to earn livelihood to the hawkers of
various household items including vegetables, fruits, utensils, wares and
clothes etc., vendors of food items and other small items such as news-
papers, books, tools etc., cycle rickshaw pullers and roadside mechanics
of various items by way of prohibitirig the police and officials of local
bodies to impound or take away their wares and stuff so as to enable the
poor and unemployed citizens to feed their families and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6337RS—12-02-2001