1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill  No.  X of  2008
THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER
EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions
of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees
(Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In chapter II of the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions
of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955, after section 13AA, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008
Insertion of
new sections
13AB, 13AC
and 13AD.
5
45 of 1955.

2
‘‘13AB. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Fund to be called as the Working
Journalists Welfare Fund which shall consist of:—
(a) a contribution of rupees seventy-five crore by the Central Government;
(b) a monthly contribution from working journalists at such rate as may be
determined by the Board of Trustees constituted under section 13AC;
(c) voluntary donations from any individual or organization; and
(d) contributions from newspaper establishments in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Board of Trustees shall manage the fund in such manner as may be prescribed.
13AC. The Central Government shall constitute a Board of Trustees which shall consists
of,—
(a)  a Chairman who shall be nominated by the Central Government;
(b) such other members as in the opinion of the Central Government are required
to manage the Fund to be elected from amongst the representatives of organizations
representing the working journalists and other newspaper employees of the country.
13AD. The Board of Trustees shall,—
(a) provide adequate financial assistance to the dependents of a working
journalist who succumbs to untimely death due to an accident or otherwise;
(b) provide adequate financial assistance to the working journalists in case of
infirmity or disability due to an accident or old age; and
(c) undertake such welfare measures for working journalists as may be considered
appropriate.
Establishment
of Working
Journalists
Welfare Fund.
Constitution
of Board of
Trustees.
Functions of
Board of
Trustees.
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Ours is a democratic country. In a democratic country press is considered as the
Fourth Estate. The Press plays a very vital role through its proper functioning in a democratic
nation. Journalists too play an important role in the smooth functioning of the press by
covering news of public importance. Today is the age of information technology and
journalists have to put in extra efforts for gathering news undeterred by adverse milieu and
violence. Sometimes, they have to risk their lives in performing their duties. There have also
been incidents in which journalists either lost their lives or have become physically
handicapped in the accident. In such a situation, the family members and dependents of
such journalists have been left helpless.
It is, therefore, essential to amend the existing statute  "the Working Journalists and
Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
1955" in order to establish Fund for the welfare of Working Journalists who are engaged in
various newspapers establishments in the country. This will go a long way in inculcating a
sense of fearlessness in the minds of working journalists.
Hence, the Bill.
JAI  PARKASH  AGGARWAL.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Working Journalists Welfare
Fund and constitution of a Board of Trustees. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of about rupees seventy-five
crore is likely to be incurred as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifteen crore is also likely to be incurred thereon.
4

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of
Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955.
————
(Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4746RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.