THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 239 AA of the Constitution, in clause (2), in sub-clause (b), for the words
"Scheduled Castes", the words "the Scheduled Castes and the women" shall be substituted.
3. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following articles shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article
239AA.
Bill No. X of 2017
Insertion of
new articles
330A and
330B.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH APRIL, 2017

2
"330 A.(1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause ( 2) of
article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to Scheduled Castes, or the Scheduled
Tribes as the case may be:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State or Union Territory
so long as the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, as the
case may be, in the State of Union Territory, is less than three.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by
direct election to the House of the People in a State or Union Territory shall be reserved for
women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different territorial constituencies in the
State or Union Territory:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State or Union Territory
so long as the number of seats allotted to such State or Union Territory in the House of the
People under clause (2) of article 81, is less than three."
"330B. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Council of States.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of members to be nominated to the
Council of States by the President in accordance with clause (3) of article 80 shall be women.
(3) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats to be filled by the representatives
of each State and Union Territory to the Council of States shall be reserved for women:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State so long as the
number of seats allotted to such State or Union Territory in the Council of States, is less than
three."
4. After article 332 of the Constitution, the following articles shall be inserted, namely:
"332 A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of every
State.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause ( 3) of
article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to Scheduled Castes, or the Scheduled
Tribes as the case may be:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State so long as the
number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative
Assembly of the State, as the case may be, is less than three.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by
direct election to the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be reserved for women and
such seats may be allotted by rotation to different territorial constituencies in the State or
Union Territory.
"332 B. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Council of every State,
where such a Council exists.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of members elected to the Legislative
Council of each State by electorates consisting of members of local authorities in accordance
with sub-clause (1) of clause (3) of article 171 shall be women.
(3) Not less than one-third of the total number of members elected to the Legislative
Council of each State by electorates consisting of graduates in accordance with sub-clause
(b) of clause (3) of article 171 shall be women.
Reservation
of seats for
women in the
House of the
people.
Reservation
of seats for
women in the
Council of
States.
Insertion of
new articles
332A and
332B.
Reservation
of seats for
women in the
Legislative
Assemblies of
the States.
Reservation
of seats for
women in the
Legislative
Council of the
States.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(4) Not less than one-third of the total number of members elected to the Legislative
Council of each State by electorates consisting of teachers in accordance with sub-clause (c)
of clause (3) of article 171 shall be women.
(5) Not less than one-third of the total number of members elected to the Legislative
Council of each State by members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance
with sub-clause (d) of clause (3) of article 171 shall be women.
(6) Not less than one-third of the total number of members to be nominated to the
Legislative Council of each State by the Governor in accordance with sub-clause (e) of (3) of
article 171 shall be women".
5. The amendments made to the Constitution, by this Act, shall not affect any
representation in the House of the people or in the Legislative Assembly of a State or the
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the
House or the Assembly, as the case may be, in existence at the commencement of this Act.
Amendments
not to effect
the
representation
in the House
of the People
or Legislative
Assembly of a
State or
Legislative
Assembly of
the National
Capital
Territory of
Delhi.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Without the active participation of women and the incorporation of women's perspective
at all levels of decision-making, the goals of equality, development and peace cannot be
achieved. India moved a step towards realising the goal of equal political representation for
women through the Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Acts that
provided for reservation of seats for women in rural and urban local bodies respectively.
However, despite the widespread movement towards democratization at the local level,
women are largely under-represented at the State and National level politics in India. For
instance, out of the 543 elected members in the 16th Lok Sabha, only 66 are women, accounting
for 12% of the total strength of the House. Similarly, out of 245 sitting members in the
Rajya Sabha, only 11% are women. Therefore, reservation of seats for women in State
Legislatures and the Parliament is essential for enhancing women participation in decision
making.
The Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill that provided for
reservation of one-third of all seats for women in the Lok Sabha and the State legislative
Assemblies was introduced in the Rajya Sabha 6th May, 2008. The Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievance, Law and Justice, in its 36th Report on the aforementioned
Bill had recommended that the Government should consider reservation for women in the
Rajya Sabha and the Legislative Councils as well. The Bill was passed by the Rajya Sabha on
9th March, 2010 and transmitted to Lok Sabha. However, the Bill lapsed with the dissolution
of the 15th Lok Sabha, and has not yet been reintroduced.
The imbalance in gender representation in the law-making bodies at the Union and the
State level ought to be immediately addressed to ensure that all sections of the society
secure a sence of participation in nation-building and the legislative processes. Unless such
mandatory provisions are made to secure representation of women in the parliamentary and
legislative process, the object of women empowerment, which has only remained a political
slogan, will not be achieved.
Therefore, in veiw of the need to ensure active participation of women at all levels of
decision making, and in consonance with the recommendations of the Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievance, Law and Justice, the current Bill seeks to provide for
reservation for women in both the Houses of the Parliament and the State Legislatures.
The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
V .  VIJAYASAI  REDDY
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
239AA. ( 1) * * * *
(2)( a) * * * *
(b) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of seats reserved
for Scheduled Castes, the division of the National Capital Territory into territorial
constituencies (including the basis for such division) and all other matters relating to the
functioning of the Legislative Assembly shall be regulated by law made by Parliament.
* * * * *
5
Special
provisions
with respect
to Delhi.

GMGIPMRND—429RS(S3)—10.04.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri  V.  Vijayasai Reddy,  M.P.)