THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order, 1950.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment)
Act, 2015.
2. In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, for paragraph 3 the following
shall be substituted:—
“3. Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 2, a citizen of India
professing a religion of Hinduism, Sikhism, Buddhism, Christian or Islam shall be
deemed to be a member of a Scheduled Caste.”
Amendment
of the
Constitution
(Scheduled
Castes) Order,
1950.
Bill No. X of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2015
C.O. 19.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In accordance with the provisions of clause (1) of article 341 of the Constitution, six
Presidential Orders were issued specifying Scheduled Castes in respect of various States
and Union territories. These Orders have been amended from time to time by Acts of Parliament
enacted under clause (2) of article  341 of the Constitution.
Article 15 of the Constitution mandates that the State shall not discriminate on the
basis of religion, caste creed, gender, etc. in 1950, the Scheduled Caste status was created
aimed at addressing historical caste based socio-economic deprivation, however, the benefits
of this Presidential Order were restricted to only those citizens professing the Hindu religion.
The Presidential Order has been amended and it has been realized through the National
Commission for Minorities and the Ranganath Mishra Commission that this denial of Schedule
Caste status on the basis of religion is discriminatory and is a breach of the equality clause
guaranteed by article 14 of the Indian Constitution and is particularly egregious as article 25
empowers every person in India to practise and profess any religion.
In order to give effect to the above changes, it is necessary to amend the Constitution
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
HUSAIN DALWAI
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950
C.O. 19
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 341 of the Constitution
of India, the President, after consultation with the Governors and Rajpramukhs of the
States concerned, is pleased to make the following Order, namely:—
*****
[3. Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 2, no person who professes
a religion different from the Hindu [,the Sikh or the Buddhist] religion shall be deemed
to be a member of a Scheduled Caste.]
*****
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5363RS(S3)—13-03-2015.