THE SENIOR CITIZENS (MAINTENANCE, PROTECTION AND
WELFARE) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory maintenance, protection and welfare of senior citizens so as
to secure a life of dignity, peace and security for them and for the welfare measures to be
undertaken by the State for its aged citizens and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Senior Citizens (Maintenance,  Protection  and
Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “indigent” means a senior citizen who, due to age related infirmity or disability
or ailment, is incapable to earn his livelihood and who has no independent and adequate
means of livelihood;
Bill No. X of  2006
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MARCH, 2006

2
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules  made under this Act;
(d) “senior citizen” means any citizen who is sixty or more years of age.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of
commencement of this Act, review the existing policy, if any, and formulate a National Policy
for the overall welfare, care and protection of the senior citizens so as to give them a secure
life of dignity at the fag end of their lives.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
it shall be the duty of every person to take care, look after and maintain his parents and grand
parents and more so who do not have any source of income or sustenance, as the case may
be.
(2) Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of
an offence under this Act.
5. The appropriate Government shall maintain district wise register of senior citizens
with such details and particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall establish and maintain sufficient number of
senior citizens' homes at conspicuous places in the country in consultation with the
concerned Governments of the States and Union Territory Administrations and provide all
necessary facilities in such homes as may be prescribed.
(2) All indigent and other senior citizens abandoned or neglected by their kith and
kin shall be kept in the homes referred to in sub-section (1) by the appropriate Government.
(3) Apart from the facilities of day to day life, the homes shall also provide means of
entertainment and such recreational facilities which may help the senior citizens residing
in such homes to overcome their distress at being indigent or being neglected by their
kith and kin.
7. (1) Every senior citizen shall, on an application made in the prescribed format, be
given rupees one thousand per month as financial assistance for his subsistence by the
appropriate government in whose jurisdiction the senior citizen ordinarily resides and the
financial assistance payable to such citizens shall be linked with the cost of living index so
as to ensure a decent living to the senior citizens:
Provided that the financial assistance shall not be given to those senior citizens who are
residing and being looked after in the senior citizens homes established under section 6.
(2) The financial assistance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be disbursed to the
senior citizens through Government Treasury or any branch of a public sector Bank or Post
Office as per the preference given by the concerned senior citizen in his application form.
8. The appropriate Government shall provide to every senior citizen,—
(a) free medical treatment in Government hospitals and dispensaries or other
dispensaries, nursing homes and clinics recognized by the appropriate Government;
(b) free travel facilities by public transport and concessions in private owned
transport;
(c) free pilgrimages within the country, pilgrimage to Mansarovar and Haj in
such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) facilties for Y oga and other sports;
(e) interest free loans for housing and self-employment purposes.
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
the local police of every Police Station or Police Post shall keep a record of all the senior
citizens residing in its jurisdiction so as to provide maximum security to such citizens.
(2) It shall be the duty of the area Station House Officer or In-charge of the Police Post
of the local Police as the case may be to provide maximum security to every lone senior
citizen or lonely couple residing in his jurisdiction in such manner as may be prescribed.
National
Policy for the
senior
citizens.
Compulsory
maintenance
of senior
citizens by
their kins.
Register of
senior
citizens.
Establishment
of senior
citizens'
homes.
Financial
assistance to
senior
citizens.
Medical and
Other
facilities to
the senior
citizens.
Area Police
to provide
security to
senior
citizens.

3
10. (1) In case of non-compliance of the provisions of section 4 by any person, a
Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal by such person, order
such person to make a monthly allowance or lump sum payment thereof for such period as
may be prescribed for the maintenance of his father or mother or both, as the case may be and
to pay the same to such senior citizen as the Magistrate may from time to direct.
(2) The Magistrate may, before making an order under sub-section (1), consider all or
any of the following matters:
(a) the average income, property or joint family property income of the person
against whom maintenance order has to be passed.
(b)  the standard of living of the family;
(c) any other matter which, in the circumstances, the Magistrate may consider
relevant.
(3) An appeal shall lie to the concerned High Court from any order made by the
Magistrate under sub-section ( 1).
11. If any person who is ordered to pay maintenance allowance under section 10 of this
Act, fails without sufficient reasons to comply with the order or willfully refuses to maintain
and take care of his parents or grand parents, as the case may be, shall be liable to imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten years and also with
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to senior citizens in any part of
the country.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act;
Maintenance
Allowance in
certain cases.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

4
4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
As per Census 2001, there were 7,66,22,321 senior citizens in our country and their
population is growing very fast and by the year 2016 the population of senior citizens will be
more than ten per cent of the total population of the nation. Majority of these senior citizens
are unable to take care of themselves and do not have sufficient means to lead a decent and
happy life. Due to near disintegration of joint family system and economic considerations by
their kith and kin, the senior citizens are being ignored by their near and dear ones who are
left to fend for themselves and compelled to lead a lonely and disappointed life. Though
section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 provides for maintenance allowance that
the senior citizens can claim from their legal heirs, but generally the majority of senior citizens
do not claim maintenance because of their ignorance or self-pride which compels them to
disown their kith and kin who they feel have dumped them.
These days another alarming trend which is emerging is that lonely or couple senior
citizens are being murdered either for their property or are robbed and they are becoming
easy targets of the criminals. Hence it has become necessary to give utmost security to the
senior citizens.
In a welfare State like ours, it is the duty of the Central and State Governments to look
after the senior citizens so that they too lead a decent life at the fag end of their lives. For this,
the Central Government should open Senior Citizen Homes, give financial assistance, medical
aid and other facilities to the indigent and needy senior citizens so as to enable them to forget
the wounds given by their own near and dear ones.
Hence this Bill.
SUSHMA SWARAJ

5
5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Senior Citizens Homes. Clause 7
provides for the financial assistance to senior citizens. Clause 8 provides for medical and
other facilities for senior citizens. Clause 12 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
five thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.

6
6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

MGIPMRND—5996RS(S-5)—03-03-2006.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory maintenance, protection and welfare of senior citizens so as to
secure a life of dignity, peace and security for them and for the welfare measures to be
undertaken by the State for its aged citizens and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
—————
(Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P .)