THE  MINES  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Mines Act, 1952.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Mines Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title,
for the words “regulation of labour and safety in mines”, the words “regulation of conditions
of work and welfare of persons employed in mines and safety in mines and to provide for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto" shall be substituted.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the words “whole of India”,
the words and figures “including the territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic
zone and other maritime zones of India as defined under the Territorial Waters, Continental
Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976" shall be inserted.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
35 of 1952. Amendment
of long title.
Amendment
of secton 1.
80 of 1976.
Bill No. X of 2011
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

4. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (c), for the words “every person”, the words "every person, being
superior to the manager" shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ga) “foreign company” means the company falling under section 591 of
the Companies Act, 1956;’;
(iii) for clause (l), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(l) “owner”, when used in relation to a mine, means a person or authority
having ultimate control over the affairs of the mine:
Provided that where the mine belongs to,—
(i) a company incorporated in India, the managing director thereof,
and if there is no managing director, all the whole-time directors of the
board of directors of the company, as the case may be, shall be the owner;
(ii) a foreign company, the principal officer by whatever name called,
including its director and secretary, shall be the owner;
(iii) a firm or other association of persons, all the individual partners
or members thereof, shall be the owner:
Provided further that, in the case of a body corporate without a managing
director, or in the case of a firm or other association of persons, where a specific
nomination has been made, in favour of a whole-time director, managing partner
or member, as the case may be, such whole-time director, managing partner and
member shall be the owner:
Provided also that where a mine belongs to,—
(i) a local authority or body, the person having the ultimate control
over such authority or body;
(ii) a person who has the prospecting licence, mining lease or mining
right, such person;
(iii) a liquidator or receiver, such liquidator or receiver, as the case
may be, shall be the owner:
Provided also that any contractor or sub-lessee for the working of a mine
or any part thereof, shall also be the owner, but, not so as to exempt the owner
from any liability.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) the expressions “body corporate”, “board of directors”,
“company”, “director”, “firms” and “managing director” shall have the
same meanings respectively assigned to them under the Companies Act,
1956;
(ii) the expressions “prospecting licence” and “mining lease” shall
have the same meanings respectively assigned to them under the Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957;’.
Amendment of
section 2.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
67 of 1957.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. After section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
 ‘18A. (1) Without prejudice to any of the provisions of this Act or any other law
for the time being in force, the owner of every mine shall appoint,—
(a) sufficient number of his officials, as may be prescribed, for the effective
supervision of all operations, equipment, installations and sites, in the mine of
such owner to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Act and of the rules
and regulations made and of any order issued, thereunder;
(b) such number of his agents, as may be prescribed, specifying their
functions, duties and responsibilities in respect of each of his mines.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression “official”
means a person, having such qualifications, as may be prescribed and appointed by,
or, on behalf of the owner, to perform the duties of supervision in mine of such owner
or part thereof, in such capacity as may be prescribed.
(2) Every agent referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), shall,—
(a) possess such qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed;
(b) be resident in India for at least one hundred and eighty-two days
during any year or such other period as may be prescribed.
(3) The owner shall, in respect of every agent referred to in clasue (b) of sub-
section (1), forthwith send notice of appointment of such agent to the Chief Inspector
and the Inspector, specifying the functions, duties and responsibilities of every such
agent in respect of the mine for which he is appointed as such.’.
6. In section 58 of the principal Act, after clause (a), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(aa) number of officials to be appointed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 18A;
(ab) number of the agents to be appointed under clause (b) of sub-section (1)
of section 18A;
(ac) the qualifications of the officials to be appointed under sub-section (1) of
section 18A;
(ad) the qualifications and experience of the agents under clause (a) of sub-
section (2) of section 18A;
(ae) the period during which the agent shall be resident in India under clause (b)
of sub-section (2) of section 18A;’’.
7.  In section 63 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “five hundred rupees”, the words “fifty
thousand rupees” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “three hundred rupees”, the words “thirty
thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
8. In section 64 of the principal Act, for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words
“one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
9. In section 65 of the principal Act, for the words “two hundred rupees”, the words
“twenty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
10. In section 66 of the principal Act, for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words
“one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
11. In section 67 of the principal Act, for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words
“one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
12. 
In section 68 of the principal Act, for the words “five hundred rupees”, the words
“fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 58.
Amendment
of section 63.
Amendment
of section 64.
Amendment
of section 65.
Amendment
of section 66.
Amendment
of section 67.
Amendment
of section 68.
Appointment
of officials
and agents in
mines.
Insertion of
new section
18A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
13. In section 69 of the principal Act, for the words “three months, or with fine which
may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees”, the words “one year, or with fine
which may extend to two lakh and fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
14. In section 70 of the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words “five
hundred rupees” at both the places where they occur, the words “fifty thousand rupees”
shall be substituted.
15. In section 72A of the principal Act, for the words “six months, or with fine which
may extend to two thousand rupees”, the words “one year, or with fine which may extend to
two lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
16. In section 72B of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words “two years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees”, the words “five years and shall also be liable to fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “two thousand rupees”, the words “two lakh rupees” shall be
substituted.
17. In section 72C of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section  (1),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words “two years, or with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees”, the words “five years or with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words “three thousand rupees”, the words “three
lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause ( c), for the words “three months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees”, the words “one year, or with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(iv) in the proviso, for the words “shall not be less than three thousand
rupees”, the words “shall not be less than three lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Where the contraventions falls under any of the three clauses of
sub-section ( 1), the award of punishment shall be in accordance with the
maximum punishment provided under the clauses being so contravened.”.
18. In section 73 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words “which may extend to three months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees,”,  the words “which may extend to one year or with
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees," shall be substituted;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that in case the contraventions of any provision of this Act or
of any rule, or regulation, bye-law or of any order made thereunder continues,
additional fines shall be imposed which may extend to one thousand rupees for
each day on which the contravention is continued, and, if such contravention
continues beyond a period of one year after the date of conviction or
contravention, the offender shall be punishable with imprisonsment for a term,
which may extend to seven years.”.
Amendment
of section 69.
Amendment
of section 70.
Amendment
of section
72A.
Amendment
of section
72B.
Amendment
of section
72C.
Amendment
of section
73.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
19. After section 74 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“74A. Where any person is prosecuted, or proceeded against, for contravening
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, or regulation, or bye-law or order made
thereunder, it shall be for the person who is alleged to have failed to comply with such
duty or requirement, to prove that it was not reasonably practicable, or, as the case
may be, all practicable measures, were taken, to satisfy the safety requirements, duty
or other requirements, as the case may be.”.
20.  In section 76 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words “all or any of the directors thereof”, the words “managing
director, all or any of the directors thereof or where the owner of a mine is a foreign
company, all or any of its principal officers, by whatever name called, including its
director or secretary” shall be substituted;
(b) in the proviso,—
(i) in clauses ( a), (b) and (c), the words “or managers” occurring at the
end, shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(d) in the case of a foreign company, any of its principal officers, by
whatever name called, including its director or secretary,”;
(iii) after clause (d) as so inserted, in the long line, the words “or manager”
occurring at both the places, shall be omitted.
21. After section 76 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“76A. Nothing contained in this Act shall absolve any person from his liability
under this Act, if such person had or has ultimate control over the affairs of the
business of the mines.”.
Insertion of
new section
74A.
Burden of
proof in
certain cases.
Amendment
of section 76.
Insertion of
new section
76A.
Continuance
of liability.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mines Act, 1952, was enacted with a view to amending and consolidating the law
relating to the regulation of labour and safety in mines. The Act, inter alia, regulates the
working conditions in mines by providing for measures to be taken for the safety of the
workers employed therein and certain amenities for them. The said Act was amended in 1983
by the Mines (Amendment) Act, 1983, inter alia , to provide for the prohibition of the
employment of persons below eighteen years of age, inspection of mines by workers
representatives, safety committees and to regulate the use of machinery to take care of the
hazards associated with the introduction of new types of machines.
2. Since the last amendment was made in 1983 there have been several developments
in the area of technology, scale of operation, working environment and work practices in
coal, non-coal and oil sector. Operations are getting more and more mechanised with
introduction of heavy machines, shallow deposits are getting depleted and mines are
becoming deeper and complicated and operators from other parts of the world have started
acquiring mining rights and managing mining operations within our country. This has created
a new safety and health risk scenario at the work places in these sectors. In view of such
developments the amendments have been proposed to the Bill mainly to keep pace with the
changes at work places in the mining sector and thereby attempting to effectively manage
the safety and health risk to the work persons employed in these sectors.
3. The Mines (Amendment) Bill, 2011 proposes to amend the Mines Act, 1952,
inter alia, to,—
(a) amend the ‘‘long title’’ of the Act so as to reflect therein the regulation of
conditions of work and welfare of persons employed in mines;
(b) clarify that the applicability of the Act to whole of India includes up to the
Exclusive Economic Zone and Maritime Zones of India as defined under the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act,
1976;
(c) substitute the definition of  ‘‘owner’’  so as to provide that a person or
authority having ultimate control over the affairs of the mine be the owner and
specifically provide for the person who would be the owner in the case of (i) company
incorporated in India;  (ii) foreign company; (iii) firm and other association of persons;
(d) define ‘‘foreign company’’ with reference to the Companies Act, 1956;
(e) make provisions for appointment of sufficient number of ‘‘officials’’ having
prescribed qualifications for the effective supervision of all operations, equipment,
installation and sets to ensure compliance of the provisions of the Act and rules;
(f) increase the penalties,—
(i) in case of obstruction of Chief Inspector or an Inspector in the discharge
of his duties under section 63, from ‘‘five hundred rupees’’ to ‘‘fifty thousand
rupees’’;
(ii) in case of falsification of records under section 64, from ‘‘one thousand
rupees’’ to ‘‘one lakh rupees’’;
(iii) in case of using false certificate of fitness under section 65, from ‘‘two
hundred rupees’’ to ‘‘twenty thousand rupees’’;
6

7
(iv) in case of omission to furnish plans, etc., under section 66, from
‘‘one thousand rupees’’ to ‘‘one lakh rupees’’;
(v) in case of contravention of provisions regarding employment of labour
under section 67, from ‘‘one thousand rupees’’ to ‘‘one lakh rupees’’;
(vi) in case of employment of persons below eighteen years of age under
section 68, from ‘‘five hundred rupees’’ to ‘‘fifty thousand rupees’’;
(vii) in case of failure to appoint a manager of mines, in contravention of
the provisions of section 17, under section 69, from ‘‘three months, or with fine
which may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees’’ to ‘‘one year, or
with fine which may extend to two lakh and fifty thousand rupees’’;
(viii) in case of failure to give notice of accident, in contravention of the
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 23, under section 70, from ‘‘five hundred
rupees’’ to ‘‘fifty thousand rupees’’;
(ix) in case of contravention of certain regulations under section 72A,
from, ‘‘six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees’’ to
‘‘one year, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees’’;
(x) in case of contravention of the any order issued under section 22
relating to powers of inspectors when causes of danger not expressly provided
against exist or when employment of persons is dangerous, under section 72B,
from ‘‘two years imprisonment and fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees’’ to ‘‘five years imprisonment and fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees’’;
(xi) provided in section 72C of the Act for contravention of law with
dangerous results;
(xii) provided in section 73 of the Act for contravention of any provision
of the Act or of any rule or regulation or bye-law or of any order made thereunder
of which no penalty is specified in the Act;
(g) insert a new section 74A so as to shift the burden of proof upon the person
who is being prosecuted or proceeded against to prove that it was not reasonably
practicable , or, all practicable  measures to satisfy the safety requirements were taken;
(h) amend section 76 so as to enlarge the scope to cover the foreign companies
and to take away the ‘‘manager’’ out of the scope of the said section; and
(i) to insert a new section 76A to provide that the person who has actual ultimate
control over the affairs of the mines would continue to be liable for the contravention
of the provisions of the Act or of any rule or regulation or bye-law or order made
thereunder.
4. With all the above amendments new mining legislation has become utmost necessary
that should not only embrace the current needs of the prevailing environment but also
address the future needs of the profession.
5. The bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
MALLIKARJUN  KHARGE
N
EW DELHI;
The 9th March, 2011.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MINES ACT, 1952
(35 OF 1952)
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to the regulation of labour and
safety in mines.
*****
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) * * * * *
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
*****
2.  (1) In this Act, unless the context  otherwise requires,—
*****
(c) "agent", when  used  in relation to a mine, means every person, whether
appointed as such or not, who, acting or purporting to act on behalf of the  owner,
takes part in the management, control, supervision or direction of the mine or of any
part thereof;
*****
(l) "owner", when used in relation to a mine, means any person who is the
immediate proprietor or lessee or occupier of the mine or of any part thereof and in the
case of a mine the business whereof is being carried on by a liquidator or receiver, such
liquidator or receiver; but does not include a person who merely receives a royalty,
rent or fine from the mine, or is merely the proprietor of the mine, subject to any lease,
grant or licence for the working thereof, or is merely the owner of the soil and not
interested in the minerals of the mine; but any contractor or sub-lessee for the working
of a mine or any part thereof shall be subject to this Act in like manner as if he were an
owner,  but not so as to exempt the owner from any liability;
*****
CHAPTER IX
P
ENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
63. (1) Whoever obstructs the Chief Inspector, an Inspector, or any person
authorised under section 8 in the discharge of his duties under this Act, or refuses or
wilfully neglects to afford the Chief Inspector, Inspector or such person any reasonable
facility for making any entry, inspection examination or inquiry authorised by or under
this Act in relation to any mine, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or
with both.
(2) Whoever refuses to produce on the demand of the Chief Inspector or Inspector
any registers or other documents kept in pursuance of this Act,  or prevents or attempts to
prevent or does anything which he has reason to believe to be likely to prevent any person
from appearing before or being examined by an inspecting officer acting in pursuance of his
duties under this Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to three hundred
rupees.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
8
Obstruction.

9
64.  Whoever—
(a) counterfeits,  or knowingly makes a false statement in, any certificate,  or any
official copy of a certificate,  granted under this Act, or
(b) knowingly uses as true any such counterfeit or false certificate, or
(c) makes or produces or uses any false declaration, statement or evidence
knowing the same to be false, for the purpose of obtaining for himself or for any other
person a certificate, or the renewal of a certificate,  under this Act, or any employment
in a mine, or
(d) falsifies any plan, section, register or record, the maintenance of which is
required by or under this Act or produces before any authority such false plan, section,
register or record, knowing the same to be false, or
(e) makes, gives or delivers any plan, return, notice, record or report containing
a statement, entry or detail which is not to the best of his knowledge or belief  true,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
65.  Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use as a certificate of fitness granted to
himself under section 43 a certificate granted to another person under that section, or,
having been granted a certificate of fitness to himself under that section, knowingly allows
it to be used,  or allows an attempt to use it to be made by another person, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one months, or with fine which may extend
to two hundred rupees, or with both.
66. Any person who, without reasonable excuse the burden of proving which shall lie
upon him, omits to make or furnish in the prescribed form or manner or at or within the
prescribed time any plan, section,  return, notice, register, record or report required by or
under this Act to be made or furnished shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees.
67. Whoever, save as permitted by section 38, contravenes any provision of this Act
or of any regulation, rule or bye-law or of any order made thereunder prohibiting, restricting
or regulating the employment or presence of persons in or about a mine shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
68. If a person below eighteen years of age is employed in a mine in contravention of
section 40, the owner, agent or manager of such mine shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees.
69. Whoever  in contravention of the provisions of section 17, fails to appoint a
manager shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees, or with both.
70. (1) Whoever in contravention of the provision of sub-section (1) of section 23
fails to give notice of any accidental occurrence or to post a copy of the notice on the special
notice board referred to in that sub-section and to keep it there for the period specified shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever in contravention of a direction made by the Central Government under
sub-section (3) of section 23 fails to record in the prescribed register or to give notice of any
accidental occurrence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
Falsification
of records,
etc.
Use of false
certificates of
fitness.
Omission to
furnish plans,
etc.
Contravention
of provisions
regarding
employment
of labour.
Penality for
employment
of persons
below
eighteen years
of age.
Failure to
appoint
manager.
Notice of
accidents.

10
72A. Whoever contravenes any provision of any regulation or of any bye-law or of
any order made thereunder, relating to matters specified in clauses (d), (i), (m), (n), (o), (p),
(r), (s) and (u) of section  57 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.
72B. Whoever continues to work in a mine in contravention of any order issued under
sub-section (1A), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 22 for under sub-section (2)
of section 22A shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five thousand rupees:
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be
recorded in writing in the judgment of the court, such fine shall not be less than two thousand
rupees.
72C. (1) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation,  rule or
bye-law or of any order made thereunder other than an order made under sub-section (1A) or
sub-section (2) or sub-section ( 3) of section 22 or under sub-section ( 2) of section 22A
shall be punishable—
(a) if such contravention results in loss of life, with imprisonment which may
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with
both; or
(b) if such contravention results in serious bodily injury, with imprisonment
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees,
or with both; or
(c) if such contravention otherwise causes injury or danger to persons employed
in the mine or other persons in or about the mine, with imprisonment which may extend
to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both:
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be
recorded in writing in the judgment of the court, such fine, in the case of a contravention
referred to in clause (a), shall not be less than three thousand rupees.
* * * * *
73. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation, rule or bye-
law or of any order made thereunder for the contravention of which no penalty is hereinbefore
provided, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * *
76. Where the owner of a mine is a firm or other association of individuals, all, or any
of the partners or members thereof or where the owner of a mine is a company, all or any of the
directors thereof or where the owner of a mine is a Government or any local authority, all or
any of the officers or persons authorised by such Government or local authority, as the case
may be, to manage the affairs of the mine, may be prosecuted and punished under this Act for
any offence for which the owner of a mine is punishable:
Provided that where a firm, association or company has given notice in writing to the
Chief Inspector that it has nominated,—
(a) in the case of a firm, any of its partners or managers;
(b) in the case of an association, any of its members or managers;
(c) in the case of a company, any of its directors or managers,
Special
provision for
contravention
of certain
regulations.
Special
provision for
contravention
of orders
under section
22
Special
provision for
contravention
of law with
dangerous
results.
General
provision for
disobedience
of orders.
Determination
of owner in
certain cases.

11
who is resident, in each case in any place to which this Act extends and who is in each case
either in fact in charge of the management of, or holds the largest number of shares in such
firm, association or company, to assume the responsibility of the owner of the mine for the
purposes of this Act, such partner, member, director or manager, as the case may be, shall, so
long as he continues to so reside and be in charge or hold the largest member of shares as
aforesaid, be deemed to be the owner of the mine for the purposes of this Act unless a notice
in writing cancelling his nomination or stating that he has ceased to be a partner, member,
director or manager, as the case may be, is received by the Chief Inspector.
Explanation.—Where a firm, association or company has different establishments or
branches of different units in any establishment or branch, different persons may be nominated
under this proviso in relation to different establishments or branches or units and the person
so nominated shall, with respect only to the establishment, branch or unit in relation to which
he has been nominated, be deemed to be the owner of the mine.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mines Act, 1952.
————
(Shri Mallikarjun Kharge, Minister of Labour and Employment)
GMGIPMRND—7175RS(S3)—15-03-2011.