Bill No. X of  2023
Short title and
commencement.
THE RIGHT TO FREE INTERNET BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to provide for free internet access to all the citizens in the country and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Free Internet Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of the
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
5
Definitions.

2
(b) "citizen" means any Indian citizen;
(c) "internet" means the latest and fastest version of internet available as
approved by authorities;
(d) "service provider" means any public or private sector entity, which is providing
internet facilities;
(e) "local authority" means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or
Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat or Panchayat, by whatever name called, and includes
such other authority or body having administrative control or empowered by, or under
any law for the time being in force to function as a local authority in any city, town or
village;
(f) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; and
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to free internet access.
(2) No citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses which may
prevent him or her from accessing internet facilities.
4. The appropriate Government shall, while ensuring universal access to internet to
all citizens, take special measures to ensure that the citizens who belong to the backward
and remote regions of the country are provided equal access to the internet.
5. (1)  The appropriate Government shall ensure that the citizens have the right to
choose any available service provider and may opt for any other service provider, as and
when they desire.
(2) The appropriate Government shall also ensure that no service provider shall deny
services to any citizen on account of his/her not having a permanent address.
6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to,—
(a) either directly provide internet access to all citizens or completely subsidize
the services provided by any service provider so that internet access is ensured for all
citizens;
(b) develop a framework to carry out the provisions of this Act by strengthening
the public sector entities along with legally requiring the services of the private players;
(c) determine a tariff for such services and revise it regularly; and
(d) examine the reports provided by the State Governments under section 7 of
this Act and propose necessary actions to ensure internet access for every citizen.
7. It shall be the duty of the State Governments to monitor internet access at the micro
level and provide precise reports to the Central Government about internet access and
services provided by the service providers for the citizens within its jurisdiction, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments, as
grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the provisions of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government shall constitute by notification, a body to be known as
the National Accessibility Council for performing the functions assigned under this Act.
Right of
citizens to
free internet.
Special
provisions for
citizens
belonging to
backward and
remote
regions.
Right to
access any
service
provider.
Duties of the
Central
Government.
Duties of
State
Governments
to monitor
access and
services.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Constitution
of National
Accessibility
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The National Accessibility Council shall consist of a Chairperson appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed and such other members, as given
below:—
(i) representatives from both Houses of Parliament;
(ii) representatives from the State Legislative Assemblies;
(iii) representatives from the Central Government;
(iv) representatives from the State Government; and
(v) representatives of the service providers.
(3) The representatives mentioned in sub-clauses (i) to (v) above shall be appointed in
such number and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The allowances and other terms and conditions of the Chairpersons and Members
of the National Accessibility Council shall be such as may be prescribed.
10. (1) Each State Government shall constitute, by notification, a body to be known as
the State Accessibility Council for performing functions assigned under this Act.
(2) The State Accessibility Council shall consist of a Chairperson appointed by the
State Government in such manner as may be prescribed and such other members, as given
below:—
(i) representatives from the State Legislative Assembly and State Legislative
Council, where there are two Houses of the State Legislature;
(ii) representatives from the State Government;
(iii) representatives from the Local Self-Governments; and
(iv) representatives of the service providers.
(3) The representatives mentioned in sub-clauses (i) to (iv) above shall be appointed
in such number and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(
4) The allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairpersons and 
Members
 of the State Accessibility Councils shall be such as may be prescribed.
11. The National Accessibility Council Shall,—
(a) decide the norms and standards of the services to be  provided by the service
providers;
(b) devise a mechanism to redress grievances of aggrieved parties arising out of
the implementation of the provisions of this Act; and
(c) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
12. The State Accessibility Councils shall perform such functions as may be assigned
to them by the State Governments in consultation with the National Accessiblity Council.
13. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for carrying out
the provisions of the this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
Constitution
of State
Accessibility
Councils.
Functions of
the National
Accessibility
Council.
Functions of
the State
Accessibility
Councils.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of
two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
14. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the appropriate
Government may by notification, make such provisions, not inconsistent with this Act, as
appears to them to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Internet is a technology that serves as the primary source of information to millions of
Indian citizens.
2. The Indian Constitution make the Right to Freedom of Speech and Expression a
Fundamental Right for all citizens, as enshrined in article 19(1)(a). All citizens of the country
should, therefore, be able to access internet in order to exercise and enjoy their right to
freedom of expression and opinion, and other fundamental human rights.
3. The Central Government and the State Governments have the responsibility to
ensure that internet access is broadly available and that there are no unreasonable restrictions
on an individual's access to the internet.
4. This Bill seeks to expand the scope of the constitutional Right to Freedom of Speech
and Expression granted to all citizens of the country by making internet accessible to all free
of cost. The Bill also envisages to bridge the digital divide in society.
The Bill  seeks to achieve its objectives.
V . SIVADASAN.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that no citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of charges or
expenses for accessing internet facilities. Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government
shall take special measures to ensure internet access to citizens belonging to backward and
remote regions of the country. Clause 6 (a) provides that the Central Government shall either
directly provide universal internet access or completely subsidize the services provided by
any other service provider. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide
funds to the State Government, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the
provisions of this Act. Clause 9 provides for the constitution of a National Accessibility
Council, appointments  of its members and their allowances.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the expenditure involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Government to
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free internet access to all the citizens in the country and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. V . Sivadasan, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—105—14.12.2023.