Bill No. X of  2022
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1)  In article 15 of the Constitution,—
(i) in the marginal heading, after the words, "religion, race, caste, sex", the word
"disability" shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause (1), after the words, "religion, race, caste, sex", the word "disability"
shall be inserted;
(iii) in clause (2), after the words, "religion, race, caste, sex", the word "disability"
shall be inserted; and
(iv) in clause ( 4), after the words, "the Scheduled Tribes", the words "or the
disabled" shall be inserted;
3. In clause (2) of article 16 of the Constitution, after the words, "religion, race, caste,
sex, descent", the word "disability" shall be inserted.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST APRIL, 2022
Amendment
of article 15.
Amendment
of article 16.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Since the Constitution specifically names and mentions grounds on which
discrimination is prohibited and mandates equal treatment to all its citizens, it is imperative
that the Constitution also prohibits discrimination based on disability and places persons
with disabilities on an equal pedestal.
2. The principle of non-discrimination is enshrined in articles 15 and 16, however does
not categorically specify "disability" as a ground on which discrimination is prohibited. This
is despite the fact that discrimination based on disability is very much prevalent and rampant
now-a-days.
3. India ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(UNCRPD) in 2017, which has equality and non-discrimination as its guiding principles. The
UNCRPD Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in its 'Concluding observations
on the initial report of India' vide CRPD/C/IND/CO/1 dated 29.10.2019 has recommended,
India to amend its Constitution to explicitly prohibit disability-based discrimination in
paragraph B 13(a)[p.3]. India, being a signatory to UNCRPD, has an international obligation
as well as constitutional obligation under article 51(c) to ensure that the UNCRPD is
implemented in letter and spirit.
4. The proposed amendments to articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution are in consonance
with and to give effect to the UNCRPD and the recommendations of the UNCRPD Committee
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and to prohibit discrimination based on disability.
5. Hence, the  Bill.
JOHN BRITTAS
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment;
or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general
public.
* * * * *
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause ( 2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
* * * * *
16. (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth,
residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any
employment or office under the State.
* * * * *
3
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.
Equality of
opportunity
in matters of
public
employment.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri John Brittas, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—30RS(S3)—04-04-2022.