THE DESTITUTE WOMEN AND WIDOWS WELFARE BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of the destitute women and widows and for matters
connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute Women and Widows Welfare Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "Appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the State Government
and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the Destitute Women and Widows Welfare Authority
established under section 3;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XC of 2006
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH NOVEMBER, 2006
Definitions.
5
10

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/3604RS
22
Establish-
ment of the
Destitute
Women and
Widows
Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
Authority.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
(c) "Destitute" in relation to a woman and widow means any female who has no
independent source of livelihood or is not being looked after by any family member or
relative and includes a divorced woman;
(d) "Widow" means a woman whose husband has expired after legal marriage.
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in Official Gazette establish an
authority, to be known as "the Destitute Women and Widows Welfare Authority" to perform
functions assigned under this Act.
(2) The composition of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed—
Provided that the Authority shall not have less than ten members.
(3) The Central Government shall provide to the Authority such number of officers
and employees on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(4) The Authority may establish as many offices in States and UT as may be necessary
for its efficient functioning.
4.  It shall be the function of the Authority:—
(1) to register names of all destitute women and widows residing in the country,
and
(2) to formulate plans and schemes for the welfare of the destitute women and
widows.
5. The Authority shall provide to every destitute woman or a widow registered under
section  4, the following facilities namely:—
(a) Subsistence allowance not exceeding rupees two thousand per month or
such financial assistance as may be determined by the Subsistence Expenditure
Index whichever is more;
(b) free medical assistance;
(c) free residential facilities wherever necessary;
(d) free education including technical education to the dependent children of
the destitute women and widows;
(e) gainful employment;
(f) vocational training;
(g) free travelling facilities by public transport and also concessions in privately
owned transport;
(h) interest free loans for the purpose of housing and self employment; and
(i) such other facilities which are necessary for her proper development and
welfare.
6. The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate fund to the Authority for carrying out the
purpose of this Act.
7. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Authority to
provide
facilities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A very large number of destitute women and widows in our country are leading a
miserable life. They do not have any means for their own subsistence and for their dependent
children. They work as maids and perform various domestic chores such as cleaning utensils,
washing cloths, dusting, etc. for very small wages. They can do such a work only when they
are physically healthy. But many widows are not so fortunate. Being old, physically weak or
having been suffering from serious and chronic diseases they are incapable of doing physical
labour. In many cases, they are mentally depressed. Such helpless widows, perforce have to
take to begging in streets for their livelihood. Many young widows are forced into prostitution
and many of them have to  opt it as a profession to avoid starvation. Many widows are forced
to leave their families after the death of their husbands and generally they move to other
places leaving their family for the sake of peace and relief. In many cases, such widows
become victims of sexual exploitation at the hands of unscrupulous persons at such places.
In many cases, widows are deprived of their rights by their in-laws and parents and they
have to manage their affairs themselves. Their condition worsens further when they have to
look after their dependent children and when those children are thrown out of the homes
with their mother. The condition of widows in rural areas is all the more serious. They are not
only maltreated but are also considered ominous. They are also not permitted to take part in
the family ceremonies. Being illiterate they are badly subjected to physical, mental and social
exploitation.
Our country is a welfare state and, therefore, it becomes the duty of the state to
rehabilitate such hapless widows and to implement welfare schemes for this purpose. But
even after so many years have passed since independence, a large number of destitute
women, widows and  divorcee women still remain deprived of Government assistance and
facilities. Most of them are unemployed and they do not get proper food. They are suffering
from various diseases. It is the primary responsibility of the Government to ensure that they
are provided all such opportunities and facilities so that they may live and grow in a healthy
environment and are protected from all kinds of exploitation.
It is, therefore, necessary to enact a legislation for the welfare and protection of the
destitute women and the widows.
Hence this Bill.
JAI PARKASH AGGARW AL
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Destitute Women and Widows
Welfare Authority by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides that the Destitute Women
and Widows Welfare Authority shall formulate plans and prepare schemes for the welfare of
the Destitute Women and Widows and that they will also register the names of all Destitute
Women and Widows. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall provide to all the
Destitute Women and the Widows financial assistance of rupees two thousand  every
month, free medical care and such other facilities as are necessary for their proper development
and welfare. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for Central Government to provide adequate funds
to the Authority for carrying out the purpose of this Act. The Bill, if enacted will therefore
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the country. It is estimated that it will
incur a recurring expenditure of rupees 50 crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten crore may also be involved in it.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of the destitute women and widows and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3604RS(S1)—24-11-2006.