AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. XCI of 2024 
THE AIRLINE PASSENGERS’ RIGHTS BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to define, extend, and protect the rights of individuals availing air 
carrier services and to prevent their exploitation in terms of air 
 fares, basic amenities, and unjust profits for air service  
 providers and ensure due compensation in case of 
 undue delays, loss or damage of luggage etc. 
 so as to make air travel more affordable, 
 convenient and transparent and for 
 matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Airline Passengers’ Rights Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “air carrier” means any airline company registered with th e
Directorate General  of Civil Aviation (D.G.C.A.) in India and
includes its Chairman and other members of  the Board of Directors
of the company and Chief Operating Office;
(b) “ airline" means all commercial flights operating in the country
either on domestic or international routes;
(c) "compensation" means and includes the payment to be made to
the passenger for any inconvenience caused to them due to delay or
cancellation of scheduled flights, loss or damage of luggage or an
y
other reason on the part of the airlines while traveling in any
airlines;
(d) “foreign airline” means an airline that has been issued an Air
Operator Certificate by  a country other than India to carry out
specified commercial air transport operations and which operates
commercial flights in India;
(
e) "frequent flyer" means a passenger who travels by any airlines
at least twice a month for business or personal purposes;
(
f) "passenger" means any person who travels by any airlines for
any purpose; and
(g ) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules or regulations made
under this Act.
5 
10 
15 
20 
CHAPTER II 
INTERLINE AGREEMENTS AND PROTECTIONS 
Interline 
agreements 
and 
protections. 
3. Not later than one year from the date of the commencement of this Act,
the Central Government shall prescribe regulations to facilitate interline
agreements and related practices between air carriers and providers of
other modes of transportation and establish a complaint and remediation
process through which parties may submit complaints and resolve
disputes regarding the estab lishment and implementation of interline
agreements, which shall—
(i) include provisions to prevent air carriers and other
transportation providers from significantly hindering or preventing
willing air carriers or other transportation providers from entering
into interline agreements or conducting related practices;
( ii) require air carriers to explicitly notify passengers when the y
a
re eligible to be provided transportation by another air carrier or a
provider of another mode of transportation;
( iii) require air carriers, after an eligible passenger is notified
under clause (ii),  to attempt to provide to the passenger
transportation through another air carrier or a provider of another
mode of transportation, upon the passenger’s request, if the air
carrier has an interline agreement with the other air carrier or
transportation provider;
(i v ) pr ohibit air carriers and other transportation providers from
unduly or improperly influencing the decision of a partner, 
subsidiary, or vendor to enter into an interline agreement, the terms 
or conditions of such an agreement, or related practices; 
25 
30 
35 
 
40 
 
45 

3 
5 
(v) account for operational records, seat availability, and capacity;
(vi) p romote competition and public interes t;
(
vii) provide for appropriate penalties and remedies for violations
of an interline agreement; and
(viii) any other matter related thereto, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III 
PASSENGER PROTECTIONS 
 
10 
1
5 
4. In the event of an airline requiring a passenger to give up their booked
seat on a flight operated by the air carrier — 
( i) the airline shall offer due monetary compensation to a
passenger to incentivise them to relinquish their booked seat, i n
s
uch manner as may be prescribed; and
( ii) the airline shall be prohibited from imposing a cap on the
amount of compensation to be provided to a passenger in exchange
for the passenger relinquishing their booked seat.
Compensation 
 to 
passengers for 
relinquishing 
their booked 
seat. 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
4
0 
 
45 
5. (1) In case a passenger’s flight is delayed or cancelled for any reason
within the control of the airline, including but not limited to crew
scheduling, routine maintenance, functioning of information technology
systems, passenger service issues, issues relat ed to baggage services,
issues related to ground handling of aircraft, or other reasons as may be
specified by the Central Government, from time to time and –
(a) t he passenger’s arrival at their destination is delayed by more
than one hour and less than f
our hours after their originall y
scheduled arrival time, the airline shall —
(i) automatically refund to the passenger the amount the y
p
aid for the ticket; and
(ii) arrange a seat for the passenger on another flight
operated by the airline, or another airline, or on an alternative
means of transportation, at no additional expense to the
passenger, that results in them arriving at their destination not
later than four hours after the original scheduled arrival time;
(b) t he passenger’s arrival at their destination is delayed by more than
four hours after their originally scheduled arrival time, the airline
shall –-
(i) automatically refund to the passenger the amount they paid
f
or the ticket;
(ii) arrange a seat for the passenger on another flight operated
by the air carrier, or another airline, or on an alternative means
of transportation, at no additional expense to the passenger,
that results in them arriving at their destination not later than
four hours after the original scheduled arrival time;
(iii) provide compensation to the passenger of an amount
equivalent to $1350 in Indian rupees as per the prevalent
currency exchange rate at that time; and
(iv) provid e   passenger with a complimentary meal free of
charge or an amount equal to the cost of a meal or a free
coupon to purchase a meal; and
Compensation 
for delays and 
cancellation. 

4 
(c) the passenger’s departure is delayed until the next day, the
airline shall provide the passenger with an amount equal to the
cost of hotel lodging in addition to the requirements of sub -
section (2).
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting the authority
of an airline to maximize its system capacity during weather -related
events to accommodate maximum number of passengers.
 
5 
(3) It shall be deemed as an unfair or deceptive practice for an  airline or
foreign  airline to attribute the delay or cancellation of a flight operate d
by 
the  airline or by another  airline or foreign  airline with which the
airline has a code sharing or other joint marketing arrangement to a forc e
m
ajeure event unless the delay or cancellation is caused by an event not
within the control of the  airline operating the flight, such as weather, an
act of God, or a war or other hostilities and such airline sha ll be liable to
penalty, as per the provisions of this Act.
10 
1
5 
Adequate 
seating space 
for 
passengers on 
aircraft.
 
6. Every airline shall be required to —
( i) ensure that seats on their domestic and international aircrafts do
not violate the minimum dimensions of seats, including the size,
width, and pitch of seats, and the amount of leg room, and the
width of aisles, shall be such as may be prescribed by the C entral
Government not later than one year from the date of
commencement of this Act:
       Provided that Central Government shall issue rules or 
regulations in this regard after providing  due notice and reasonable 
opportunity for seeking and obtaining c omments from all 
stakeholders and holding adequate consultations with the Union 
Ministry of Labour and Employment and the Union Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, passenger advocacy organisations, and 
ergonomic engineers. 
( ii) prominently display on a  publicly available internet website of
the airline, the amount of space available for each passenger on a 
passenger aircraft operated by the airline or by another airline with 
which the airline has a code 
sharing or other joint marketing 
arrangement, incl uding the size, width, and pitch of seats, the 
amount of leg room, and the width of aisles on such aircraft. 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
Availability 
of lavatories 
on passenger 
aircraft. 
7. Each airline and foreign  airline shall ensure that each passenger
aircraft operated by them maintains sufficient functional lavatories
that —
(i) a re available for use, free of charge, at any time passengers
are on board the aircraft, except during takeoff, landing,
turbulent weather conditions or any other situation likely to
jeopardize passenger safety and as duly informed to them by the
aircraft crew; and
( ii) can accommodate and is user friendly for  persons with
disabilities.
 
40 
 
45 
Availability of 
potable water 
on passenger 
aircraft. 
8. Each airline and foreign airline shall ensure that potable water is
available, free of charge, to passengers on board the aircraft operated by
them.
Training on 
rights of 
passengers. 
9. Every air carrier shall provide, at a frequency of not less than every 180
days, training on the rights of passengers to employees and
representatives of the air carrier who directly interact with passengers,
including ticket agents, gate agents, pilots, and flight attendants etc..
 
50 

5 
5 
 
10 
10. Not later than one hundred and eighty days fro m the date of  
commencement of this Act, and thereafter at such intervals as may be  
prescribed, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall submit to the  
appropriate Committees of Parliamen t, as may be prescribed, a report, in  
such form and manner as may be prescribed, assessing —
(i) the quality and safety of fo od and potable water provided to  
passengers on passenger aircraft;
(ii) whether air carriers ensure that sufficient flight crews and 
aircraft are available for scheduled flights;
(iii) the extent to which not hav ing sufficient flight crews 
and aircraft available affects scheduled arrival and departure times; 
and
(iv) any other matter, as may be prescribed or as directed by 
the Directorate General of Civil Aviation, from time to time. 
Reporting to 
the 
Parliament 
1
5 
CHAPTER IV 
CONSUMER PROTECTIONS 
2
0 
2
5 
3
0 
35 
4
0 
4
5 
11. (1)  Every airline shall be prohibited from imposing fees that are
unreasonable or disproportional to the costs incurred by the airline
including —
(a) any fee for a change or cancellation of a reservation for a flight
in air transportation;
(b) any fee relating to checked baggage or carry -on baggage to be
transported on a flight;
(c) any fee relating to seat selection or reservations on a flight;
(d) any fee relating to changing between flights departing on the
same day or flying standby on a flight; and
(e) any other fee imposed by an air carrier relating to a flight;
(2) The Central Government shall, not later than one hundred and eighty
days from the date of commencement of this Act, establish standards for
assessing whether such fees, as referred to in sub -section (1) are
reasonable and proportional to the costs incurred by the airline by taking
into consideration the following, namely –
(a) with respect to a fee described in clause (a) of sub-section (1)
imposed by an airlines for a change or cancellation of a flight
reservation —
(i) any net benefit or cost to the airline from the change or
cancellation, taking into consideration—
I. th e ability of t he airline to anticipate the expected
average number of cancellations and changes and make
reservations accordingly;
II. the ability of the airline to fill a seat made available by a
change or cancellation;
III. any difference in the fare likely to be paid for a ticket
sold to another passenger for a seat made available by the
change or cancellation, as compared to the fare paid by the
passenger who changed or cancelled the passenger’s
reservation; and
Protections 
relating to the 
imposition of 
fees that are 
not 
reasonable 
and 
proportional 
to the costs 
incurred. 

6 
IV. the likelihood that the passenger changing or cancelling
the passenger’s reservation will fill a seat on another flight
by the same airline;
( ii) the costs of processing the change or cancellati on
electronically; and
(iii) any related labour costs;
(b) with respect to a fee described in clause (b)  of sub-section (1)
i
mposed by an air carrier relating to checked baggage —
(i) the costs of processing checked baggage electronically; and
(ii) any related labour costs; and
(c) any other considerations that the Central Government may
consider appropriate.
(3) Not later than two hundred and seventy days from the date of
commencement of this Act, and thereafter at such intervals as may be
prescribed, the Directorate General of Ci vil Aviation shall lay a report
for assessing whether the fees imposed by airlines are reasonable and
proportional to their costs based on the standards specified in sub- secti
on
(2
), in such form and manner as may be prescribed, before each House of
Parliament.
5 
 
10 
1
5 
Protections 
relating to 
disclosure of 
flight 
information.
 
12. Every airline shall be prohibited from limiting or withholding
information relating to schedules, fares, including the lowest available
fare options, fees, availability, and taxes relating to flights in passenger
air transportation from consumers and onli
ne travel agents and
metasearch engines that provide flight search tools.
 
20 
Transparency 
in pricing of 
tickets in air 
transportation
.
 
13. (1) Every airline shall provide useable, current, and accurate information
in a user-friendly, accessible form, with respect to fares, applicable
taxes, and ancillary fees to ticket agents, online travel agents, and
metasearch engines that provide flight search tools.
(2) E very airline shall allow consumers to purchase tickets and pay for
applicable taxes and ancillary fees through ticket agents, online travel
agents, and metasearch engines that provide flight search tools;
(3) Every Airline, ticket agents online travel agents and metasearch
engines that provide flight search tools s hall disclose all applicable taxes
and any ancillary fees charged by an airline with respect to a fare that is
applicable to the services identified by the purchaser, at any point at
which the fare is shown in whole or in part; and
(4) E very Airline, tick et agents online travel agents and metasearch
engines that provide flight search tools, through a telephonic
communication with a prospective consumer regarding the cost of air
transportation, shall inform the consumer of all applicable taxes and any
ancillary fees charged by an airline in relation to the air transportation
and associated services requested by the consumer, at any point at which
the cost of the air transportation is disclosed in whole or in part.
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
4
0 
Frequent flyer 
programs, 
fairness and 
transparency 
14. Not later than one hundred and eighty days from the date of
commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall prescribe rules
and/or regulations to prevent unfair changes to frequent flyer programs
depriving its members of its benefits by —
( i) considering the significance of the change to the frequent flyer
program’s terms and conditions;
 
45 

7 
5 
1
0 
1
5 
(ii) considering the amount of time be tween the notification
provided to a consumer and the date on which the change takes
effect; and
( iii) requiring each airline that offers a frequent flyer program to
disclose, in a standardised format, when offering or enrolling 
consumers into the progra m, accurate information regarding the 
program’s rules, including— 
(a) the rate at which credits are earned;
(b) the minimum number of credits earned per flight;
(c) the number of credits needed for each award;
(d) any applicable deadlines for redeeming credits;
(e) any restrictions on the transferability of earned credit a nd
aw
ards;
(f) other conditions and limitations of the program;
(g) the percentage of successful redemptions; and
(h) frequent flyer seats made available in the top origin and
destination markets.
2
0 
25 
15. In case a passenger’s baggage is lost, damaged, delayed, or stolen, the
airline shall –
(i) pr omptly provide an automatic refund to a passenger in the
amount of any ancillary fee charged by the airline for checked
baggage if the passenger’s checked baggage arrives damaged; and
( ii) provide notification to a passenger who is impacted by lost,
damaged, delayed, or stolen baggage, through  the passenger’s
chosen method of communication, of the procedure by which the
passenger shall obtain a refund and the amount of the refund.
Refunds for 
lost, damaged, 
delayed, or 
stolen 
baggage. 
3
0 
3
5 
4
0 
45 
16. All airlines shall notify passengers of their rights and eligibility for
refunds, compensation, and protections required by law, including by an
airline’s contract of carriage, or otherwise available to passenger, which
shall include the following, namely—
(i) promptly and expressly notify eligible passengers and the
public of their eligibility for refunds, compensation, and
protections not later than 30 minutes after the airline becomes
aware that such passengers have become eligible for such refunds ,
c
ompensation, and protections;
( ii) if such airlines permit passengers and other interested persons
to subscribe to flight status notification services—
(a) to deliver refunds, compensation, and protecti on
notifications to subscribers to such services,  by whatever
means the airline offers and which the subscriber chooses; and
(b) to incorporate commitments with respect to such services
i
nto their customer service plans;
( iii) to continuously display information and eligibility
requirements for refunds,  compensation, and protections, including
refunds, compensation, and protections relating to —
Passenger 
rights 
transparency. 

8 
(a) denied boarding and delays and cancellations (including on
international flights); and
(b) lost, damaged, or delayed luggage; and
(iv) to prominently display passengers’ rights and complaint
submission
 system and the guidelines for escalation on boarding
passes, computer-g enerated boarding passes, and ticketed itineraries, at
boarding gates and ticket counters and other prominent places at airports.
 
5 
Powers to 
make rules 17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have ef fect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.
 
10 
 
15 
20 

9 
    STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
      India, over the last few years, has seen a rapid increase in air traffic, 
first-time flyers, as well as airports and attained the status of being the third 
largest aviation market globally. As India progresses towards its goal of 
being a developed country, fast and affordable travel becomes a necessity 
for all its citizens. 
     While India allows a free -market system to decide air fares without the 
Government’s intervention, airline companies often c harge exorbitantly high 
prices for their services making air travel unaffordable for a large section of 
our population. 
     Moreover, India’s airline industry broadly consists of a few giant players 
forming an oligopoly market, often leaving the quality o f their services 
unchecked and sub-par. 
    A passenger-centric approach is required by addressing passengers’ health 
concerns, by ensuring a minimum seat and aisle size inside aircrafts, and 
access to in-flight lavatories and potable water; their travel-r elated concerns 
with adequate compensation for any delays or losses, and possibilities for 
interline connectivity; increasing transparency and accountability and 
strengthening redressal mechanisms by making passengers aware of their 
rights. 
 T he Bill s eeks to achieve the above-mentioned objectives. 
      P RIYANKA CHATURVEDI 

10 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
        
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out t he purpose of this Bill. As the rules relate to the matters of details 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

 RAJYA SABHA 
   ___________ 
A 
BILL 
to define, extend, and protect the rights of individuals availing air 
carrier services and to prevent their exploitation in terms of air 
fares, basic amenities, and unjust profits for air service   
providers and ensure due compensation in case of 
undue delays, loss or damage of luggage etc. 
so as to make air travel more affordable, 
convenient and transparent and for 
matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)—037—10.02.2026. 