1
Bill No. XCI of 2022
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
 further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the Code),
the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"124A. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible
representation or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or
excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards the Government established by law
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
new section for
section 124A.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Sedition.
45 of 1860.
5
10

2
in India, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or
with imprisonment which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or
with fine:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall apply only when the
words, signs, visible representation or any other action directly results in
incitement of violence and commission of an offence punishable with
imprisonment for life under this Code.
Explanation.—Comments or signs or visible representation or any other act
expressing disapprobation of the administrative measures or other action of the
Government, do not constitute an offence under this section.".
3. In the Code, for section 309, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"309. Whoever holds out a threat of suicide to a public authority, with intent to
cause that authority to do any act which it is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do
any act which it is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such
threat, and does any act towards the execution of such threat, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or with
fine, or with both.".
4. In the Code, in section 375, for Exception 2, the following Exception shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(2) Marriage or other relationship shall not constitute a defence to a charge of
rape under this section.".
Substitution of
new section
for section
309.
Threat of
suicide with
intent to
coerce a public
authority.
Substitution
of new
exception for
exception 2
of section
375.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Democracy is not another name of majoritarianism, on the contrary it is a system to
include every voice, where thought of every person is counted, irrespective of the number of
the people backing that idea. In a democracy, it is natural that there will be different and
conflicting interpretations of a given account of an event. Not only viewpoints which
constitute the majority are to be considered, but at the same time, dissenting and critical
opinions should also be acknowledged. Free speech is protected because it is necessary to
achieve some greater, often ultimate, social good. In a democratic set-up, there has to be an
active and intelligent participation of the people in all spheres and affairs of their community
as well as the State. It is their right to be kept informed about current political, social,
economic and cultural life as well as the burning topics and important issues of the day in
order to enable them to consider and form broad opinion about the same and the way in
which they are being managed, tackled and administered by the Government and its
functionaries. To achieve this objective the people need a clear and truthful account of
events, so that they may form their own opinion and offer their own comments and viewpoints
on such matters and issues and select their further course of action.
2. The Supreme Court has also narrowed the scope and applicability of section 124A,
in its landmark judgment in Kedar Nath Singh V/s  State of Bihar (1962) case, where it linked
sedition to a test of tangible evidence of actual harm. There is an urgent need to amend
section 124A of the Indian Penal Code in compliance with the judgment of the Supreme Court
and to prevent the possibility of undue harassment of citizens who simply disagree with the
Government.
3. Section 309 of Indian Penal Code criminalised an attempt to suicide by any person.
However section 115 of the Mental Health Care Act, 2017 States that any person who
attempts to commit suicide shall be presumed to have stress and therefore shall not be
punished under IPC thus making provision of section 309 of IPC otiose. The Law Commission
had twice, in 1971 and 2008, also recommended the repeal of section 309 of the IPC. In Aruna
Ramchandra Shanbaug v. Union of India, (2011) 4 SCC 454, the Supreme Court emphasised
that a person suffering from mental health illnesses needs help rather than punishment.
However, it is imperative to punish suicide where it serves another purpose, i.e., an attempt
to suicide should be criminalised when it is used as an instrument to threaten with the object
of coercing a public authority to pursue a course of action. To prevent suicide attempts
being used as threats, to intimidate of coerce public authorities, the new provision be added
to the code.
4. In India, marital rape exists de facto but is not recongnised de jure, i.e. in law. While
in other countries either the legislature has criminalized marital rape, or the judiciary has
played an active role in recognizing it as an offence, in India, however, very little has been
done to recognise this crime. Though marital rape is the most common and repugnant form of
masochism in Indian society, it is hidden behind the iron curtain of marriage. In 1993, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights published the declaration on the
elimination of violence against women. This also establishes Marital Rape as a human right
violation. However, India is one of the thirty-six countries that still have not criminalized
marital rape. In a landmark judgment, the Supreme Court in Independent Thought v. Union of
India, (2013) 382 SCC (2017) criminalized unwilling sexual contact with a wife between fifteen
and eighteen years of age. This judgment has in turn led to an increase in other writs
challenging the constitutionality of Exception 2 of section 375 of IPC as a whole. Although
the Constitution guarantees equality to all under Article 14, Indian criminal law discriminates
against female victims who have been raped by their own husbands. Exception 2 also violates
3

4
Article 21’s right to live a healthy and dignified life. It is well settled that the “right to life”
envisaged in Article 21 is not merely a right to exist. The courts have repeatedly held that the
“right to life” encompasses a right to live with human dignity. Yet, the very existence of
Exception 2 of section 375 which fails to deter husbands from engaging in acts of forced
sexual contact with their wives, adversely affects the physical and mental health of women
and undermines their ability to live with dignity. It is time that we recognise the inhumane
nature of this provision and consign it to the dustbin of history.
This Bill seeks to amend sections 124A, 309 and Exception 2 of section 375 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
DR. SASMIT  PATRA.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
124A. Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible
representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt or excites or
attempts to excite disaffection towards, the Government established by law in India shall be
punished with imprisonment for life to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which
may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1.—The expression “disaffection” includes disloyalty and all feelings of
enmity.
Explanation 2. —Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting or
attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this
section.
Explanation 3.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other
action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
* * * * *
309. Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any act towards the commission
of such offence, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year or with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
375. A man is said to commit “rape” if he—
* * * * *
Exception 1.—A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape.
Exception 2.—Sexual intercourse of sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife
not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.
5
Sedition.
Attempt to
commit
suicide.
Rape.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E) –022–11-12-20 23.