SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/4117RS
1
THE MULTI PURPOSE INTER-STA TE RIVER PROJECTS AND SETTING
UP OF LARGE ENTERPRISES (REHABILITA TION OF OUSTEES)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the appropriate rehabilitation of the oustees and more so of the poor
villagers, dalits and tribals who have to vacate their ancestral houses and whose
lands and immovable properties are acquired by the State for setting up multi-
purpose inter-state river projects or for setting up large or big industrial enterprises
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Multi-Purpose Inter-State River Projects and Setting
up of Large Enterprises (Rehabilitation of Oustees) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government  may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XCII of 2006
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/4117RS
22
Definitions.  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "family" includes parents and their children.
(c) "industry" shall have the meaning assigned to the term in the Industries
(Development and Regulation) act, 1951;
(d) "Oustee" means any person, whose land has been acquired by the appropriate
Government and who has to vacate his house alongwith his family with his belongings and
shift to other place to enable the Government to construct a multi purpose Inter-State
river project or to set up a big industry at the acquired land;
(e) "prescribed" means perscribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "project" includes multi-purpose dam or reservoir constructed over a river passing
through more than one State for the purposes of generating power, prevention of floods,
irrigation and drinking water etc.;
(g) "tribal" means  people belonging to tribes which have been declared as Scheduled
Tribes in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
 3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every project shall be formulated by the Central Government in consultation with the
Government of the States concerned with the project.
(2)  The project formulated under sub-section (1)  shall be implemented and monitored
by the Central Government in such manner as may be perscribed.
(3) The entire cost of the project shall be borne by the Central Government.
(4) The required land shall be acquired by the appropriate Government, by notification
in the Gazette, in such manner as may be prescribed.
 4. (1)  The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Governments  of the
States concerned with the project or the industry as the case may be, formulate a
comprehensive scheme for the appropriate rehabilitation of the oustees by providing them
compensation, dwelling houses, agricultural land and such other infrastructure which is
necessary for their proper rehabilitation.
(2) While formulating the rehabilitation scheme under sub-section (1) special care
shall be taken of the dalits, farmers, women and children and more so of the tribals keeping
in view the requirements of the environment in which they are habitual of living.
(3) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers the
rehabilitation scheme shall also provide for,—
(a) giving a built up dwelling house to every oustee by the appropriate
Government with such facilities as may be prescribed;
(b) giving agricultural land to every oustee farmer or other person whose land
has been acquired for the industry or the project as the case may be, by the appropriate
Government acquiring such land in the following manner:—
(i) if the land acquired was irrigated land, similar land which shall be
ten per cent more then the total area of the acquired land;
(ii) if the land acquired was not irrigated one then similar land which
shall be twenty per cent more than the total area of the acquired land and if the
alternative land is irrigated land then land equivalent to the total area of the
acquired land.
65 of 1951.
Central  
Government
to formulate,
monitor and
finance the
project.
Rehabilitation
Scheme for the
oustees.
Order of 1950.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/4117RS
3
(4) Prior to administering the rehabilitation scheme it shall be the duty of the appropriate
Government to obtain from the likely oustees of a site chosen for the project, their choice as
to whether they want to be rehabilitated within the State or District or elsewhere as proposed
by the appropriate Government and shall, as far as possible rehabilitate the oustees as per
the option given by them.
 5. The appropriate Government shall provide appropriate employment to at least one
eligible member of every family ousted for the project or industry, as the case may be, as per
his calibre and qualifications in such manner as may be prescribed.
 6. The appropriate Government shall provide adequate number of schools and other
institutions including technical and vocational ones, medical and such other facilities as
may be perscribed in and around the areas where oustees have been and proposed to be
rehabilitated.
7. The  Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
made in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this act.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
 9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Employment
provision for
the oustees.
Educational
and other
facilities.
Central 
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Savings.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Recently, the issue of rehabilitation of oustees of Sardar Sarovar Pariyojana on Narmada
river and those of a multinational Joint Venture Company in Orissa was in the limelight
through the electronic and print media due to hunger strike by an activist of the Narmada
Bachao Andolan and by the Chief Minister of Gujarat in case  of Sardar Sarovar Pariyojana
and killing of many Tribals in Police firing in Orissa who were demanding appropriate
rehabilitation of oustees and more compensation respectively. In this context, it is necessary
for the overall development of the country in general and specific areas or region in particular
to formulate and implement multi purpose Inter-State river projects or setting up of big
industrial ventures. The multi purpose Inter State River Projects give precious electricity and
water in abundance which may be utilized for irrigating millions of hectares of dry land which
will boost  agricultural produciton, execute drinking water schemes to quench the thirst of
crores of people and millions of households and electricity will benefit the industrial and
households sectors leading to the prosperity of the nation. Setting up of big industries will
create more employment opportunities and lead to economic growth of the country. But, at
the same time, thousands of families and persons living in the vicinity of the proposed river
project or the industry have to leave their ancestral native place to facilitate the execution of
the project or the industry. Their rehabilitation becomes a necessity by keeping a balance
between the urgency and emotional attachment or bond of the oustees with the place or site
because people generally are not willing to leave their houses and hamlets and some times
there are complaints and resentment against rehabilitation schemes which are often defective.
Sometimes the villages and hamlets of the Tribals situated in forest areas also come in the
vicinity of the project. Their rehabilitation becomes problematic because of their habit of
living in a particular environment and atmosphere. Due to these reasons agitations were
galore against the Sardar Sarovar Pariyojana or Tehri Dam Pariyojana and other projects. The
issue had even gone to the Supreme Court of India which observed that it is essential to
strike a balance between development and rehabilitation when such a vast project was being
carried out and a large number of people were affected. Although all persons cannot be
satisfied but  rehabilitation has to be reasonable. On agitations the Supreme Court was of the
opinion that parties should stop the agitational path in such matter, otherwise it would be a
threat to the unity and integrity of the country. However, since there is no law to deal with
these important issues the matter, many a time linger on causing avoidable losses to the
nation.
Hence this Bill.
E.M.  SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall provide adequate
number of schools and other institutions in and around areas where oustees have been
rehabilitated. Clause 7 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide adequate
funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Since the expenditure will be project based it
is difficult to make an estimate about the likely expenditure which may involve on the
Consolidated Fund of India in case the Bill is enacted and brought into force. The Central
Government will assess the likely expenditure on each project and get it approved by the
Parliament.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation or legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the appropriate rehabilitation of the oustees and more so of the poor villagers,
dalits  and tribals who have to vacate their ancestral houses and
whose lands and immovable properties are acquired by the State for setting up multi-
purpose inter-state river projects or for setting up large or big industrial enterprises
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4117RS(S1)—8-12-2006.