1
THE ADVOCATES  (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force  on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
''(ia)  "misconduct" means any act of a legal practitioner that is found to be
in breach of or wanting in observance of the standard of professional conduct
or etiquette prescribed by the rules framed under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 49 of this Act, or any conduct that is a disqualification for enrolment under
section 24A of this Act."
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.
25 of 1961.
Bill No.  XCIII of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
5
10

2
3. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (d), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(e) impose such fine as it may deem fit, proportionate to the gravity of the
misconduct proved against the advocate, subject to the maximum limit of three lakh
rupees; and
(f) award a fair and reasonable compensation of such amount as it may deem fit,
subject to the maximum limit of five lakh rupees, payable to the person aggrieved by
the misconduct of the concerned advocate."
4. In section 43 of the principal  Act, after clause (b), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that  the disciplinary committee may order special or exemplary costs,
subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees, to be payable either by the complainant,  if
the complaint is found to be vexatious or frivolous, or by the respondent advocate, if
he is found to have been uncooperative in the disciplinary proceedings under this
Act."
Amendment
of section 35.
Amendment
of section 43.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The legal profession is considered a noble profession as it facilitates the establishment
of a legal system that dispenses fair and impartial justice and protects the rule of law. The
fundamental pre-requisite for preserving the nobility of this profession is to ensure adherence
to a well-defined set of professional norms that seek to regulate the conduct of advocates
and provide adequate punishment in cases of proven misconduct.
Although both the Advocates Act, 1961 and the Bar Council of India Rules lay down
the standards of professional conduct, they are silent as to what the term ‘misconduct’
means in the context of the legal profession. This lack of specificity has resulted in the
arbitrary usage of section 35 of the Act, which seeks to penalise the misconduct of advocates.
Furthermore, the forms of punishment prescribed under section 35 are very limited. They do
not allow for imposition of fine on the advocate on whose part the misconduct is proven, or
provision of compensation to the party aggrieved by such misconduct. Lastly, the Act fails
to provide punishment in case the complaint of misconduct is found to be vexatious or
frivolous, or where the advocate has been uncooperative in the disciplinary proceedings.
To remedy this lacunae in the law governing the legal profession, this Bill inserts a
comprehensive definition for ‘misconduct’, expands the scope of penalties and costs provided
under sections 35 and 43. By doing so, this Bill lends much-needed clarity and efficacy to the
professional norms that are aimed at deterring misconduct of advocates.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
DR. SASMIT PATRA.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961
(25 OF 1961)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(i) “legal practitioner” means an advocate or vakil of any High Court, a pleader,
mukhtar or revenue agent;
* * * * *
CHAPTER V
C
ONDUCT OF ADVOCATES
35. (1) Where on receipt of a complaint or otherwise a State Bar Council has reason to
believe that any advocate on its roll has been guilty of professional or other misconduct, it
shall refer the case for disposal to its disciplinary committee.
(1A)
 The State Bar Council may, either of its own motion or on application made
to it by any person interested, withdraw a proceeding pending before its disciplinary
committee and direct the inquiry to be made by any other disciplinary committee of
that State Bar Council.
(2) The disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council shall fix a date for the hearing of
the case and shall cause a notice thereof to be given to the advocate concerned and to the
Advocate-General of the State.
(3) The disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council after giving the advocate concerned
and the Advocate-General an opportunity of being heard, may make any of the following
orders, namely:—
(a) dismiss the complaint or, where the proceedings were initiated at the instance
of the State Bar Council, direct that the proceedings be filed;
(b) reprimand the advocate;
(c) suspend the advocate from practice for such period as it may deem fit;
(d) remove the name of the advocate from the State roll of advocates.
* * * * *
43. The disciplinary committee of a Bar Council may make such order as to the costs of
any proceedings before it as it may deem fit and any such order shall be executable as if it
were an order—
(a) in the case of an order of the disciplinary committee of the Bar Council of
India, of the Supreme Court;
(b) in the case of an order of the disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council, of
the High Court.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Punishment of
advocates  for
misconduct.
Cost of
proceedings
before a
disciplinary
committees.

5
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961.
————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–026–11-12-2023.