SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/4129RS
1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After article 275 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"275A. Notwithstanding anything in article 275 of the Constitution, there
shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid to the revenues of
the State of Rajasthan such recurring sums as may be considered necessary for the
special development of the State and for promotion of infrastructure, generation of
adequate employment opportunities and investment in the said state particularly the
arid and sandy areas:
Provided that such grants-in-aid shall be in addition to the annual allocations
made by the Planning Commission to the State of Rajasthan and all other schemes of
assistance from the Government of India:
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XCIII of 2006
Grants from
the Union to
the State of
Rajasthan.
5
10
Insertion of
new article
275A.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/4129RS
22
Insertion of new
article 371J.
Special
provision
with respect
to State of
Rajasthan.
Provided further that the grants-in-aid referred to under this article may be reviewed
on the expiry of every five years from the commencement of this Constitution (Amendment)
Act.”
3.  After artice 371-I of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"371 J. The President may by order made with respect to the State of
Rajasthan having regard to requirement of the area as a whole for development,
employment opportunities and facilities for the people of different parts of the State
provide for,—
(i) a separate Board for development of the State;
(ii) integrated scheme for potable water and irrigation in the arid and sandy
areas of the State; and
(iii) an arrangement providing adequate facilities for technical education
and vocational training and adequate opportunities for employment in services
under the control of State Government particularly with respect to arid and
sandy areas.”
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Geographically, Rajasthan is the largest State in the country. Major portion of the State
is arid and sandy sticken with acute backwardness. The State has been facing drought for
past several years. As a result there is not enough development of infrastructure and for the
generation of employment there has been least  investment in the State. There is no adequate
infrastructure like irrigation, road, power, railway, etc. in the absence of which it is not
possible to accelerate the growth and development of the arid and sandy areas. Besides,
there is acute shortage of drinking water in the State.
The money granted by the Central Government has not been adequate to meet the
expenditure with regard to various developmental schemes. Being one of  the largest States
speedy developments of it is in the interest of the country. Therefore, it has been proposed
to amend the Constitution for a special grants-in-aid and certain special provisions for the
State of Rajasthan.
Hence this Bill.
PRABHA THAKUR
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the payment of such grants-in-aid of the revenues of
Rajasthan as may be considered necessary for the special development of the State and to
promote infrastructure so as to generate adequate employment opportunities and investment
in the State. Clause 3 provides for various schemes for development of the State of Rajasthan
by way of Development Board in the area of potable water, irrigation, education, training etc.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
However, without an appraisal of the position of the State, the amount of investment
required cannot be estimated at this juncture.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Prabha Thakur, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4129RS(S1)—8-12-2006.