  AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA  SABHA
 ON THE 
7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. XCIII of 2024 
THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2024  
A  
BILL 
 to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: — 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code on Social Security (Amendment)
Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
2. In  the  Code  on  Social  Security,  2020 (hereinafter  referred  as  the
C
ode), in section 2, —
(i) in sub
-section (24), in clause (a), after the existing proviso, the
following proviso shall
 be inserted, namely, –
            “Provided further that a married daughter, who is 
financially reliant on the deceased employee shall also be 
deemed to be a dependent;” 
(ii) for sub -section (26), the following shall be substituted,
namely, —
 “employee” means any individual, excluding apprentices 
engaged under the Apprentices Act, 1961, who is employed 
on wages by an establishment, either directly or through a 
contractor, to perform skilled, semi -skilled, or unskilled 
tasks, including manual, operational, supervisory, 
managerial, administrative, technical, clerical, or any other 
work,  including Anganwadi workers and Accredited Social 
Health Activists (ASHA), whether under express or implied 
terms of employment, and any individual declared as an 
employee by the appropriate Government, but excludes 
members of the Armed Forces of the Union. 
  Provided that for the purpose s of Chapter III, except 
in the case of the Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme, and 
Chapter IV, the term "employee" shall mean any employee, 
irrespective of any wage ceiling, and shall include such other 
persons or classes of persons as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify as employees for the purposes 
of those Chapters;” 
(iii) for sub- section (33), the following shall be substituted,
namely,—
“family” means family, as defined under the relevant 
provisions of the Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme, 1952 
fram
ed under section 5 of the Employees’ Provident Funds 
Act,
 1952, the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, and 
the Pa
yment of Gratuity Act, 1972;” 
(iv) for sub -sectio n (35), the following shall be substituted,
namely,—
“gig worker” means a person who performs work or 
participates in a work arrangement and earns from such 
activities outside of a traditional employer -empl
 oyee 
rela
tionship, specifically in task -based, temporary or 
project-oriented engagements, including but not limited to 
online and platform-based services;” 
(v) after sub-section (53), the following new sub-section shall be
inserted, namely,—
 “(53A) “online platform” means a digital or electronic 
medium, website, application, or technology -enabled 
interface that facilitates inter action between users and 
service providers, allowing individuals to offer or accept 
specific tasks, services, or assignments in exchange for 
payment or remuneration;” 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
 
30 
 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
50 
52 of 1
961. 
 
19 of 1952. 
34 of 1948. 
39 of 1972. 

3 
5 
10 
15 
20 
(vi) for sub -section (61), the following shall be substituted,
namely,—
“platform worker” means a person performing work on or 
through a digital or online platform for an organisation or 
individual;” 
(vii) for sub -section (75), the following shall be substituted,
namely,—
 “self-employed worker” means any person who is not 
employed by an employer but engages independently in any 
occupation, including gig or platform work, where earnings 
are variable or derived from non -
traditional work 
arrangements, and is subject to a monthly income of an 
amount as may be notified by the Central Government or the 
State Government, as the case may be, from time to time;” 
(viii) for sub -section (78), the following shall be substituted,
namely,—
 “social security” means the measures of protection afforded 
to employees, unorganised workers, gig workers, platform 
workers, agriculture wage workers, domestic workers, street 
vendors, and bidi workers to ensure access to health care and 
to provide income security, particularly in cases of old age, 
unemployment, sickness, invalidity, work injury, maternity 
or loss of a breadwinner by means of rights conferred on 
them and schemes framed, under this Code;”  
25 
30 
3. In the Code, after section 7, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely, —
“7A. (1) The Social Security Boards established under this Code, 
shall implement a digital compliance system to maintain records, 
monitor compliance with the provisions of this Act, and facilitate 
efficient data management. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notif ication in the Official
Gazette, prescribe standards for digital compliance, data privacy, and
cyber security to safeguard the integrity and confidentiality of all
records maintained by the Boards.”
Insertion of new 
section 7A. 
Dig
ital 
compliance and 
record keeping 
34 of 1948 
35 
40 
 45 
4. In the Code, in section 28, after sub-section (2), the following new sub-
section shall be inserted, namely, — 
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, Anganwadi workers and Accredited Social 
Health Activists (ASHA) and Anganwadi workers shall be 
eligible for medical benefits, disability coverage, and life 
insurance benefits  under the Employees' State Insurance 
Corporation (ESIC), including access to healthcare services, 
hospitalization, maternity benefits, and compensation for 
workplace injuries and fatalities subject to the applicable 
provisions of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, or any 
modifications thereof.” 
Amendment of 
section 28. 

Amendment of 
section 53. 5. In the Code, in section 53, —
(i) in sub-section ( 1),–
(a) for the words "five years", wherever they occur, the
words "two years" shall be substituted;
(b) in the first proviso for the words "three years", the words 
"two years" shall be substituted; and 
(ii) after sub-section (6), the following new sub- section shall be
inserted, namely,—
“(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the 
requirement of two years of continuous service for gratuity 
eligibility shall apply uniformly to all categories of 
employees, including contract labourers, seasonal workers, 
piece-rate workers, fixed -term employees, daily wage 
workers, and monthly wage workers.” 
5 
10 
 4

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        The Code on Social Security, 2020, was a landmark initiative by the Union 
Government aimed at consolidating laws relating to social security with the goal 
of providing social protection to all workers, including those in the unorganised 
sector. However, various stakeholders and the feedback from the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee highlighted the need to further refine the Code to ensure 
inclusivity, fairness and adaptability.  This Amendment Bill further refines the 
provisions designed to enhance social security coverage and align the Code with 
contemporary work structure
s. The Bill clarifies and expands on various 
definitions to acknowledge the importance of flexible work arrangements. 
Further, the Bill extends social security to previously excluded groups and 
introduces digital tools to streamline compliance. The Amendme nt Bill fulfils 
the objective of creating a more inclusive and efficient social security system. 
        The Code on Social Security (Amendment) Bill, 2024, seeks to extend and 
strengthen social security coverage for diverse segments of India’s workforce. 
The proposed amendments align with the Government’s objective of building 
a comprehensive and inclusive social security system, ensuring that all workers, 
including those in informal, gig, platform-based, and self-employed roles, have 
access to essential protections. 
         Key revisions are introduced to clarify and expand the definitions of terms 
critical to the Code, such as “employee,” “gig worker,” “platform worker,” and 
“self-employed worker,” recognizing emerging forms of employment and non-
traditional work arrangements. This includes extending social security benefits 
to groups like Anganwadi and Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA), 
acknowledging their invaluable contribution to community welfare. By 
substituting the definitions of gig and pl atform- workers in the Code, the 
amendment addresses the unique needs of those engaged in task- based, online, 
or freelance arrangements. Defining terms like “online platform” provides a 
structured approach to managing the digital workspace, accommodating new 
economic models. 
       The Amendment Bill introduces provisions for “dependent married 
daughters” to be eligible for benefits, enhancing support for families of 
deceased employees. Changes to the Code also propose a reduction in the 
qualifying period for gratuity eligibility from five years to two years, extending 
this benefit to categories of workers traditionally excluded, including contract 
labourers and daily wage earners. 
        In response to the increasing digitization of records and compliance, a new 
section mandates the establishment of a digital compliance system by Social 
Security Boards. This system will ensure efficient record -keeping, robust data 
management, and strengthened cyber security. The Amendment Bill further 
ensures that ASHA and Anganwadi workers are included under the Employees’ 
State Insurance Corporation (ESIC), making them eligible for medical, 
disability, and life insurance benefits. This provides these workers with crucial 
healthcare and financial protections. 
        Overall, the proposed amendments reflect the Government's commitment 
to enhancing labour welfare, especially for workers in the informal and 
emerging sectors. By addressing the evolving nature of work, improved benefits 
for vulnerable groups, and advancing digit al compliance, this Bill lays the 
foundation for a more inclusive and responsive social security framework in 
India. 
         Hence, this Bill. 
SANJAY SETH 

6 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY, 2020 
(36 OF 2020) 
In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, ––– 
*                 *                *        *                  * 
(24) “dependant” means any of the following relatives of deceased
employee, namely:—
(a) a widow, a minor legitimate or adopted son, an unmarried
legitimate or adopted daughter or a widowed mother:
 Provided that for the purposes of Chapter IV, a legitimate 
adopted son, who has not attained the age of twenty-five years, shall 
be dependant of the deceased employee; 
(b) if wholly dependant on the earnings of the employee at the time
of his death, a legitimate or adopted son or a daughter who has
attained the age of eighteen years and who is infirm; except for the
purposes of Chapter IV wherein the word “eighteen” occurring in
this sub-clause shall be deemed to have been substituted by the word
“twenty-five”;
(c) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the employee at
the time of his death,—
(i) a widower;
(ii) a parent other than a widowed mother;
(iii) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter
or a daughter legitimate or illegitimate or adopted if married and
a minor or if widowed and a minor;
(iv) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed sister if
a minor;
(v) a widowed daughter-in-law;
(vi) a minor child of a pre-deceased son;
(vii) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent
of the child is alive, or;
(viii) a grandparent if no parent of the employee is alive.
 Explanation. —For the purposes of sub-clause (b) and items (vi) and (vii) 
of sub-clause (c), references to a son, daughter or child include an adopted 
son, daughter or child, respectively;       
*                 *                *        *               * 
(26) “employee” means any person (other than an apprentice engaged
under the Apprentices Act, 1961) employed on wages by an establishment, 
either directly or through a contractor, to do any skilled, semi -skilled or
unskilled, manual, op erational, supervisory, managerial, administrative,
technical,
*                 *                *        *                  * 
(33) “family” means all or any of the following relatives of an
employee or an unorganised worker, as the case may be, namely, —
(a) a spouse;
52 of 1961. 
2.Definitions. 

7 
All employees 
to be insured. 
Payment of 
gratuity. 
28. 
53. 
(b) a minor legitimate or adopted child dependent upon the employee
or an unorganised worker, as the case may be;
(c) a child who is wholly dependent on the earnings of the employee
or an unorganised worker, as the case may be, and who is—
(i) receiving education, till he attains the age of twenty-one years;
and
(ii) an unmarried daughter;
(d) a child who is infirm by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury and is wholly dependent on the earnings of the
employee or an unorganized worker, as the case may be, so long as
the infirmity continues;
(e) dependent parents (including father -in-law and mother-in-law of
a woman employee), whose income from all sources does not exceed
such income as may be prescribed by the Central Government;
(f) in case the employee or an unorganised worker, as the case may
be, is unmarried and his parents are not alive, a minor brother or sister 
wholly dependent upon the earnings of the Insured Person;
*                 *                *      *                  * 
(35) “gig worker” means a person who performs work or participates in a
work arrangement and earns from such activities outside of traditional
employer-employee relationship;
*                 *                *      *                  * 
(61) “platform worker” means a person engaged in or undertaking
platform work;
*                 *                *        *                  * 
(75) “self-employed worker” means any person who is not employed by
an employer, but engages himself in any occupation in the unorganised
sector subject to a monthly earning of an amount as may be notified by the
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be , from
time to time or holds cultivable land subject to such ceiling as may be
notified by the State Government;
*                 *                *        *                  *      
(78) “social security” means the measures of protection afforded to
employees, unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers to
ensure access to health care and to provide income security, particularly
in cases of old age, unemployment, sickness, inval idity, work injury,
maternity or loss of a breadwinner by means of rights conferred on them
and schemes framed, under this Code;
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, every employee in an establishment
to which this Chapter applies shall be insured in such manner whether
electronically or otherwise, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) An employee whether insured or insurable under sub- section (1) in respect
of whom contributions are or were payable and who is by reason thereof,
entitled to any of the benefits provided under this Chapter, shall be called
“Insured Person”.
(1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the termination of his
employment after he has rendered continuous service for not less than five
years, —
(a) on his superannuation; or

8 
45 of 1955. 
(b) on his retirement or resignation; or
(c) on his death or disablement due to accident or disease; or
(d) on termination of his contract period under fixed term
employment; or
(e) on happening of any such event as may be notified by the Central
Government:
        Provided that in case of working journalist as defined in claus e (f) of 
section 2 of the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees 
(Condition of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955, the 
expression “five years” occurring in this sub -section shall be deemed to be 
three years: 
Provided further that the completion of continuous service of five years 
shall not be necessary where the termination of the employment of any 
employee is due to death or disablement or expiration of fixed term 
employment or happening of any such event as may be notified by the Central 
Government: 
Provided also that in the case of death of the employee, gratuity payable 
to him shall be paid to his nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his 
heirs, and where any such nominees or heirs is a minor, the share of such 
minor, shall be deposited with the competent authority as may be notified by 
the appropriate Government who shall invest the same for the benefit of such 
minor in such bank or other financial institution, as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government, until such minor attains majority. 
*                 *                *        *               *

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
 to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020. 
(Shri Sanjay Seth, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB-(E)—101—10.02.2025 