AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XCII of 2024 
CLAUSES 
THE LEGISLATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT 
BILL, 2024 
______________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
______________
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short
 title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II 
LEGISLATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT UNITS 
3. Establishment of Legislative Impact Assessment Units .
4. Composition of the Unit.
5. Term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and
Members.
6. Resignation and removal and filling of vacancy(ies).
7. Officers and Staff of each Unit.
8. Functions of the Unit.
CHAPTER III 
LEGISLATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE 
9. Constitution of the Legislative Impact Assessment Committee.
10. Composition of the Committee.
11. Qualifications for appointment to the Committee.
12. Selection Process of Expert and Academic Members of the Committee.
13. Term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and
Members.
14. Resignation and removal.
15. Vacancy(ies) etc.
16. Meetings of the Committee and quorum.
17. Administrative support to the Committee.
18. Functions of the Committee.

CHAPTER IV 
ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS 
19. Timelines for Legislative Impact Assessments.
20. Process of the Assessments.
CHAPTER V 
DATA COLLECTION AND STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 
21. Data Collection and Analysis Protocols.
22. Stakeholder Engagement and Public Feedback.
CHAPTER VI 
REPORTING AND PARLIAMENTARY OVERSIGHT 
23. Legislative Impact Assessment Report.
24. Submission of Annual Legislative Impact Assessment Report to
Parliament.
25. Central Government to provide funds.
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
26. Power to remove difficulties.
27. Power to make rules.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
 
Bill No. XCII of 2024 
THE LEGISLATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT BILL, 2 024 
A 
BILL 
to establish mandatory procedures for evaluating the impact of enacted 
legislation within each Ministry of the Central Government, creating 
Legislative  Impact  Assessment  Units to ensure  comprehensive  
assessments, administrative planning, stakeholder engagement, 
 and centralised oversight through a Legislative Impact 
Assessment Committee and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it en acted by Parliament i n the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1)  This Act may be called the Legislative Impact Assessment Act, 2024.
(2) It sh all  come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title  and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “C ommittee"  means the  Legislative Impact Assessment
Committee, a central oversight body constituted under  section 9 of
th
is Act;
(b) “enacted legislation” or “legislation” means any Government or
Private Members’ Bill considered and passed by both Houses of 
Parliament and duly notified in the Official Gazette as an Act of 
Parliament after assent by the President of India; 
(c) "impact assessment or legislative impact assessment" means a
structured evaluation process to assess the social, economic,
environmental, administrative, and judicial effects of enacted
legislation;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “public consultation” means the conducting of a physical or
online meeting between the Legislative Impact Assessment Units
within each Ministry/ Department, the identified stakeholder(s)
and/or the general public to discuss and receive inputs on enacted
legislation or obtaining feedback /opinion from them in such form as
may be prescribed;
(f) "stakeholders" include individuals, groups, or organisations likely 
to be affected by the legislation; and 
(g) "Unit" means the Legislative Impact Assessment Unit,  a
s
pecialised unit established within each Ministry / Department under
section 3 of this Act, to carry out legislative impact assessments as
per the provisions of this Act.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
CHAPTER II 
 LEGISLATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT UNITS 
Establishment 
of Legislative 
Impact 
Assessment 
Units  
3. (1) The Central Government  shall, by notification in the Officia l
Gazette, establish, a Legislative Impact Assessment Unit , within each
Ministry or Department of the Central Government , which shall be
responsible for assessing the impact of an enacted legislation, coming
under its jurisdiction.
(2) Each Unit  shall operate  independently within each Ministry /
D
epartment, to ensure the objective and impartial analysis of the enacted
legislation.
(3) Each Unit shall have the power to regulate its own procedure wit h
r
espect to the conduct of and transaction of its business with respect to the
functions assigned to it under the Act.
30 
35 
Composition of 
the Unit. 
4. Each Unit shall consist of the following, namely —
(i) a C hairperson – to be appointed by the Central Government, in such
manner, as may be prescribed;
(ii
) the following officers of the Ministry/Department concerned as ex-
officio Members —
(a) Secretary of the Ministry/Department;
(b) Additional Secretary of the Ministry/Department; and
(c) Joint Secretary of the Ministry/Department;
40 
45 

3 
5 
10 
(iii) the following persons to be appointed by the Central Government
as Judicial Members, in such manner as may be prescribed:
(a) one retired Supreme court Judge; and
(b) two retired High Court Judges.
( iv) Subject matter experts like policy analysts, economists,
environmentalists, public health experts, data analysts etc. , as external
(ad-hoc) Members, to be appointed by the Central Government, in such
m
anner as may be prescribed;
(v) any other persons as the Ministry  / Department concerned may
consider necessary for the effective discharge of the functions of the
Unit, as Members, to be appointed by the Central Government, in such
manner as may be prescribed:
         Provided that the total number of Members of the Unit shall not at 
any point of time exceed twenty. 
15 
20 
5. (1) The Chairperson and Members of the Unit shall hold office for such
term, as may be prescribed.
        Provided that the Judicial and ad-hoc Members of the Unit shall hold 
office for a term not exceeding six years from the date on which they enter 
upon office and shall not be eligible for reappointment. 
(2)
The qualifications and experience, salaries, remuneration and
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of,
the Chairperson and Members of the Unit shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of the 
Chairperson and 
Members. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) of section 5,
the Chairperson or any Member may, by writing given under his hand to
the Central Government, resign from his office at any time.
(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the
Chairperson or any Member, if the Chairperson, or as the case may be,
such other member —
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral
turpitude; or
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or
(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable
of acting in his official capacity; or
(e) i
s, without obtaining leave of absence from the Unit, absent
from three consecutive meetings of the Unit; or
(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his
office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the
interest of office or the public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed from office  under this 
clause, unless that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter.  
Resignation and 
removal and 
filling of 
vacancy(ies). 

4 
(3) Any vacancy in the Units shall be filled as soon as may be possible
and, in any case, not later than three months from the date of occurrence of
such vacancy.
Officers and 
Staff of each 
Unit. 
7. (1) The Central Government, shall provide such number of officers
and staff to each Unit, as may be considered necessary for the efficient
discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The method of recruitment, the qualifications and experience, the
salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and staff, so appointed, shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5 
10 
Functions of 
the Unit. 
8. Each Unit shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:—
(i) examine whether the enacted legislation is meeting its intended
obj
ectives using data -driven metrics, policy analysis, and feedback
from affected groups;
(ii) conduct analyses to detect any unforeseen impacts or
implementation challenges, including those related to administrative 
burden, financial costs, or social welfare  
or economic, 
environmental and legal impacts; 
(iii) evaluate the effectiveness, compliance , and implementation
outcomes of enacted legislation and conduct performance
measurement to assess the results against measurable outcomes;
(iv) conduct perception surveys involving stakeholder consultation
of the perceived impact, both benefits and costs, of enacted
legislation;
(v) ensure alignment with the guidelines issued by the Committee
and best practices, especially in complex or cross -s ectoral 
legislation;  
(vi) generate d etailed Legislative Impact Assessment R eports
summarising findings  and assessment results  related to legislative
impact of legislations  and containing recommendations including
amendments or improvements in existing legislation , and data
visualisations thereof, for transparency and public access , in
accordance with the s tipulated timelines and in such form a nd
manner as may be prescribed and  submit such reports to the
Committee;
(vii) provide technical and policy advice to the Ministry/Department
c
oncerned on the legislative process and regulatory changes required
to address any issues identified; and
(viii) any other matter related to legislative impact assessment  or
o
therwise, which may be referred to it by the Central Government
from time to time.
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
CHAPTER III 
LEGISLATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE  
Constitution of 
the Legislative 
Impact 
Assessment 
Committee. 
9. (1) The Central Government shall , by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a body, to be known as the Legislative Impact
Assessment Committee (LIAC), to exercise the powers conferred on,
and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Committee shall serve as a central body to provide oversight,
guidance, and support to the U nits established under section 3 in
conducting legislative impact assessments.
45 
50 

5 
(3) The Committee shall function under the administrative control of the
Union Ministry of Law and Justice  and shall operate in accordance with
such regulations and guidelines, as may be issued by the Ministry, from
time to time, for the effective discharge of its functions under this Act.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
10. The Committee shall consist of the following, namely, —
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be:
(a) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India, or
(b) a distinguished jurist with not less than twenty -five years of
experience in constitutional and administrative law,
 to be appointed by the President of India by warrant under his hand 
and seal on the recommendation, in such manner as may be prescribed, 
of a Selection Committee, which shall consist of: 
(a) the Prime Minister of India;
(b) the Chief Justice of India; and
(c) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People;
(ii) five Ex-officio Members, namely —
(a) Secretary, Legislative Department, Union Ministry of Law and
Ju
stice – Member Secretary;
(b) Secretary, Union Ministry of Finance;
(c) Secretary, Union Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs;
(d) Secretary, NITI Aayog; and
(e) Secretary,  Department of Legal Affairs, Union Ministry of Law
and Justice;
(iii) three Judicial Members, namely —
(a) two retired High Court Judges, to be nominated by the Chief
Justice of India, in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) one senior advocate with expertise in legislative drafting, to be
nominated by the  Minister of Law and Justice, in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(iv) six Expert Members , namely, to be app ointed by the Union
Ministry of Law and Justice, on the recommendation of the Search -
cum-Selection Committee as provided under section 12 and in such
m
anner as may be prescribed–
(a) three distinguished policy experts with experience in:
(i) public policy and governance; or
(ii) economic and social impact assessment; or
(iii) data analytics and research methodology.
(b) one expert in environmental impact assessment;
(
c) one expert in technology and digital governance; and
(d) one expert in public administration;
Composition of 
the Committee. 

6 
(v) two Academic Members , who shall be distinguished professors
from premier institutions specializing in the following:—
(a ) law and governance; or
(b) pu
blic policy or social sciences,
to be appointed by the Union Ministry of Law and Justice on the 
recommendation of the Search-cum-Selection Committee as provided 
under section 12 and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
5 
Qualifications 
for appointment 
to the 
Committee. 
11. (1) All Members including the Chairperson to be appointed to the
Committee shall have at least fifteen years of experience in their respective
fields; and
(2) The Chairperson and all Members shall have demonstrated experience
in policy analysis, legislative review or impact assessment; and
(3) The Chairperson and no Member shall have any conflict of interest
with their role in the Committee.
10 
Selection 
Process of 
Expert and 
Academic 
Members of the 
Committee. 
12. (1) A Search-cum-Selection Committee, to be headed by the Cabinet
Secretary shall, recommend names for appointment as Expert and 
Academic Members  of the Committee , in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(2 ) The selection process shall ensure representation from diverse
backgrounds and expertise relevant to the functions of the Committee an d
s
hall be in such manner as may be prescribed.
Provided that at least one -third of the total number of Expert and 
Academic Members so selected shall be women.  
15 
20 
Terms of office 
and conditions 
of service of 
the Chairperson 
and Members. 
13. (1)  The Chairperson shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years
and shall not be eligible for reappointment;
(2) T he  Expert and Academic Members shall hold office for a term not
exceeding three years and shall not be eligible for reappointment; and
(3) All other Members shall hold office for such term as may be prescribed
and shall be eligible for reappointment for  an additional term.
(4) The salaries, remunerations and allowances payable to and othe r
t
erms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of
the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
25 
30 
Resignation 
and removal. 
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 13,
the Chairperson may, by writing given under his hand to the President ,
r
esign from his office at any time.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -s ections (2) and (3) of
section 13, any Member of  the Committee may, by writing given under
his hand to the Union Ministry of Law and Justice, resign from his office
at any time.
(3) The President may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson and
the Union Ministry of Law and Justice may, by order, remove from office, 
any Member, if the Chairperson, or as the case may be, such other
member —
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, 
in the opinion of the President or the Union  Ministry of Law and
Justice, involves moral turpitude; or
35 
40 
45 

7 
5 
10 
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court; or
(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable of
acting in his official capacity; or
(e) is
, without obtaining leave of absence from the Committee,
absent from three consecutive meetings of the Committee; or
(f) has, in the opinion of the President or the Union Ministry of Law
and Justice, so abused his office as to render his continuance in office 
detrimental to the interest of office or the public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed from office under this 
clause, unless that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter. 
15 
20 
15. (1) Any vacancy in the Committee  shall be filled as soon as may be
possible and, in any case, not later than three months from the date of
such vacancy.
(2) No act or proceeding of the Committee shall be questioned or shall be
invalidated merely by reason of:
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
Committee; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or
Member of the Committee; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Committee not affecting
the merits of the case.
Vacancy(ies) 
etc. 
25 
30 
16. (1) The Committee shall meet at least once every quarter in each calendar
year.
( 2 ) T he quorum for the meetings of the Committee shall be one-half of the
total members of the Committee.
(3 ) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Committee and 
in his absence, any Member, so elected by the Committee from the
Members present, shall preside.
(4) The decisions of the Committee shall be taken by majority vote of the
members present at such  meeting, and in the case of an equality of votes
on any matter, the Chairperson shall have, and exercise, a casting vote.
Meetings of the 
Committee and 
quorum. 
35 
40 
45 
17. (1) The Committee shall be assisted in the efficient discharge of its
functions under the Act by  a secretariat,  headed by the Member
S
ecretary of the Committee.
(2) The secretariat shall consist of such number of officers and staff
including technical staff for data analysis, research, and coordination
with the Legislative Impact Assessment Units, as may be deemed
necessary, to be appointed by the Union Law and Justice, in suc h
m
anner as may be prescribed.
(3) Th e method of recruitment, qualifications and experience, salaries
and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the officers and staff, so appointed , shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Administrative 
support to the 
Committee. 

8 
Functions of 
the Committee. 
18. The Committee shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely: —
(i) formulate and mandate policy guidelines and assessment
methodologies for the Units to ensure uniform quality and reliable
assessments across Ministries/Departments;
(ii) oversee and verify the assessments conducted by the Units to
ensure objective, data-based analyses;
(iii) formulate and forward standardized data collection , analysis
protocols and public consultation methodologies to each Unit to
ensure that assessments made by them are data- driven, unbiased and
consistent;
(iv) compile the findings received from  the Unit of each Ministry or
D
epartment in the form of Legislative Impact Assessment Reports, as
r
eferred to under clause (vi)  of section 8  into a Consolidated Annual
Legislative Impact Assessment  R eport, outlining the successes,
challenges and the extent of fulfillment of the objectives of the
legislation and summarising trends, challenges, and recommendations
of the Committee, in accordance with the timelines and in such form
and manner as may be prescrib ed and take further action thereon in
accordance with the provisions of section 23 of the Act;
(v) facilitate inter -Ministry cooperation for laws that intersec t
multiple jurisdictions to ensure thorough cross-sectoral assessments;
(vi) the functions as stipulated in sub- sections (3) to (6) of section 22
and sub-sections (1) and (5) of section 24; and
(vii) any other matter related to its functions or otherwise, which may
be referred to it by the Central Government, from time to time.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
CHAPTER IV 
ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS 
Timelines for 
Legislative 
Impact 
Assessments. 
19. The initial legislative impact assessment shall be conducted within  three
years from the date of commencement of each Central legislation  and
s
ubsequently periodic assessments shall be carried out at intervals of every
f
ive to ten years, as deemed necessary.
30 
Process of the 
Assessments. 
20. The process for conducting legislative impact assessments shall includ e
any or all of the following methodologies, namely, —
(a) Data-Driven Audits – using advanced data analytics tools to evaluate 
the impact and performance of legislation;
(b) Stakeholder Consultations  – g athering real -time feedback from
those affected by the legislation;
(c) Periodic Reviews – conducting assessments at mandated intervals,
as may be prescribed, based on clear performance indicators such as
economic growth, social welfare metrics, and environmental impact;
and
(d) Field Surveys and Case Studies  – c onducting targeted research on
regional and sectoral impacts of the legislation.
35 
40 

9 
CHAPTER V 
DATA COLLECTION AND STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
21. (1) Every Unit shall employ standardised data collection, analysis
protocols and public consultation methodologies,  as mandated by the
Committee, to  ensure that assessments are data- driven, unbiased, and
consistent.
(2) Ministries or Departments with overlapping responsibilities sh all
collaborate in data sharing and analysis, providing a unified understanding
of the legislation’s impact across sectors.
(3) Ministries or Departments shall collect, both quantitative a nd
qualitative data, employing qualitative research methods, including
document analysis, in- depth interviews with key informants from
legislative, administrative, and legal sectors, individuals impacted by laws,
and experts in various fields on the implementation and effects of the
legislation.
(4) The primary intention of data collection shall be to assess whether the
intended objectives of the legislation are being achieved, and to analyse
unintended consequences, cross-sector impacts, and cost-benefit metrics.
(5) Data collection and analysis protocols shall ensure collection and
maintenance of comprehensive and reliable data, with data interoperability 
and integral ‘anti-fudging’ mechanism inbuilt therein. 
(6) A digital tool such as  ‘leanbot’ shall be developed and deployed to
prevent legal conflicts, ambiguities and enactment of cross-purpose and
overlapping laws regarding antitrust through  self-identification of
commonalities and potential conflicts across related laws  and resolution
thereof.
(7) With the objective of gaining deeper insights into the long-term effects
of major legislation, longitudinal studies spanning ten to fifteen years shall
be initiated, aiming to identify socio-economic, environmental, and legal
impacts that may not be immediately apparent in short-term assessments.
Data Collection 
and Analysis 
Protocols. 
35 
40 
45 
50 
22. (1)   The Committee shall identify key stakeholders, from amongst —
(a) citizens, in particular directly affected groups, civil society
organisations, industry leaders, academia, activists, unions and
associations, other interest and pressure groups; and
(b) local elected Governments bodies such as Panchayats, Zil a
Parishads, Municipalities, bureaucrats, self-help groups, who shall
play a crucial role in data collection and analysis.
(2) Zila Parishads shall serve as primary entities for data collection, and
shall collect data by employing  a bottom-up approach, collecting diverse,
representative, and authentic feedback through gram panchayats.
(3) The Committee shall organise state level, focused group
consultations, in both urban and rural areas , including discussions
with civil society organisations, industry leaders, academia, activists,
unions and associations, other interest and pressure groups, allowing
for a more inclusive approach to gathering feedback, considering th
e
ne
eds of various societal groups.
(4) The Committee s hall organize expert workshops wit h
academicians, economists, legal professionals, and sectoral experts,
involving policy think tanks, U niversities, and associations for in -
depth technical discussions and data-driven assessments of the laws.
Stakeholder 
engagement and 
public feedback. 

10 
(5) The Committee  shall establish a dedicated digital portal, where
citizens can submit their opinions, grievances, and suggestions on any
Central legislation, ensuring a streamlined and accessible feedback
process.
(6) The Committee shall widely publicise the dates, locations, a nd
f
ormats for consultations through newspapers, government websites, 
official notifications, and radio and TV broadcasts to ensure broad 
public awareness. 
5 
CHAPTER VI 
REPORTING AND PARLIAMENTARY OVERSIGHT 10 
Legislative 
Impact 
Assessment 
Report.  
23. (1) The Committee shall publish the Annual Legislative Impact
Assessment Report, as referred to under clause ( iv) of section 18, on its
website in a conspicuous manner for access by the general public and invite 
feedback/suggestions from all stakeholders including the general public, in
accordance with the timelines as may be prescribed.
(2) The Committee shall after collecting and analyzing the feedback
received, generate easily understandable data visualizations and concis e
pol
icy briefs and publish them as an Addendum to the Report, referred to
in sub-section (1), to ensure that both government officials and the general
public can easily grasp the key findings and recommendations contained
therein.
(3) The Committee shall also facilitate translation  of such Reports into all
t
he regional languages given under the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution
to enable their wide -spread access, availability and understanding by
diverse stakeholders.
15 
20 
25 
Submission of 
Annual 
Legislative 
Impact 
Assessment 
Report  to 
Parliament. 
24. (1) The Committee shall submit the Annual Legislative Impact Assessment
Report, along with its Addendum, as referred to under sub -section (2) of
s
ection 23, and containing recommendations for necessary amendments in
legislations, within six months of its completion, to the Centra l
Government, who shall, as soon as it is received, cause it to be laid before
each House of Parliament.
(2) T he Committee shall forward the Report, as referred to in sub -section
(1), after its presentation to Parliament, to the concerned Ministry o r
D
epartment for initiating necessary amendments to the legislation s
concerned and bringing an amendment Bill, as the ca se may be, after due
process, for consideration and passing by the Parliament:
(3 ) The Ministries or Departments concerned shall lay the Action Taken
Report on the Report of the Committee , as re ferred to in sub -section (2)
containing therein the status of action taken on the recommendations
contained therein and the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of any of the
r
ecommendations  of the Committee, before each House of Parliament.
30 
35 
40 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
25. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to
time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)  The funds so provided under sub- section (1) shall be allocated to
each Ministry / Department of the Central Government, for the
purpose of meeting expenditure incurred on establishment a nd
maintenance of their respective Legislative Impact Assessment  Units,
i
ncluding personnel and operational expenses, such as data collection,
and other resources required for the performance of its functions
under this Act.
45 
50 

11 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
5 
26. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make
s
uch provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
10 
15 
20 
27. (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
pe
riod of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two o r
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; s
o
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to  make 
rules. 

12 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In India, once laws are enacted, there is often insufficient follow -up to 
determine whether these laws achieve their intended objectives or create 
unforeseen challenges. This gap in post-legislative assessment has led to significant 
issues, including excessive burdens on the judiciary, confusion in implementation, 
and unintended hardships for citizens. A structured framework for evaluating the 
impact of laws after enactment will address these issues, allowing for informed 
adjustments and amendments, where necessary. 
The Bill aims to create a transparent system/process for checking how well 
laws are working after they are put into action, analysing their effects on intended 
stakeholders and communities, to make sure they are helpful, relevant and fulfilling 
the intended objectives. By setting up regular reviews, the B
ill helps hold 
lawmakers accountable, making it easier to spot and fix any unexpected errors, 
which is likely to lead to better governance and protect public interest. It also 
relieves the judiciary of excess burden to review every legislation that is passed by 
the legislature, wasting crucial time for a country so burdened with pending 
caseload. An in -built legislative mechanism that will carry out comprehensive 
legislative impact assessment at regular intervals post enactment of a law will 
ensure that the crucial practice of post enactment impact assessment is carried out 
systematically without arbitrary, ad hoc burden on other institutions. 
 In recent years, legislative  amendments to the Consumer Protection Act, 
2019 and Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act have been brought before 
judicial review where courts have highlighted the importance of legislative impact 
assessment. Amendments to the Consumer Protection Act expanded district forum 
jurisdiction, leading to a surge in cases and overwhelming the judicial system. 
Similarly, Section 138  of the Negotiable Instruments Act, provisioning 
criminalization of cheque-bounce cases has placed nearly 15  per cent. of criminal 
case burdens on courts. These examples underscore the need for structured impact 
assessments to identify such issues early and adjust legislation accordingly.  
Legislative impact assessments are standard practice in other democracies. 
Countries like the United Kingdom and Finland have successfully implemented 
frameworks to ensure regular, data- informed reviews of laws. The United 
Kingdom, for example, mandates legislative assessments for regulatory and policy 
interventions, while Finland and 
Kenya employ structured frameworks for 
assessing the economic, social, and administrative impacts of new laws. Aligning 
India’s legislative process with these international practices would foster a more 
transparent and effective governance system, responsive to the evolving needs of 
society. 
This Bill proposes a decentralised model, establishing Legislative Impact 
Assessment Units (LIAUs) within each Ministry, supported by a central Legislative 
Impact Assessment Committee (LIAC). These LIAUs wil l conduct thorough 
assessments, measuring impacts on social welfare, economic stability, 
administrative efficiency, and judicial resources. Such a framework will ensure that 
each Ministry takes responsibility for its legislation, and a centralised LIAC will 
provide oversight, guidelines, and periodic reporting to Parliament. 
The Legislative Impact Assessment Act, 2024 will enable evidence- based 
adjustments to legislation, reduce judicial burdens, and improve public 
accountability. By instituting a structured evaluation process, this Bill will support 
good governance and contribute to a well-functioning legal system that aligns with 
the evolving needs of the people of India. 
 Hence this Bill. 
K. R. SURESH REDDY. 

13 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Legislative Impact 
Assessment Units (LIAUs) in each Ministry or Department  of the Central 
Government and Clause 4 provides for the composition of each Unit . Clause 5 r 
provides for the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members of each Unit, whereas Clause 7 provides that the Central 
Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff to each Unit to assist 
their functioning and for the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and 
conditions of service of such officers and staff.  
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Legislative Impact 
Assessment Committee (LIAC), to guide and monitor the activities of the Units and 
Clause 10 provides for the composition of the Committee.  Clause 13 inter alia 
provides for the salaries and allowances payable to and other conditions  of service 
of the Chairperson  and Members of the Committee, Clause  17 provides for a 
Secretariat consisting of such number of officers and staff including technical staff 
to assist the functioning of the Committee and for the salaries and allowances 
payable to them and their conditions of service.  Clause 22 lays down some of the 
functions of the Committee such as organising of public consultations and 
workshops with diverse stakeholders and the general public for data collection and 
assessment of legislative impact etc. and establishing a dedicated web portal for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill .  Clause 2 5 provides that 
the Central 
Government shall provide adequate funds for the purposes of the Bill  and such 
funds shall be allocated to each Ministry/ Department of the Central Government 
for the purpose of meeting expenditure incurred on establishment and maintenance 
of their respective Legislative Impact Assessment Units, including personnel and 
operational expenses, such as data collection, and other resources required for the 
performance of its functions under this Act. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure, both of recurring and 
non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India.  However, it is difficult 
to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved at this juncture. 

14 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make such 
provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving 
effect to the provisions of the Bill.  Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make rules, for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
As the matters in respect of which rules or orders may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______________ 
A 
BILL 
to establish mandatory procedures for evaluating the impact of enacted 
legislation within each Ministry of the Central Government, creating 
Legislative Impact Assessment Units to ensure comprehensive  
assessments, administrative planning, stakeholder engagement, 
 and centralised oversight through a Legislative Impact 
Assessment Committee and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
________________ 
(Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)–261–08.12.2025 