 AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
ON 
THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XCIV of 2024 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WELFARE OF 
SUGARCANE FARMERS AND WORKERS BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Welfare of 
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers and for matters connected  
therewith and incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-f ifth Year o f the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Welfare of
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) 'appropriate Government' means in the case of a State, th e
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
(b) 'Commission' means the National Commission for Welfare of
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers constituted under section 3; 
(c) 'Fund' means the Sugarcane Farmers and Workers Welfare Fund
constituted under section 14;
(d) 'member' means a Member of the Commission and includes the
Member-Secretary;
(e) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) 'sugarcane farm er' means a farmer engaged in cultivation of
sugarcane and has no income from any source other than cultivation of
sugarcane; and
(g) 'sugarcane workers' means a skilled or non- skilled person engaged
in sugarcane cultivation. 
5 
10 
15 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WELFARE OF SUGARCANE FARMERS AND 
WORKERS 
Constitution of 
the National 
Commission for 
Welfare of 
Sugarcane 
Farmers. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Commission to be known as the National 
Commission for Welfare of Sugarcane Farmers and Workers to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned 
to it, under this Act. 
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following, to be nominated by
the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed— 
(a) a Chairperson, committed to the cause of sugarcane farmers
and protection of their livelihood and welfare;
(b) five members, from amongst persons of ability, integrity and
standing, who had experience in sugarcane farming, understanding
the plight of sugarcane farmers, sugar pricing and internation al
issues, social justice, law or legislation and are co mmitted to th e
welfare of sugarcane farmers;
(c) Vice-Chancellors of all Agricultural Universities, as members
ex-officio;
(d) a Member-Secretary, who shall be —
(i) an expert in the field of management, organizational
structure on sugarcane issues, or
(ii) an officer who is a member of a civil service of the Union or
of an All -India Service or holds a civil post under the Union
Government with appropriate experience,  as may be
prescribed, or
(iii) an expert who has done research on agriculture especially
on sugarcane and holding a post equal/equivalent to the post of
Professor in a college or a university.
(3) T he Commission shall be a body corporate by the name afo resaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to th e
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or
be sued.
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

3 
5 
(4) The head office of the Commission shall be at such place in New
Delhi, as may be notified by the Central Government.
(5) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central
Government, establish offices at other places in the country, as it may
deem necessary, for the efficient discharge of its functions as assigned
under this Act.
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35
4. (1) The Chairperson and every member, except ex-officio members, shall
hold office for such period, not exceeding three years, as may be specified 
by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(2) The Chairperson or a member (other than the Member -Secretary who is
a member of a Civil Service of the Union or of an All-India Service or holds
a Civil post under the Union Government) may, at any time, by writing
under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign from the Office
of Chairperson or, as the case m ay be, of the member and on such
resignation being accepted, such person shall be deemed to have vacated his
office.
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of the
Chairperson or a member, as the case may be, if that person—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which
in the opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a compete nt
c
ourt;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(e) without taking leave from the Commission, absent himself from
three consecutive meetings of the Commission; and
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government, has abused his position of
Chairperson or a member so as to render his continuance in office
detrimental to public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under this sub- section unless 
he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(4) A vacancy caused under sub -sections (2) and (3), shall be filled within
one month from the date  of occurrence of the said vacancy.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and members shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
Term o f office, 
conditions of 
service, 
resignation and 
removal of the 
Chairperson and 
members. 
40
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide such number of suitabl e
officers and employees to the Commission, as may be required, for its 
efficient performance under this Act. 
(2) The method of recruitment, the qualifications and experience,
salaries and allowan ces payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of officers and employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
Officers and 
employees of the 
Commission. 
45 
50
6. (1) The Commission may, for efficient discharge of its functions, constitute
such number of Committees, as may be necessary, for dealing with or 
studying issues that may be taken up by the Commission from time to time. 
(2) The Commission may appoint such memb ers, as it may deem fit, on
Committees constituted under sub-section (1):
 Provided that the members of the Committee who are not members of 
the Commission shall not have the right to vote on matters of the 
Commission. 
Committees of 
the Commission. 

4 
(3) The allowances payable to the members appointed to the
Committees shall be such as may be prescribed.
Procedure to be 
regulated by the 
Commission. 
5 
10 
Vacancies etc. 
not to invalidate 
the proceedings 
of the 
Commission. 
15 
Chairperson, 
members, 
officers and 
employees to be 
public servants.
 
20 45 of 2023. 
Salaries and 
allowances to be 
paid out of 
grants. 
7. (1) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure
with regard to
 transaction of its business in order to exercise the powers
conferre
d on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The
 Commission shall meet as and when  necessary and at such times
and
 places as the Chairperson may deem fit for the efficient discharge of the
functions
 assigned to it under this Act.
(3) All
 orders and decision of the Commission shall be authenticated by the
Member
-Secretary.
8. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid or be questioned
mere
ly on the ground of existence of any vacancy in or any defect in the
constitution
 of the Commission  or any defect in the n omination of a person
as
 Chairperson or member of the Commission or any irregularity in the
procedure
 of the Commission not affecting the merits of the case.
9. The
 Chairperson, the members, officers and employees and members of the
Committees
 of the Commission shall be deemed, when acting or p urporting
t
o act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants
within the meaning of sub-s ection (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.
10. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members
and the administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and
pensions payable to the officers and employees, referred to in section 5
and allowances payable to the members appointed to the Committees of
the
 Commission, referred to in section 6, shall be paid out of the grants
referred
 to in sub-section (1) of section 16.
25 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
Functions of the 
Commission.
11. The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely—
(a) undertake annual income surveys of sugarcane farmers and
sugarcane workers across various categories, including different
crops and landholding sizes;
(b) make policy suggestions to ensure that minimum income accrues to
sugarcane farmers and workers across various categories;
(c) design periodically an income security framework for various
categories of farmers, inter alia  including ma rket interventions,
compensation, subsidies, reduction in cost of production,
mechanization, capacity building, credit enhancement, strengthening
supply chains or any other tool that the Commission deems fit;
(d) review, from time to time, various schemes of the appropriate
Government pertaining to agriculture and income of sugarcane
farmers;
(e) make recommendations to the appropriate Government for effective
implementation of policies and schemes ensuring that the minimum
income accrues to sugarcane farmers and workers;
(f) formulate a scheme for payment of old age pension at the rate
of at least five thousand rupees per month to every sugarcane
farmer and worker, who have attained the age of sixty years and is
unable to perform his job on account of infirmity and incapacity;
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

5 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(g) call for special studies and investigations into problems arising
out of agrarian distress, and make timely recommendations to the
appropriate Government for appropriate action;
( h) undertake promotional and educational research  to ensu re
minimum incomes for farming households, enhancement of income 
of farmers and productivity in agriculture; 
( i) take suo moto notice of matters relating to—
(i) sugarcane farmers' distress particularly sugarcane farmers'
suicides across the country;
(ii) non-implementation or poor implementation of policies or
schemes of farmers; and
(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines an d
instructions taken for farmers.
( j) evaluate the status of livelihood of sugarcane farmers across
various regions in the country;
( k) make periodic reports to the Central Government on any matters
pertaining to sugarcane farmers and workers;
(l) ensure payment to sugarcane f armers within a week after delivery
of sugarcane to sugar mills;
(m) ensure payment of interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. for the
delay in payment by sugar mills;
(n ) impart training on modern and mechanised agricultural
practices, use of fertiliz ers, crop management and other issues
related to sugarcane farmers and workers;
(o) ensure subsidized loan for fertilizers, seeds, pesticides,
equipments, labour and transportation cost to the sugarcane farmers;
(p ) ensure compensation to sugarcane farmers in case of loss of crops
on non-acceptance of sugarcanes by sugar mills;
(q ) receive grievances or complaints from sugarcane farmers and
workers or their representatives regarding deprivation of their rights,
exploitation or violation of  any of the provisions of this Act an d
investigate into complaints so received from them; and
( r ) t ake up any other matter related to sugarcane cultivation, farmers
and their welfare, that may be referred to it by appropriate
Government.
40 
45 
12. The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in clause
(q) of section 11, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in
particular in respect of the following matters, namely, —
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from a ny
pa
rt of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof f rom any court or
office;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses an d
documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Commission to 
have powers of a 
Civil Court. 

6 
Appropriate 
Government to 
consult the 
Commission.
13. The appropriate Government shall consult the Commission on all major
policy matters affecting the interests of sugarcane farmers and workers.
Constitution of 
Sugarcane 
Farmers and 
Workers Welfare 
Fund.
14. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Sugarcane Farmers and
Workers Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central and State Governments shall from time to time, aft er
due appropriation made in this behalf by the Parliament or the
respective State Legislature by law, contribute such sums of money to
the Fund in such proportion, as may be provided.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Commission in such manner as
may be prescribed. 
5 
10 
CHAPTER IV 
FACILITIES TO THE SUGARCANE FARMERS AND WORKERS 
Facilities to the 
sugarcane farmers 
and workers.
15. The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities, in
such form and manner as may be prescribed, to the sugarcane farmers
and workers, namely—
(i) implement the Scheme formulated by the Commission for
payment of old age pension to every sugarcane farmer and worker,
who have attained the age of sixty years and is unable to perform
his job on account of infirmity and incapacity;
(ii) subsidized healthcare facilities to the sugarcane farmers and
workers and dependent family members at Government and other
designated hospitals;
(iii) subsidized education facilities including supply of books,
uniform, writing materials, transportation and hostel facilities for
the children of sugarcane farmers and workers;
(iv) free insurance cover to sugarcane farmers and workers; and
(v) subsidized housing loan to sugarcane farmers and workers.
15 
20 
25 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 30 
Grants by Central 
Government.
16. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide to the Commission by way of
grants such sums of money, as the Central Government may think fit,
for being utilized for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums, as it thinks fit, for
performing the functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated
as expenditure payable out of grants under sub-section (1).
35 
Accounts and 
Audit.
17. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form, as may
be prescribed by Central Government in consultation with Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts o f the Commission shall be audited by Comptroll er
and Auditor- General of India at such intervals as may be specified by
him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall
be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India.
(3) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor- General along with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded
annually to the Central Government by the Commission.
40 
45 

7 
18. The Commission shall prepare once every year, in such form and within
such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full
account of its activities during the previous year, and copies thereof shall be
forwarded to the Central Government.
Annual Report. 
5 
10 
15 
19. (1) The Central Government shall cause the annual report and the audited
annual accounts of the Commission along with an explanatory
memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations contained therein and the reasons for non -acceptance, if
any, of any of such recommendations to be laid, as soon as may be, after the
reports are received, before each House of Parliament.
Annual report 
and audit report 
to be laid before 
Parliament. 
20 
(2) Where any such report, or any part thereof relates to any matter with 
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be 
forwarded to the Governor of that State, who shall in turn, cause it to be laid 
before each House of the Legisla ture of the State, where it consists of two 
House, or where such Legislature consists of one House, b efore that House, 
along with an explanatory memorandum ex plaining the action taken or 
proposed to be tak en on the recommendations related to the State, and the 
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
25 
20. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary 
or expedient for removing the difficulty. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
30 
21. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of 
any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on 
the provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
35 
40 
45 
22. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not i nconsistent with
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of
giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every r ule and regulation made under t his Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be
made, the rule or regulation shall the reafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Power to make  
rules. 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
      The sugarcane farming sector is a vital part of India's agricultural 
landscape, providing livelihood to millions of farmers and their families 
across the country. Sugarcane is a major cash crop, contributing 
significantly to the country’s rural economy and supporting industries such 
as sugar production, ethanol, and bioenergy. However, despite its 
importance, sugarcane farmers face numerous challenges, including delayed 
payments, volatile market p
rices, high production costs, and lack of 
adequate support during crop losses. These issues lead to financial insecurity 
and distress among sugarcane farmers, affecting their quality of life and 
sustainable livelihood. 
       Recognizing these challenges, the National Commission for Welfare of 
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers Bill, 2024 seeks to establish a dedicated 
Commission focused on the welfare and economic empowerment of 
sugarcane farmers and workers. The primary objective of the Bill is to create 
a structured and permanent mechanism to address the unique issues faced by 
sugarcane farmers  and workers , propose policy recommendations, and 
ensure that adequate financial, technical, and institutional support is 
provided to this sector. 
        The establishm ent of the National Commission for Welfare of 
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers will allow for continuous monitoring of the 
welfare conditions of sugarcane farmers and workers and the overall health 
of the sugarcane industry. The Commission will be empowered t o make 
timely interventions, recommend policy measures, ensure implementation of 
welfare schemes, and take proactive steps in addressing agrarian distress 
specifically affecting sugarcane farmers. This structure will be instrumental 
in bridging the gap between the needs of farmers and the assistance provided 
by the Government, ultimately leading to an enhanced standard of living and 
more secure income for sugarcane farming communities. 
        This Bill is expected to have a transformative impact on the sugarcane 
farming sector. The establishment of a dedicated Commission will bring 
much-needed focus to the sector’s unique challenges, enabling targeted 
interventions that are currently lacking. By addressing payment delays, 
providing financial support, and ensuring social security, the Bill aims to 
reduce the economic vulnerability of sugarcane farmers and workers and 
improve their standard of living. 
        T he Bill’s provisions for a Sugarcane Farmers and Workers Welfare 
Fund will allow for immediate and effective financial interventions, helping 
farmers manage risks associated with market fluctuations and crop losses. 
Furthermore, the mandated seven -day payment schedule and interest on 
delayed payments are intended to improve cash flow stability for farmer s, 
allowing them to plan and invest in their crops without financial stress. This 
framework will empower sugarcane farmers with a reliable support system, 
reducing the distress that has long plagued this community. 
        O verall, the National Commissi on for Welfare of Sugarcane Farmers  
and Workers  Bill, 2024, will provide a holistic approach to tackling the 
economic and social challenges faced by sugarcane farmers, paving the way 
for a more resilient and sustainable sugarcane sector in India. This 
legislation will also set a precedent for other crop -specific welfare 
commissions, potentially leading to further sectoral reforms in India’s 
agriculture sector. 
 H ence this Bill.  
IRANNA KADADI. 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
        Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National 
Commission for Welfare of Sugarcane Farmers  and Workers with 
headquarters at New Delhi and also provides that the Commission with the 
approval of the Central Government may set up regional offices anywhere in 
the country as may be deemed necessary . Clause 4 inter alia  provides for 
the salaries and allowances to be paid to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and members of the Commission. Clause 5 
provides that the Central Government shall provide such number of suitable 
officers and employees to assist the Commission and for the salaries and 
allowances payable to them as well as their terms and conditions of service. 
Clause 6  provides for constitution of Committees by th e Commission  for 
dealing with or studying issues that may be taken up by it and for the 
appointment of such number of members to such Committees and the 
allowances payable to them . Clause 10 provides that the salaries and 
allowances of the Chairperson and members of the Commission, the 
administrative expenses of the Commission including the salaries, 
allowances and pensions payable to the officers and employees and 
allowances payable  to members appointed to the Committees of the 
Commission shall be met from the grants provided by the Central 
Government. Clause 11 stipulates the functions of the Commission which 
inter alia includes undertaking annual income surveys of sugarcane farmers  
and sugarcane workers across various categories, including different crops 
and landholding sizes as well as promotional and educational research to 
ensure minimum incomes for farming households, enhancement of income 
of farmers and productivity in agriculture, conducting special studies and 
investigations into the problems arising out of agrarian distress and 
imparting training on modern and mechanized agricultural practices, use of 
fertilizers, crop management and other issues related to sugarcane farmers  
and workers. Clause 14 provides for the  constitution of the Sugarcane 
Farmers and Workers Welfare Fund. Clause 15 of the Bill provides that the 
appropriate Government shall provide certain facilities to the sugarcane 
farmers and workers including implementation of a Scheme for payment of 
old age pension; free insurance cover ; subsidized housing loans to them as 
well as subsidized health care and educational facilities for the families and 
children respectively of sugarcane farmers and workers. Clause 1 6 provides 
that the Central Government shall provide adequate 
funds to the 
Commission. Clause 17  provides for payment of expenditure incurred in 
connection with audit of the annual accounts of the Commission.  
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of one thousand crore 
rupees will be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. A non -recurring expenditure of fifty  crore 
rupees is also likely to be involved. 

10 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
        Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government make 
such provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might 
arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. Clause 22  of the Bill 
empowers the Central Government to make rules and the National 
Commission for Welfare of Sugarcane Farmers and Workers, with the 
approval of the Central Government, to make regulations, for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the matters in respect of which rules or 
regulations or orders may be made are matters of procedure and 
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill 
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Welfare of 
Sugarcane Farmers and Workers and for matters connected  
therewith and incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Shri Iranna Kadadi, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)─267─08.12.2025.