1
\\SERVER5\BILLS_2004\RAJYA SABHA\4127RS
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XCIV of 2006
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh year of the Republic of India as
follows :—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“21B. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to adequate potable water.
(2) The State shall ensure that every citizen in the country is provided potable
water as per his requirement within three years of the commencement of this Constitution
(Amendment) Act.”
Insertion of
new article
21B
Right to
potable water.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.
5
10

2
\\SERVER5\BILLS_2004\RAJYA SABHA\4127RS
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
After air, water is the primary requirement of life because it is water that sustains life.
The whole nature, flora, fauna and the creatures are alive and conscious because of water.
The importance of water, therefore, stands supreme and is even more than food itself. For the
last few years, water pollution is continuously on the rise in many places in the country. This
is a very serious and deplorable situation that citizens of the country, at many places, in
various regions of the country are compelled to drink polluted, muddy or fluoride contaminated
water even though there is a risk of many kinds of diseases being contracted by drinking
such water. But as no person or animal can survive without water there is no option but to
drink whatever type of water is available in their locality and they become so helpless that
they are ready to take all risks of contracting diseases from it when they feel thirsty. It is for
the safety and health of these vulnerable people that pure and clean drinking water should be
made available for the citizens everywhere, in every region. It is, therefore, imperative to bring
necessary amendments to the constitution making it mandatory for the State to provide
every citizen clean and safe drinking water so that people of the country are secure from risk
of several diseases and they may lead a healthy and long life. There is a need to implement
this provision on priority.
Hence this Bill.
PRABHA THAKUR

3
\\SERVER5\BILLS_2004\RAJYA SABHA\4127RS
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the State shall provide potable water to every citizen
in the country within three years of the commencement of this enactment. This is definitely
going to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, in the absence
of assessment of requirement of funds and the ratio of sharing the same between the Centre
and the States, it is difficult at this stage to estimate the amount likely to be spent from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Prabha Thakur, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4127RS(S5)—8-12-2006.