AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 
7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. XCIX of 2024 
THE COMPULSORY SELF-DEFENCE TRAINING IN 
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide compulsory self-defence training in all educational institutions 
in order to create preparedness amongst youth of the nation for  
self-protection and as a proactive measure to enhance  
student safety, promote personal empowerment, and  
foster a supportive educational environment 
 and for matters connected therewith 
 and incidental thereto. 
 
5 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year o f the Republic of 
India as follows, — 
1. (1) This A ct m ay be c alled t he C ompulsory Self -Defence Training i n
Educational Institutions Act, 2024. 
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short  title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,―
(a) “appropriate Government” means —
(i) in relation to a educational institution established, owned or
controlled by the Central Government, or the administrator of
the Union territory, having no legislature, the Central
Government;
(ii) in relation to a educational institution, other than the school
referred to in sub-clause (i), established within the territory of
(A) a State, the State Government;
(B) a Union territory having legislature, the Government of
that Union territory;
(b) “educational institution” means any school, college, University or
other institution imparting education at primary, secondary, senior
secondary or higher education, whether  directly owned by the
Government or local authority, or an aided school receiving aid or
grants to meet whole or part of its expenses from the appropriate
Government or the local authority, or unaided institution not
receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its expenses from the
appropriate Government or the local authority, as the case may be;
Explanation.– For the purposes of this clause, "local authority" means a 
Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or Zila Parishad or Nagar 
Panchayat or Panchayat, by whatever name called, and includes such other 
authority or body having administrative control over the school or 
empowered by or under any law for the time being in force to function as a 
local authority in any city, town or village; 
(c) “ Fu nd” means the Self -Defence Training Fund established under
section 6;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “self-defence training” includes basic and advanced self -defence
training in skills that are necessary for self -protection, as defined
under section 4 or as may be prescribed; and
(f) “student” means any person enrolled in an educational institution.
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
Compulsory 
Self-Defence 
Training to 
students. 
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall include in the curriculum,
compulsory basic self -defence training for students of  classes First to
Eighth and advanced self-defence training for students of classes Eighth to
Twelfth and at undergraduate level.
(2) The se lf-defence training referred to in sub -section (1) shall be
conducted for a minimum of three hours per week by the educational
institutions.
(3) Every educational institution shall, in consultation with the
appropriate Government, establish a Self -Defence Training Advisory 
Committee (STAC) to manage and coordinate the self- defence 
training activities being conducted therein, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) The composition, powers, functions of the Self-D efence Training  
Advisory Committee (STAC) established  und er sub-s ection (3) and any 
other matters relating thereto, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Self -defence Train ing Advisory  Committee (STAC) e stablished 
under sub- section (3)  shall submit quarterly reports on the progress and 
effectiveness of the self -defence training  programs to the appropriate 
Government in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 

3 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Union
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and the Union Ministry of
Education, prescribe the curriculum and training modules for self- defence
training to students.
(2) The curriculum and training module for basic self -defence training to
students shall include,
(a) physical fitness exercises;
(b) Karate;
(c) aikido;
(d) kickboxing and krav maga;
(e) drill and ceremonial parades;
(f) awareness of  the concept of good touch-bad touch; and
(g) such other activity or program, as may be prescribed.
(3) The curriculum and training module for advanced self -defence training
to students shall in addition to the skills enumerated in sub- section (2)
include,
(a) mixed Martial Arts training;
(b) psychological counselling;
(c) course on advocacy and legal rights; and
(d) such other activity or program, as may be prescribed.
Curriculum 
and Training 
Modules for 
Self-defence 
training to 
students. 
 
25 
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Union
Ministry of Youth Affairs and  Sports, appoint such number of
instructors, as may be required, for imparting self -defence training to
students in all educational institutions in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The method of recruitment, qualifications and experience, s alaries
and allowances payable to and other term and conditions of service of
the instructors so appointed under sub- section (1), shall be such as
may be prescribed.
Training 
Instructors. 
30 
 
35 
40 
 
45 
6. (1) The appropriate  Government, shall by notification, in the Official
Gazette, establish a separate Fund to be known as the Self-Defence 
Training Fund, for the purposes of implementing the provisions of this 
 
Act. 
(2) The Central and State Governments shall, from time to time, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament and the State Legislature 
respectively, by law, contribute to the Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be applied by the appropriate Government to meet the
expenditure incurred in connection with measures and facilities which, in
the opinion of that Government,  are necessary or expedient to effectively
implement the provisions of this Act, a nd in particular the following,
namely,―
(a) administrative and operational costs incurred under this Act;
(b) financial assistance to educational institutions for infrastructure
development including equipments and other gear required for the
purpose of imparting  self-defence training;
(c) resources for capacity building and training of instructors; and
Establishment 
of Self-
Defence 
Training 
Fund. 

4 
(d) any other expenses, as may be deemed necessary, for the
purposes of this Act.
Compliance. 7. (1)The appropriate Government shall ensure that every educational
institution complies with the provisions of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall designate an officer, not below the
rank of District Education Officer, to oversee and ensure the
implementation of the provisions of this Act within their jurisdiction.
 
5 
Penalty. 8. If any educational institution fails to comply with any of the provisions of
this Act, such educational institution shall be liable to a fine, which may
extend up to ten thousand rupees.
 
10 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of
any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have over  riding effect
on the provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency.
Power to 
remove the 
difficulties. 
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government or the State  Government, as the case may be, by
order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the p rovisions of this Act as may appear to it to be
necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament or each House of State
Legislature, as the case may be.
15 
 
20 
Power to 
make rules 
and 
regulations. 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India,
make rules and regulations for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each Hou se of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule and
regulation or both the Houses agree that the rule and regulation should not
be made, the rule and regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule and regulation.
(3) Every rule and regulation made by the State Government shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature
consists of one House, before that House.
 
25 
30 
 
35 
 
40 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to introduce compulsory self -defence training in 
all educational institutions to foster physical fitness, sense of 
preparedness amongst  the youth, establish self -defence orientation and 
training programmes for students, which caters to all the ir needs to 
empower themselves. The primary objective of this Bill is to enhance the 
safety and security of students in educational environments by making 
self-defence training a compulsory part of the curriculum.  
Given the rising concerns about bullying, violence, sexual 
offences and potential threats in educational institutions, this initiative 
aims to empower students with the skills and confidenc e necessary to 
protect themselves and others. 
Self-defence training equips students with essential skills to 
handle threatening situations effectively. By fostering awareness and 
preparedness, students can better protect themselves from physical harm. 
It can also boost students’ confidence and self -esteem. It al so promotes 
conflict-resolution and non -violent strategies, creating a more positive 
school climate.  
Self-defence training emphasizes discipline, respect, and 
responsibility. These values are integral to personal development and can 
contribute to a more respectful and inclusive environment  in educational 
institutions. Self -defence training will serve as a critical component of 
broader safety education, helping students to respond effectively in 
various situations. 
By implementing this training at a community level, we  will be 
able to foster a culture of safety and vigilance, where students, educators, 
and parents collaborate to create a secure environment for learning. 
In conclusion, this B ill seeks to implement compulsory self-
defence training in education al institutions as a proactive measure to 
enhance student safety, promote personal empowerment, and foster a 
supportive educational environment. By equipping our youth with these 
vital skills, we will be able to contribute to the development of a more 
resilient and secure generation. 
Hence, this Bill. 
SANJAY SETH 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
       Clause 3  of the Bill inter alia  provides that every educational 
institution shall, in consultation with the appropriate Government, 
establish a Self -Defence Training Advisory Committee (STAC) to 
manage and coordinate the self -defence training activities being 
conducted therein,  Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the appropriate 
Government to appoint adequate instructors for imparting self -defence 
training to students in all educational institutions and for the salaries and 
allowances payable to them and their terms and conditions of service . 
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a  Self-Defence 
Training F und for the purposes of implementing the provisions of this 
Act and that the Central and State Governments shall, from time to time, 
after due appropriation made by Parliament and the State Legislature 
respectively, contribute to the Fund. 
T
he Bill, therefore, if enacted, would invol ve both non-
recurring and recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure 
likely to be involved. 

7 
      MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
          Clause 10 provides that the appropriate Government may, make  
such provision, by an order, as necessary for removing any difficulty in 
giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. Clause 1 1 empowers the 
appropriate Government to make rules and re gulations to carry out the 
provisions of this Bill.  
          As the matters in respect of which  orders, rules and regulations may 
be made are matters of procedure and administrative details only, the 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide compulsory self-defence training in all educational institutions 
 in order to create preparedness amongst youth of the nation for 
 self-protection and as a proactive measure to enhance 
 student safety, promote personal empowerment, and 
 foster a supportive educational environment 
 and for matters connected therewith 
 and incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Shri Sanjay Seth, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—099—10.02.2025 