SERVER3/BILL 2004/RS/4115RS
1
Bill No. XCIX of 2006
THE DIRECT MARKETING TELEPHONE CALLS  (REGULATION)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to check and regulate the unsolicited direct marketing calls made by banks, non-banking
financial institutions, cellular phone, pharmaceutical and insurance companies
and companies manufacturing other high end consumer goods, on the
mobile or landline telephone of an individual thereby violating the
right to privacy, by establishing a Do-not Call Registry and
preventing the companies or individual from disclosing
customer's details to any other company or individual
and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Direct Marketing Telephone Calls (Regulation) Act,
2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.

SERVER3/BILL 2004/RS/4115RS
2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "consent" means signing of a written document by an individual as a posi-
tive indication of the individual's intention to receive direct marketing telephone calls
and includes acceptance in electronic form;
(c) "Do not call registry" means the registry established under section 4;
(d) "individual subscriber" means a subscriber to a telephone service which is
publicly available;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "tele-density" means the number of telephones (both land line and mobile) in
use for every hundred individuals living in a city;
(g) "telephone calls" includes short messaging service and multi messaging
service;
(h) "Telecom Controller" means Telecom Controller appointed under section 6;
(i) "unsolicited" means any direct marketing telephone call to which an
individual has not given his consent for receiving.
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, no person shall make any unsolicited tele-
phone calls to an individual subscriber for direct marketing purposes without his consent.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
Do Not Call Registry in every city of the country having a tele-density of twenty five which
shall ensure that the telephone numbers of subscribers who do not want to receive
unsolicited telephone calls are no longer available to organizations including charity and
voluntary organizations for making direct marketing calls.
(2) Individual subscriber to any telephone service who does not wish to receive
direct marketing calls may register their telephone numbers with the Do not Call
Registry in such a manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a
Telecom Controller for each Do not Call Registry to look after its functions.
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Telecom Controller shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall provide such number of officers and staff  as
may be required for efficient functioning of the Telecom Controller.
(4) The procedure for appointment of the Telecom Controllers, their powers and
functions shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. Any person who receives unsolicited direct marketing calls shall be entitled to
compensation for any damage or distress caused by breach of any provision of this Act in
such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The telephone numbers and other personal details of any individual subscriber shall
not be disclosed by any individual or establishment to any other person or establishment.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made in this behalf, provide
such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Prohibition of
making unso-
licited tele-
phone calls.
Establishment
of Do Not Call
Registry.
Appointment
of Telecom
Controllers.
Right to claim
damages.
Personal de-
tails of sub-
scriber not to
be disclosed.
Central Gov-
ernment to
provide funds.

SERVER3/BILL 2004/RS/4115RS
3
9. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to
three years or with fine, which may extend to ten lakhs or with both.
10. Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule, made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of
business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if  he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Explanation:—For the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
11. All offences under this Act shall be tried summarily in the manner prescribed for
summary trial under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, 1973.
12. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the official Gazette, make such provisions, not incon-
sistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficult:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to unsolicited direct market-
ing calls.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3
Penalty.
Offence by
companies.
Summary trial.
2 of 1974
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Of late, there has been a tremendous jump in the direct marketing sector. Every now
and then, people are receiving unsolicited telephone calls from various banking companies,
non-banking financial companies, cell phone operators, credit card companies, insurance
companies and others offering various kinds of services and loans provided by their compa-
nies. Its impact can be seen more on the mobile phone users as their number has also
multiplied to a large size overtaking the landline subscribers. These companies are obtaining
the telephone numbers of the persons through illegal means and make all kinds of offers to
the subscriber by calling him on the phone or sending SMS relating to their services which,
at times, are quite irritating. These calls are assuming the proportion of a nuisance, as they
disturb the subscribers day and night. Many a time a person is in meeting and all of a sudden
his mobile rings with an offer to provide him life time free credit card or zero per cent interest
loan. Though none of these things are free or interest free, the agents of these companies
claim to be representatives of the bank or the company, etc. but actually are not employees
of the bank or the company. They are often found to be direct marketing agents of the bank.
Whenever a consumer complains about harassment or otherwise by such direct marketing
agents, banks, etc. often refuse to accept any responsibility or even deny any relationship
with these agents. The surprising fact remains how these agents are getting the telephone
numbers of the subscribers. There is a nexus amongst the persons working in various
companies and they are selling the subscribers' details to the other companies for a fixed
price. These companies are supposed to keep the subscribers' details confidential instead of
disclosing or selling it. These companies are in fact violating the right to privacy of the
individual. Several countries in the world recognize the subscriber's right to privacy but the
same has not received much attention in our country. As a result there are invasions of all
kinds on privacy without much retaliation. The companies making unsolicited calls do so
without the consent of the person by way of getting his telephone numbers through some
undesirable means. There has to be a check on these unsolicited telephone calls. Though
RBI has come out with some guidelines on these unsolicited telephone calls made for promo-
tion of credit cards being offered by banks but the same remains to be unnoticed and not
extended to other services.
In many countries, agencies have been created for this purpose and if the subscriber
is registered with those agencies, no direct marketing calls/SMS/MMS can be made to that
person. The same is required to be done in our country also. With this end in view, it has been
proposed to establish a Do not Call Registry in each city of the country having a teledensity
of twenty five and no unsolicited direct marketing calls shall be made to those persons who
would register themselves with this Registry. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
MAHENDRA MOHAN
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to appoint Telecom
Controllers, Officers and staff for looking after the functioning of the Do not Call Registry.
Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall make the funds available for being utilized
for the purpose of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India to the tune of rupees twenty crore per annum.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers is
of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to check and regulate the unsolicited direct marketing calls made by banks, non-banking
financial institutions, cellular phone, pharmaceutical and insurance companies
and companies manufacturing other high end consumer goods, on the
mobile or landline telephone of an individual thereby violating the
right to privacy, by establishing a Do-not Call Registry and
preventing the companies or individual from disclosing
customer's details to any other company or individual
and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4115RS(S3)—8-12-2006.