1
THE  MICRO, SMALL  AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Micro, Small an d Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, after
section 10, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"10A. (1) Every scheduled commercial bank shall lend to the micro, small 
and medium enterprises at the rate of one per cent. plus the rate of fixed deposit of 
such banks.
(2) Every micro, small or medium enterprise shall be entitled to collateral free 
loan of up to rupees two crore from scheduled commercial banks.
10B. The Central Government shall, from time to time, notify suitable incentives 
to increase the inflow of equity capital in micro, small and medium enterprises.".
Insertion of
new sections
10A and 10B.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XCIX of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Lending rate
and limit for
lending of
collateral free
loans.
Incentives to
increase the
inflow of
equity capital.
5
1 0
1 5

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 aims to provide for 
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of micro, 
small and medium enterprises in the country particularly after the covid pandemic. The 
recommendations of various committees and task groups have brought about considerable 
positive changes in various areas of development of competitiveness of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs).
However, the MSMEs, that contribute to nearly ten per cent. of the country's Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP), forty-five per cent. of the manufactured output, forty per cent. of 
our exports and that employ an estimated twelve million people, continue to face serious 
bottlenecks in its development especially after the ill effects of covid pandemic and lock 
downs. Lack of access to adequate and timely credit at a reasonable cost is the most critical 
problems faced by this sector. Hence, there is an urgent need to make it mandatory by law for
 
scheduled commercial banks to provide affordable lending rates to MSMEs.
The Bill hence, aims to ensure lowest lending rates to MSMEs, fixed at one per cent. 
plus the rate of interest for fixed deposits of the scheduled commercial banks in the country. 
This would ensure more credit flow to the MSME sector, without hurting commercial banks, 
as they will continue to have freedom to fix lending rates to other sectors or units. The Bill 
also aims to make it mandatory for scheduled commercial banks to offer MSMEs, collateral 
free loans, up to rupees two crore. These two key changes in the Principal Act would revive 
MSMEs through increased credit flow.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU.

RAJY A  SABHA
— — — — —
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
— — — — —
(Dr . Kanimozhi NVN Somu, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–034–11-12-2023.