AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XCV of 2024 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
 of India as follows:— 
    5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title  and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
section 19. 
2. In the  Representation of the People Act,  1950 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in section 19, in clause (b), for the words, “is ordinarily
resident in a constituency”, the words, “is ordinarily or usual resident in a
constituency”, shall be substituted.
43 of 1950. 
Amendment of 
section  20A.
3. In the principal Act, in section 20A, after sub -section (3), the following
new sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, a citizen of 
India residing outside the country for employment, education, or 
other purposes for a time period not less than a year, shall be entitled 
to cast their vote in elections through a method as prescribed by the 
Election Commission of India from the country of their current 
residence. 
(5) The Election Commission shall take measures to enable a citizen
mentioned in sub -section (4) to vote remotely, ensuring the security,
confidentiality, and authe nticity of the process, in accordance with
the rules framed under the Representation of the People Act, 1951.”
5 
10 
15 
43 of 1951. 
Insertion of 
new section 
20B. 
Usual 
Resident. 
4. In the principal Act, after section 20A, the following new section shall be
inserted —
“20B.(1) Any person, who has been staying continuously in a local 
area (village/town) within India for at least six months or intends to 
stay for six months or mor e shall be deemed as a usual resident of 
that place.  
         Provided that if a person was not staying in the village/town 
continuously for six months, but was found to be staying there 
during the enumeration, with the intention to stay there continuousl y 
for six months or more, then that place shall be deemed to be the 
person’s usual place of residence and this category shall  include, but 
not be limited to: 
(a) persons whose usual place of residence is evidenced by
ongoing familial, social, or economic ties to the constituency for
not less than six months;
(b) inter-state migrants who have temporarily relocated for
work, education, or other purposes for not less than six months;
(2) The status of "usual resident" shall be determined without
prejudice to any other residence status an individual may hold for
other legal purposes;
(3) A person may be considered a usual resident of only one
constituency at any given time for the purposes of electoral
registration;
(4) No usual resident shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral
roll of more than one constituency within a period of not less than six
months, given that the person holds any other residence statu s in
India in more than one constituency;
(5) The Central Government in consultation with the Election
Commission may prescribe additional criteria or documentation
requirements to establish usual residence, ensuring that such
requirements do not unduly burden the right to vote;
(6) If any question arises as to where a person is usually resident
within India at any relevant time, the question shall be determined
with reference to all the facts of the case and to such rules as may be
made in this behalf by t he Central Government in consultation with
the Election Commission.
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

3 
(7) Any person, who disputes his inclusion in the electoral roll based
on the determination of his usual place of residence within India may
appeal in accordance with the provisions mentio ned in section 24 of
the Act.
   5 
  10 
5. In the principal Act, in section 22—
(i) in clause (b), for the words, “ordinary residence within the
constituency”, the words,  “ordinary or usual residence”, shall be
substituted;
(ii) in clause (c), for the words, “ordinarily resident”, the words,
“ordinarily or usual resident”, shall be substituted.
(iii) in  the proviso, for the words , “ordinarily resident”, the words,
“ordinarily or usual resident”, shall be substituted.
Amendment of 
section 22. 
  15 
6. In the principal Act, in section 27, in sub-section (5),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words, “ordinarily resident”, the words,
“ordinarily or usual resident”, shall be substituted.
(ii) in clause (b), for the words “ordinarily resident”, the words
“ordinarily or usual resident” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 
section 27. 
  20 
7. In the principal Act, in section 28, in sub -section (2), for clause  (a), the
following shall be substituted, namely—
“the determination of ordinary residence under sub -section (7) of 
section 20 and the determination of usual residence under sub -
sections (1) and (5) of section 20B;” 
Amendment of  
section 28. 
  25 
8. In the principal Act, after section 29, the following new sec tion shall be
inserted, namely:—
“29A. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any 
other law for the time being in force or in any rule or regulation 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.” 
Insertion  of  
new section 
29A. 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
   The Representation of the People Act, 1950, laid the foundation for 
India's electoral system, establishing the framework for voter registration and 
constituency delimitation. Over the years, this Act underwent several 
amendments to adapt to changing socio -political landscapes. Despite these 
changes, a significant challenge remains unresolved, low voter turnout during 
elections.  
  One of the key factors contributing to this issue is internal migration, 
as identified in various assessments. Migrant voters  who reside away from 
their home constituencies often face difficulties in returning to vote during 
polling day due to logistical and financial constraints. This challenge has 
been acknowledged by the Election Commission of India (ECI) as a critical 
factor affecting voter participation, particularly in States with historically low 
turnout. 
   While the Constitution guarantees the right to vote and the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 provides the legal framework for 
voting, however, it still fails t o enable domestic migrants to vote from their 
current place of residence. This issue is particularly pressing for India's large 
population of inter -state migrants, who often rely on seasonal employment 
and receive low wages. The scale of this challenge bec ame evident in the 
2019 general election, where 300 million eligible voters —twice the 
population of Russia—did not cast their ballots. The ECI highlighted internal 
migration as a key reason contributing to this low turnout. 
   Therefore, the Bill envisages amending the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 to remove unreasonable restrictions imposed on domestic 
migrants by requiring them to be physically present in their constituencies. 
The Bill intends to add provisions to facilitate their voting  to their home 
constituencies from a location within India where they have set up their usual 
place of residence for not less than six months. The Bill makes provision  to 
ensure that there is only one registration per voter regardless of the status of 
the usual resident in any other residence they may hold for other legal 
purposes. This Bill, therefore, ensures that any individuals who have 
maintained a usual place of residence in a different constituency are entitled 
to vote for their home constituencies f rom their usual place of residence 
anywhere within India, thereby eliminating the need for them to travel to 
their ordinary residence to cast votes. This will not only empower the voting 
rights of the people of India but also mend the democratic deficit pr evailing 
in India.  
 A significant milestone in the amendments made to the principal Act 
was the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2010, which 
introduced Section 20A, allowing overseas Indian citizens to register as 
voters in their constituencies of ordinary residence. This amendment aimed to 
enfranchise the growing Indian diaspora, recognizing their right to participate 
in the democratic process of their home constituency. However, while this 
was a step forward in expanding voting rights, i t did not fully address the 
logistical and financial challenges faced by Indian emigrants in returning 
back to their home constituencies to exercise their voting rights, thus 
necessitating further reform.  
  Despite the existence of the constitutional righ t to vote and the 
provisions in the Representation of People Act , 1950, it still fails to entitle 
Indian emigrants to vote from their usual place of residence.  As per 
estimates, India has the largest diaspora population.  Out of 99,844 registered 
NRI voters, only 25,606 cast their votes proving how a substantial portion of 
Indian citizens are deprived of their legitimate right to partici pate in the 
electoral process.  Comparatively, in the 2014 Parliamentary elections, only 
11,846 NRIs were registered.  

5 
   The Ministry of External Affairs reports that there are 35.42 million 
foreign emigrants from India.  Further, India is expected to have a migration 
rate of around forty per cent. in 2030, according to the India Employment 
Report 2024 by the Institute for Hu man Development and the International 
Labour Organization.  In light of the growing foreign migration for study or 
work purposes, it becomes indispensable to provide them with voting rights 
from their usual residence instead of ordinary residence. The amen dment in 
this Bill is introduced against the backdrop of several previous efforts to grant 
voting rights to Non -Resident Indians (NRIs). Notably, a Bill passed by the 
Lok Sabha in 2018 sought to enable overseas voters to exercise their 
franchise from their  place of residence abroad. However, the Bill lapsed due 
to the dissolution of the Lok Sabha. However, despite these attempts, the 
issue of extending voting rights to Indian emigrants remains unresolved, 
necessitating further legislative action to ensure t heir participation in the 
democratic process the Bill envisages amending the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 to remove unreasonable restrictions imposed on foreign 
emigrants by requiring them to be physically present in their constituencies. 
The Bil l intends to add provisions to facilitate their voting to their home 
constituencies from a location where they have set their usual place of 
residence for not less than one year. The Bill makes provision to ensure that 
there is only one registration per vo ter regardless of the status of any other 
residence they may hold for other legal purposes. This Bill, therefore, ensures 
that any individuals who have maintained a usual place of residence in a 
different country are entitled to vote for their home constit uencies from their 
usual place of residence, thereby eliminating the need for them to travel to 
their ordinary residence in India to cast votes. This will not only empower the 
voting rights of the people of India but also mend the democratic deficit 
prevailing in India.  
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
JEBI  MATHER HISHAM. 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
    The amendment to the Representation of the People Act of 1950  
vide Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill, will entail certain initial costs for 
upgrading the electoral roll management systems, developing secure 
platforms for remote voting and voter verification, and conducting 
widespread voter education campaigns. Ongoing annual e xpenditures will 
involve maintaining these systems, training election officials, and 
managing the increased complexity of voter registration and verification 
processes. While the implementation of these amendments represents a 
substantial financial commitm ent, it is expected to provide long -term 
benefits by increasing voter participation, especially among domestic 
migrants and Indian migrants, thereby enhancing the democratic process.  
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of 
recurring and non -recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure 
likely to be involved. 

7 
ANNEXURE 
 EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE  PEOPLE ACT, 1950 
  (43 of 1950) 
* *  * *  * 
19. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this Part, every person who —
(a) is not less than 5 [eighteen years] of age on the qualifying date, and
Conditions of 
registration. 
(b) is ordinarily resident in a constituency,
  shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that constituency. 
*                         *                         *                             *                     *   
22. If the electoral registration officer for a constituency, on application made
to him or on his own motion, is satisfied after such inquiry as he thinks fit,
that any entry in the electoral roll of the constituency—
(a) is erroneous or defective in any particular,
(b) should be transposed to another place in the roll on the ground that
the person concerned has changed his place of ordinary residence
within the constituency, or
(c) should be deleted on the ground that the person concerned is dead
or has ceased to be ord inarily resident in the constituency or is
otherwise not entitled to be registered in that roll, the electoral
registration officer shall, subject to such general or special directions,
if any, as may be given by the Election Commission in this behalf,
amend, transpose or delete the entry  after proper verification of facts
in such manner as may be prescribed:
 Provided that before taking any action on any ground under clause (a) 
or clause (b) or any action under clause (c) on the ground that the person 
concerned has ceased to be ordinarily resident in the constituency or that 
he is otherwise not entitled to be registered in the electoral roll of that 
constituency, the electoral registration officer shall give the person 
concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the action 
proposed to be taken in relation to him after proper verification of facts in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
Correction of 
entries   in 
electoral  rolls. 
* *       * *  * 
27. * *   * *  * 
(5)Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section,—
(a) every person who is ordinarily resident in a graduates' constituency
and has, for at least three years before the qualifying date, been either a
graduate of a University in the territory of India or in possession of any
of the qualifications specified under clause (a) of sub-section (3) by the
State Government concerned, shall be entitled to be registered in the
electoral roll for that constituency; and
(b) every person who[is ordinarily resident in a teachers' constituency,
and has, within the six years immediately before the qualifying date for
a total period of at least three years, been engaged in teaching in any of
the educational institutions specified under clause (b) of sub-section (3)
by the State Government concerned shall be entitled to be registered in
the electoral roll for that constituency.
Preparation   of 
electoral   roll 
for  Council 
constituencies. 
* *  * * *

8 
Power to 
make rules. 
28. * *  * *  * 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the determination of ordinary residence under sub -section (7) of
section 20;
* *   * * *

RAJYA SABHA 
__________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
   ___________ 
(Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—263—08.12.2025 