1
S-5\BILL-2004\RS\4131RS
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
48AA.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. After article 48A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
48AA The State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way as it may
deem necessary and expedient to do so, to,—
(a) spend an adequate percentage of its GDP (Gross Domestic Product) on the
promotion of agriculture;
(b) declare agriculture as an industry and extend all the facilities enjoyed by
industrial sector in the country to it;
Bill No. XCV of 2006
Overall
development of
agricultural
sector.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.

2
S-5\BILL-2004\RS\4131RS
(c) make agriculture export oriented;
(d) ensure remunerative prices for agriculture produce of the farmers and
automatically extend compulsory market intervention whenever there is bumper crop
of any agricultural commodity including foodgrains, pulses, fruits and vegetables;
(e) ensure that farmers get timely loans from the banks and financial institutions
to save them from moneylenders;
(f) save farmers from taking extreme step of committing suicide and to extend
welfare measures to the families of those who committed suicide and also to all the
families of the farmers;
(g) ensure rapid growth of agriculture in drought prone, desert and arid areas
by implementing watershed programme;
(h) programme revival of traditional water storage bodies and rain water
harvesting technologies in a big way;
(i) give agricultural workers all those benefits which are available to industrial
workers;
(j) raise the standard of living of agricultural workers and their purchasing
capacity; and
(k) introduce 'agriculture'  as a subject of study at all levels of education.
Explanation:— For the purposes of this article, the expression 'agriculture' includes
horticulture, sericulture, poultry, rearing of livestock and such other operations which are
based on agriculture.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ours is primarily an agriculture country because more than 70 per cent of its
population is in one way or the other, dependent on agriculture as cultivators, agricultural
workers, small and tiny entrepreneurs rearers and so on so forth. The farming community
through green revolutions has made our nation self sufficient in food grains but their lot is
far from satisfactory. On the other hand most of the industrial products are based on
agriculture because their raw materials come from agriculture. But there is no comparison
between the agricultural and industrial sectors. The margin of profit and increase in industrial
production is manifold whereas it is very meagre in agriculture. This has brought prosperity
in the industrial sector whereas there is poverty amongst the farmers who are exploited
and debt ridden. Their inability to pay back their debts is leading them to take the extreme
step of committing suicide. In fact, agriculture despite being the backbone of our economy
has consistently been neglected as meagre GDP is spent on the agriculture. The agriculture
is mostly dependent on rains as irrigation capability has not increased to desired levels.
Hence, the development of agriculture has become very crucial for our nation. The industrial
sector must admit agriculture as a supporting partner and agriculture must be given the
status of Industry and all facilities should be extended to it, which are enjoyed by Industrial
sector. The agricultural workers should also be at par with industrial workers with Price
Index based salaries and bargaining power by forming trade unions and organized efforts
so that they get a fair deal. It is in the national interest that the standard of living of farmers,
agricultural workers is raised to the desired levels by increasing their purchasing capacity,
which is possible only through rapid growth of agriculture.
Hence this Bill.
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Santosh Bagrodia, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4131RS(S5)—8-12-2006.