THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY 
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of  Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act,  
2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Chidren to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Cen
tral Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009,
(hereinafter r
eferred to as the principal Act)
 after clause (g), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely,—
“(ga) “health care services and emergency medical aid’’ means diagnosis,
prevention, treatment, cure, or relief of a physical, mental, or behavioural health
condition illness, or disease, including mental health and substance use disorders;’’.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XCV of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA    
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
5
10
35 of 2009. Amendment
of section 2.

2
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, after clause ( d), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely,—
“(da) formulate a scheme within ninety days from the commencement of this
Act to provide free health care services and emergency medical aid to every child of
the age of six to fourteen years, including a child referred to in clause (d) or clause (e)
of section 2, during  the course of education;
Explanation 1.—The term “course of education means the time during which a
child is present at an educational institution for education or education related
activities;
Explanation 2.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time
being in force this clause shall apply to school as defined under this Act.’’.
4. After section 19 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely,—
“19A. It shall be the duty of every school, as defined under this Act, to provide 
health care services and emergency medical aid to all children who have been enrolled 
as 
a student of their institution during the course of education, in a manner as may be 
prescribed.’’.
5. After section 35 of the principal  Act, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely,—
“35A. Any school or person who fails to comply with the provisions of clause
(da) of section 8 or section 19A, shall be punishable with a fine which may extend up
to five lakh rupees.’’.
5
10
15
20
Amendment
of section 8.
Insertion of
new section
19A.
Duty of school.
Insertion of
new section
35A.
Penalty.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The right to health is an in alienable right enshrined under the Constitution of India,
a corollary right which shall be protected by the State in its parens partiae role. The value
of right to health can be explained at its best from a Kantian perspective, which says that,
every human being has an intrinsic worth which makes them valuable above all price.
Right to education also became a Constitutional as well as a statutory right which got
realised by the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
Albeit the fact that right to edcucation are logical corollaries and complementary to
each other, right of a child to health care services and emergency medical aid during education
is silent in the present laws. As a univeral principle, educational right can be enjoyed by a
child with good health, which can only be realised by right to health care services and
emergency medical aid during the course of education.
The Bill therefore proposes to insert, in Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009 provisions for free health care services and emergency medical aid to
every child of the age of six to fourteen years.
Hence, this Bill.
A.A. RAHIM.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of  Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Shri A. A. Rahim, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—041—05.02.2024.