 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XCVIII of  2024 
THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT LABOUR 
(PROHIBITION AND REGULATION)   
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation)  
Act, 1986. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of  the Republic 
of India as follows: ― 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child and Adolescent Labour
(Prohibition and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2024 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title extent 
and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
Section 3. 
2. In the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act,
1986 (hereinafter referred to as the principal act), in section 3, for sub -
section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely―
“(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply where the child, — 
“(a) helps his family or family enterprise, which is other 
than any hazardous occupations or processes set forth in the 
Schedule, after his school hours or during vacations; or  
(b) works as an artist in an audio- visual entertainment
industry, including advert isement, films, television serials,
sound or audio- visual recording with respect to those
uploaded on social media networks, or any such other
entertainment or sports activities, except the circus, subject
to such conditions including working for not more tha n
tw
enty four days in a month and requisite safety measures,
as may be prescribed:
      Provided that anyone other than “family” who records videos or 
audios that feature a child for the purpose of monetization on video 
sharing platforms shall be liable for penalty as provided under clause 
(e) of sub-section (3) of section 14 and no such work  under this clause
shall affect the school education of the child and fifty per cent. of the
income generated by the child as an artist shall be   deposited as fixe d
de
posit in any of the Scheduled Banks, as defined under clause (e)  of
s
ection 2 of the Res erve Bank of India Act, 1934, and shall be made
available to the child, when he   completes eighteen years of age.”
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression, 
(a) “family” in relation to a child, means his mother, father,
brother and sister and also includes guardian as defined in clause
(2) o
f section 4  of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.
(b) “family enterprise” means any work, profession,
manufacturing or business which is performed by members of
the family with engagement of other persons;
(c) “artist” means a child who performs or practices any work
as a hobby or profession directly involving him as an actor,
singer, sports person or content creator in audio- video form for
social media networks or in any such other a ctivities as may be
prescribed relating to the entertainment or sports activity falling
under clause (b) of sub-section (2).
5 
 
10 
1
5 
2
0 
2
5 
3
0 
3
5 
61 of 1986. 
2 of 1934. 
8 of 1890. 
Amendment of 
Section 14. 
3. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub -section (3), after clause (d),
the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: ―
“(e) fails to comply with or contravenes the provisions of section 
3 of the Act shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which 
may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees or with both.”   
 
40 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
          The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 
1986 provides for prohibition of the engagement of children in certain 
employments and for regulating the conditions of work of children in certain  
other employments.  
           Section 3 of the said Act, inter alia , provides that employment of 
children below the age of fourteen years is prohibited in any of the 
occupations or processes specified in the Schedule to the said Act. Section 6 
of the said Act provides that the provisions of Part III of the Act (which 
relates to the regulation of conditions of work of children) shall apply to an 
establishment or a class of establishments in which none of the occupations 
referred to in section 3 is carried on.  
            With rapid strides in mass media communications and technological 
innovation, social media has become the new rage in society with adults, 
adolescents and children being addicted to watching and making reels and 
posting content thereon.  It is being observed that families often post audios 
or videos of thei r children who are talented in music, dance, acting etc. on 
social media as a form of encouragement and to popularize their talent. 
Often families together participate in such activities.  In consonance with 
this trend, it is proposed to include these act ivities within the purview of 
Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 by 
making suitable amendments in section 3 thereof and to exclude such 
activities, which are being pursued as part of family activity. The definition 
of ‘family’ and ‘artist’ in the Explanation to section 3 is also proposed to be 
amended to include ‘Guardian’ as defined under the Guardians and Wards 
Act, 1890 and to include social media activities respectively.  However, if 
persons other than the family of the c hild indulge in such activities for the 
sole purpose of monetary benefit, they will be penalized for the same with 
simple imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both, for which provision has 
been made under section 14 of the Act through due amendment thereto.  
         It is also imperative to ensure that the earnings of a child artist accrue 
to him as a future investment and are not squandered away by the family. 
For this, it is proposed to provide that fifty per cent. of the income generated 
by the child as an artist shall be locked in Fixed Deposits in any of the 
Scheduled Banks, as defined under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, 
which shall be available to the child after he completes eighteen years of 
age. 
   Hence, this Bill. 
IRANNA KADADI. 

4 
 ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT  LABOUR 
 (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986 
 (61 OF 1890)
*                         *                           *                       *                           * 
3.—(1) No child shall be employed or permitted to work in any occupation 
or process. 
(2) N
othing in sub-section (1) shall apply where the child,—
(a) helps his family or family enterprise, which is other than any
hazardous occupations or
processes set forth in  the Schedule, after his school hours or during
vacations;
(b) works as an artist in an audio- visual entertainment industry,
including advertisement, films, television serials or any such other
entertainment or sports activities except the circus, subject to such
conditions and safety measures, as may be prescribed:
Provided that no such work under this clause shall effect the school 
education of the child. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression, 
(a) “
family” in relation to a child, means his mother, father, brother,
sister and father’s sister and brother and mother’s sister and brother;
(b) “f
amily enterprises” means any work, profession, manufacture or
business which is
performed by the members of the family with the engagement of other
persons;
(c) “ar
tist” means a child who performs or practices any work as a
hobby or profession directly involving him as an actor, singer, sports
person or in such other activity as may be prescribed relating to the
entertainment or sports activities falling under clause (b)  of sub -
section (2).]
        *     
    *                  *       *              * 
14. *     *                  *          *              * 
(3) Whoever—
*    *               *       *                    * 
(d) fails to comply with or contravenes any other provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder,
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one 
month or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both. 
 
Prohibition of 
employment of 
children in any 
occupation and 
processes. 
 
Penalties. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation)  
Act, 1986. 
____________ 
(Shri Iranna Kadadi, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(H)—271—08.12.2025 