AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No.  XCVII of  2024 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) 
Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Interpretation 2. In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
(a) after clause (bb),  the following new clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(bc) “constituency” means the Parliamentary constit uency or 
the Assembly constituency, as the case may be;”; 
(b) after clause (e),  the following new clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ea) “member” in reference to PART VB means a Member of 
the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a 
State, as the case may be”;  
(c) after clause (h), the following new clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ha) “recall” means removal of an elected candidate during 
his or her term by the electorate.” 
(hb) “recall petition” means a petition calling for vacation of 
the seat of a Member   of the House of the People or the 
Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be;”; and 
(d) after clause (i),  the following new clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ia) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the People 
or the Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be;” 
5 
10 
15 
20 
43 of 1951. 
Insertion of 
new Part VB. 
Initiation of 
recall process 
for a member. 
3. After PART VA of the principal Act, the following PART and sections
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
“PART VB 
RECALL OF REPRESENTATIVES 
78C. (1) Any elector of a particular constituency, if not satisfied with the 
performance of the elected member of that constituency, may file a recall 
petition, signed by not less than one -
fourth of the total number of 
electors of that constituency, with the Speaker in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub- section (1), no process of recall of a
member shall be initiated—
(i) within a period of two years from the date of election of that
member; or
(ii) i
f that member was elected in a bye-election and one-half of
t
he period of tenure of such member has not expired; or
(iii) b
efore the expiry of a period of six months from the date of
submission of an earlier recall petition; or
(iv) within a period of six months prior to the polling day for the
next general election for the purpose of constituting a new House 
of the People or a new Stat e Legislative Assembly, as the case 
may be; or 
(v) if that member is already subject to a recall petition process.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression “member is 
already subject to a recall petition process” means the period beginn ing 
with the reference of the recall petition by the Speaker to the Election 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

3 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Verification of 
signatures on 
recall petition. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
Commission and ending with the not i ficati on by the S p eaker of t he 
outcome of  the petition. 
78D. (1 ) The Speaker shall, as soon as possible, after confirming the 
genuineness of the recall petition filed under section 78C refer the recall 
p
etition to the Election Commission, within thirty days, for verification 
and signing by the electors of the respective constituency of the concerned 
Member against whom the recall petition is filed and that the recall 
p
etition is not prima facie frivolous.  
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, it is clarified that the 
S
peaker shall not entail  a review of the m e rits of the recall petition or 
decide as to whether that member should be recalled or not, but shall 
in
stead limit his review to decide whether the petition has been filed by 
a
n eligible person, whether it bears the requisite number of signatures and 
wh
ether it sets out in detail, reasons for recall of the member.  
(2) The Election Commission shall, on receipt of recall petition from the
S
peaker, initiate the verification process for authentication of the
signatures on the recall petition in such manner as may be prescribed:
 Provided that the verification process for authentication of 
signatures shall be completed within a period of thirty days from the date 
of receipt of the recall petition from the Speaker. 
78E. (1)  The Election Commission shall, if satisfied about the 
genuineness of signatures on the recall petition, designate one of its 
officials to be the Recall Election Officer with respect to the concerned 
r
ecall petition. 
 Provided that if the Election  Commission is not satisfied about the 
ge
nuineness of the recall petition or on scrutiny finds that it does not fulfill 
th
e stipulated criteria for admission, the said recall petition shall be 
deemed to be rejected an d the Election Commission shall notify the 
r
ejection of the recall petition along with reasons therefor. 
(2) The Recall Election Officer shall be responsible for conducting the
recall election as per the procedure given under section 78F.
(3) The Election Commission shall provide the Recall Election Officer
with such number of employees and funds as may be necessary for the
purposes enumerated under Sections 78F, 78G.
78F. (1) The Recall Election Officer shall, within ten days of the receipt 
of a recall petition, by way of a notification, specify— 
(a) a place or places where the recall petition shall be made
available for signing by the electors; and
(b) the designated day on and the time duration upto which the
recall petition shall be made available for signing to the electors: 
 Provided that the Recall Election Officer shall not specify more 
than ten places within the constituency for signing the recall petition: 
  Provided further that, in extraordinary circumstances, the Recall 
Election Officer may specify more than ten places within the constituency 
for signing the recall petition, after presenting in writing the detailed 
reasons thereof, to the Election Commission and the Speaker: 
           Provided also that in specifying the number of places where the 
recall petition shall be made available for signatures, due consideration 
shall be given to the size and population of the constituency of the 
concerned member, against whom the recall petition has been filed. 
Appointment of 
Recall Election 
Officer and other 
employees. 
Procedure for 
signing the recall 
petition 

4 
(2) The Recall Election Officer, while specifying the place or places under 
clause (a) of sub-section (1), shall ensure that—
(a) all electors entitled to sign the recall petition have such
reasonable facilities for signing it as are practicable in th e
circumstances; and
(b) as far as practicable, every place where the recall petition is
made available for signing is accessible to senio r citizens,
persons with disabilities. transgenders as well as other socially
deprived sections of the society:
(3) The Recall Election Officer, shall also specify the days on which an
eligible voter, who is unable to be physically present at the designat ed
place(s) on the designated day, shall be able to sign the recall petition by
means of postal ballot.
5 
1
0 
. 
Public Notice 
for signing on 
the recall 
petition. 
78G. (1) The Recall Election Officer shall, within a period of ten days  
after specifying the places and the days under sub - section (1) of section 
78F,— 
(a) issue a public notice containing details of the designate d
p
laces, day on and time during which every elector eligible to
vote in the constituency may sign on the recall petition as well
as the details for signing by means of postal ballot;
(b) cause such notice to be printed in all the leading
newspapers circulated in the constituency; and
(c) cause such notice to be put up on the notice board of all
the Courts, Government offices and institutions in the
constituency.
15 
20 
25 
Eligibility of 
electors. 
78H. Every elector of the constituency of the concerned Member, in 
respect of whom the recall petition has been filed, shall be eligible to sign 
the recall petition: 
           Provided that if any eligible elector is unable to be physically 
present at the designated place(s) on the designated day, he may sign the 
recall petition by means of a postal ballot and every such postal ballot 
shall be deemed to be the signature of the elector on the recall petition.      
Explanation:  For the purposes of this section, every person of the said 
constituency, who is eligible to vote in accordance with the Constitution 
of India as on the date of recall election, shall be eligible to sign the recall 
petition. 
30 
3
5 
Process of 
counting. 
 78I. (1) The Recall Election Officer shall, without any delay, and within 
a period of not more than fifteen days after the end of the signing period, 
cause the signatures including the postal ballots, to be counted and 
forward the result of counting to the Speaker. 
(2) A  recall petition of a member shall be deemed to be a successful recall
petition for the purposes of this Act, if it is signed under Section 78H by
such number of electors, which is not less than two-third of the number of
valid votes which that member was polled in his respective election.
(3) T he Speaker shall, within twenty -four hours of the receipt of the result
of counting under sub-section (2), notify the result to the general public in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
40 
4
5 

5 
 78J. The member, in respect of whom the recall petition was filed, upon 
notification of the successful recall petition under sub -section (3) of 
section 78J, shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in the House of the 
People or Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be. 
Vacation of seat 
by a recalled 
member. 
5 
10 
 78K. When as a result of a successful recall petition, a seat in the House 
of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be, 
is duly vacated under section 78K, the Election Commission shall cause a 
bye-election to be held to fill the va cant seat in such manner as may be 
prescribed under Part IX of the Act. 
         Provided that the elected member who has been recalled, shall be 
not be entitled to participate in the bye-election for the remaining term. 
Filling up of a 
vacant seat of a 
recalled 
member. 
1
5 
20 
2
5 
30 
 78L.  Whoever,— 
(a) tampers with or forges any of the signatures including on the
initial recall petition submitted to the Speaker; or
(b) signs the same recall petition more than once; or
(c) either directly or through an agent, gives bribe by way of gift,
offer or promise any gratification to any person with a  view to
directly or indirectly induce such person to sign or refrain from
signing a recall petition; or
(d) receives, either directly or through an agent, by way of  gift,
offer or promise any gratification, either himself or through an
a
gent, from any person in respect for signing or  refraining from
signing a recall petition,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto 
five years or with a fine which may extend upto rupees ten lakh or      with 
both. 
Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the term “gratification” 
shall not be restricted to pecuniary gratifications or gratifications 
estimable in money and shall include all forms of entertainment and all 
forms of employment for reward. 
Offence  for 
giving a 
frivolous recall 
petition 
 78M. Notwithstanding anything contained in the above provisions, the 
pendency of a recall petition against a member shall not affect the rights 
of the said member and will not deter the duties of the said Member, who 
will be bound by the oath of his office. 
Pendency of 
recall petition 
not to affect the 
rights and duties 
of the member. 
35  78N. Every recall petition shall be disposed of within a maximum period 
of sixty days, beginning from the date of filing till the date of outcome of 
the said recall petition.” 
Time limit for 
final disposal of 
recall petition. 
40 
4. In section 169 of the principal Act, after clause (hh), the following new
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
“(hhh) the manner of filing a recall petition, verification process for 
authentication of the signatures on the recall petition and notification of 
the result of counting of signatures on recall petition;”   
Amendment of 
section 169. 

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill underscores that citizens deserve direct mechanisms to hold 
underperforming representatives accountable. As per the proposed provisions, 
if a minimum of one-fourth of a constituency's electorate is dissatisfied with the 
performance of their elected Member of Parliament or of a State Legislative 
Assembly, they can initiate a recall petition. Further, on receiving the signatures 
and consent from two-third of the valid votes which that member was polled in 
his respective election, the concerned member may be removed from his or her 
tenure. More so, the proposed amendment tends to penetrate awareness across 
the masses and equips the citizens with right to recall their votes. It is widely 
observed that electors after cast ing their votes, are usually oblivious about the 
future outcome till the next elections, however the introduction of the right to 
recall shall instill a sense of agility amongst the electors to participate in the 
democratic process with alacrity. This meas ure responds to growing demands 
for participatory governance and aims to bridge the trust deficit between elected 
representatives and their constituents. By empowering citizens with the right to 
recall, the Bill proposes a fundamental shift towards a more accountable 
political framework in India, aligning with democratic principles and reflecting 
citizens’ rights to ensure their representatives act in their best interests. 
         Globally, the right to recall has been effectively incorporated in several 
democratic countries, demonstrating its utility in strengthening representative 
accountability. Notable examples include Switzerland and the United States. In 
Switzerland, local recall laws empower citizens to remove office-bearers based 
on performance criteria. Similarly, in the U.S., several States allow the recall of 
officials, with specific processes defined for elected representatives across state 
and local governments. These examples demonstrate how the right to recall can 
serve as a check on power and ensure that representatives adhere to their 
mandates. Through this Bill, India aspires to emulate such best practices, 
introducing a recall mechanism suited to the country’s unique democratic and 
political landscape. 
         This Bill seeks to empower Indian citizens by allowing them the right to 
recall their elected representatives under specific conditions. This initiative is 
rooted in the principle of enhanced accounta
bility, ensuring that elected 
members maintain a high standard of integrity and performance throughout 
their tenure. Currently, Indian citizens lack direct recourse if their elected 
officials fail to fulfill their duties satisfactorily, resulting in a democratic deficit. 
This Bill addresses this gap by proposing the right to recall, which would 
reinforce citizens’ voices and re-establish faith in representative governance. 
        A distinctive feature of the proposed amendment is the provision for a 
postal ballot for signing on recall petition in case an eligible elector is not able 
to be physically present at the designated place(s) in his constituency on the 
designated day.  This will ensure that no eligible elector misses out on the 
opportunity to participate in the process of recall of a member.     Every eligible 
elector within the concerned constituency can participate in the recall election 
via postal ballot, making the process more inclusive and ensuring maximum 
participation. 
         In conclusion,  the proposed Bill seeks to introduce a recall mechanism 
that reinforces the accountability of elected representatives in India, and serves 
to deter the underperformance, mismanagement, corruption or apathy of the 

7 
elected representatives. By setting out st ringent requirements and a systematic 
approach to initiate recall petitions, verification of signatures, and conduct of 
recall elections, the Bill upholds democratic values while providing practical 
safeguards against potential misuse. The inclusion of the  postal ballot system 
further ensures the integrity of recall elections, making the process fair, 
accessible, and credible. 
         Hence this Bill. 
RAGHAV CHADHA. 

8 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
            Clause 3 of the Bill  inter alia  provides that the Election Commission 
shall provide the Recall Election Officer with such number of employees and 
funds as may be necessary for the conduct of recall  election and that the Recall 
Election Officer shall issue public notice specifying the p
laces and day 
designated for signing the recall petition and cause such notice to be printed in 
all the leading newspapers in the constituency and to be put up on the notice 
board of all the Courts, Government offices and institutions in the constituency. 
     The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
C
onsolidated Fund of India. As the expenditure to be incurred would depend 
upon the number of recall petitions filed, it is not possible at this stage to give 
the exact amount of recurring expenditure which would be involved out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
 No non-recurring expenditure is however, likely to be involved. 

9 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951 
* *                  *                 *                 *  
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— In
terpretation. 
*              *                  *             *                 *  
(bb) “chief electoral officer” means the officer appointed under section 13A of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950); 
*              *                  *             *                 *   
(e) “elector” in relation to a constituency means a person whose name is entered 
in the electoral roll of that constituency for the time being in force and who is
not subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 16 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);
*              *                  *                 *                 *  
(h) “public holiday” means any day which is a public holiday for the purposes
of section 25 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881);
(i) “s
ign”, in relation to a person who is unable to write his name, means
authenticate in such manner as may be prescribed.
*              *            *                 *                 *  
[PART VA 
FREE SUPPLY OF CERTAIN MATERIAL TO CANDIDATES OF RECOGNISED 
POLITICAL PARTIES 
78A. (1) The Government shall, at any election to be held for the purposes of 
constituting the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State, 
supply, free of cost, to the candidates of recognised political parties such 
number of copies of the electora l roll, as finally published under the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) and such other material as 
may be prescribed. 
(2) T
he material referred to in sub-section (1) shall be supplied,—
(i) s
ubject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Central Government
in consultation with the Election Commission with respect to the reduction
of the maximum expenditure which may be incurred by the candidate under
section 77; and
(ii) through such officers as may be specified by the Election Commission
who shall act in accordance with such general or special directions as may
be given by the Election Commission.
Fr
ee supply of 
copies of 
electoral rolls 
78B. (1) The Election Commission shall, at any time between the date of 
publication of the notification calling the election for the purposes of 
constituting the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State and 
the date on which the poll is to be taken, supply or cause to be supplied, such 
items as the Central Government may, by order, determine in consultation with 
the Election Commission, to the electors in the constituencies concerned or to 
the candidates set up by the recognised political parties. 
(2) Where the Election Commission supplies the items to the ca ndidates under
sub-section (1), the Central Government may, in consultation with the Election
Supply of 
certain items to 
candidates, etc. 

10 
Commission, impose conditions with respect to the reduction of the maximum 
expenditure which may be incurred by the candidate under section 77. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of section 39A, this Chapter and clause (hh) of 
sub-section (2) of section 169, the ex pression “recognised political party”, has 
the meaning assigned to it in the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) 
Order, 1968. 
*              *                  *                 *            *

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
(Shri Raghav Chadha, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB-(E)—255—08.12.2025. 