1
Bill No. XCVII of 2022
THE KHADI SPINNERS, WEAVERS AND KHADI INSTITUTIONS
(PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for th e protection of  distressed Khadi Spinners, Weavers and Khadi 
establishments who are deb t ridden, exploited and are committing suicide and
for introduction of welfare measures like life insura nce coverage, interest free working 
capital and consump tion loan, healthcare, education to the
children, availability of affordable raw material, modernization
of looms, housing and compulsory purch ase of Khadi cloth
by Government and for the establishment of an authority
and a welfare fu nd and for matters connected
therewith a nd incid ental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:––
1. (1) The Khadi Spinners, Weavers and Khadi Institutions Protection and Welfare 
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER,2023
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) “Authority” means the National Khadi Spinners, Weavers and Khadi
Establishments Welfare Authority established under section 3;
(c) “Fund” means the Khadi Spinners and Weavers Welfare Fund established
under section 5;
(d) “Khadi” means any handspun and handwoven fabric using charkha and
loom for production of cloth other than handloom and powerloom, as defined in
clause (g) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “spinner” means a person engaged in the production of handspun yarn to be
used for weaving handwoven cloth on a loom and includes a person who owns,
works or operates on a loom for the production of cloth;
(g) “weaver” means a person engaged in the production of handspun yarn
which is woven on a loom and includes a person who owns, works or operates on a
loom for the production of cloth;
(h) “worker” means a person engaged in spinning and weaving, whether male
or female, engaged by khadi establishment and who earns wages on daily or any
other basis by working on charkha and loom respectively.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be called the National Khadi Spinners, Weavers and 
Khadi Establishments Welfare Authority for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Mumbai where the Khadi Village 
Industries Commission is also headquartered and the Authority may establish offices at 
such other places in the country, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, who shall be appointed by 
the Central Government, namely:—
     (a) a Chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional experience in 
khadi sector;
(b) a Deputy chairperson with such qualification, as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two from
Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of the two Houses;
(d) three members to represent khadi institutions or cooperatives;
(e) three members to represent the khadi spinners;
(f) three members to represent the khadi weavers;
(g) four members to represent each of the Union Ministries of finance, Planning,
            Labour & Employment and Textiles;
       (h) four members to he nominated by the Government of the States to be                         
rotated amongst them in alphabetical  order.
(4) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and common seal, with the power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
63 of 1948
Definitions.
National
Khadi
Spinners,
Weavers and
Khadi
Establishments
Welfare
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such officers and members of staff
and with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed from time to time.
4. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps in close coordination
with the Governments of the States for the overall welfare, removal of poverty and
indebtedness, raising the standard of living, modernize the looms and ensuring easy
availability of raw materials at affordable prices and marketing of khadi cloth of and for the
khadi spinners;
(2) Without prejudice to generality of the foregoing provisions, the authority shall,—
(a) formulate welfare policy for the khadi spinners, weavers and workers;
(b) maintain records of charkha and kharga  existing in all the villages, districts
and other places throughout the country;
(c) maintain a district-wise register of khadi spinners, weavers and local khadi
establishments with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) regulate the service conditions of workers in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(e) fix minimum wages for khadi spinners, weavers and workers from time to
time;
(f) ensure modernization of all the old looms;
(g) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to khadi spinners, weavers
and khadi establishments or cooperatives and for their democratic functioning;
(h) organise exhibitions, melas and set up an institution exclusively to educate
the people about the potential of khadi in generation of employment and solving the
unemployment problem and such other activities to promote khadi sector in different
parts of the country;
(i) make suitable arrangements for purchase of khadi cloth by the Government
agencies on cash and carry basis;
(j) encourage export of khadi cloth and khadi garments from the country in a big
way;
(k) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the appropriate
Government from time to time.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a fund to be
called the Khadi Spinners, Weavers and Khadi Establishments Welfare Fund with a corpus
of five thousand crore rupees and thereafter shall contribute to the fund from time to time
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf along with the Government
of the States in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(2) There shall also be credited to the fund such other sums as may be recieved by
way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals, spinners, weavers,
workers, khadi establishments, body corporates, financial institutions firms, partnerships,
etc.
(3) The fund shall be managed by a Board of Trustees, which shall be constituted by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
Functions of
the Authority.
Establishment
of Khadi
Spinners,
Weavers and
Khadi
Establishments
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(4) The fund shall be spent on,—
(a) providing interest free consumption loans to  khadi spinners, weavers and
khadi establishments from time to time;
(b) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved families
of spinners and weavers who die prematurely;
(c) providing loans at nominal interest for purchasing cotton yarn and other
necessary raw materials to the khadi spinners, weavers and khadi establishments and
workers;
(d) insuring all charkha, khargas , khadi spinners, weavers and khadi
establishments and workers;
(e) providing healthcare facilities, maternity and such other facilities to the
khadi spinners, weavers and khadi establishments and workers;
(f) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of
weavers and workers;
(g) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to ensure regular supply of yarn
to the khadi spinners, weavers and khadi establishments at affordable and subsidized
rates throughout the country.
(2) The appropriate Government, all its Ministries, Departments, subordinate Offices,
Public Sector Enterprises shall purchase their entire cloth requirements for dusters,
curtains, table cloth and such other things exclusively from the primary khadi spinners,
weavers and khadi establishments and not from the mills and power loom sectors.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the authority in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary and adequate for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this
Act.
8. The Authority shall prepare once in every calender year in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the President of India,
who shall cause, the same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be
laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Role of
Central
Government
and other
Ministries.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual
Report.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Khadi fabric has the potential to generate many times more employment as compared 
to mill made fabric. All over the country, in thousands of Khadi untis, lakhs of spinners and 
weavers and workers weave cloth on the charkha and kharga or looms to earn th eir 
livelihood. For most of the spinners and weavers, it has been their family profession which 
has passed on from one generation to the other. Until a few years back, entire families used 
to be involved in this profession such as dyeing, b leaching, embroidery, printing, etc. For 
them, this is the only source of their livelihood. Pure khadi cloth is popular among the 
people not only in the country but world over, and is in great demand, in the fashion world 
also, it is very popular.
But unfortunately, khadi sector is not doing well and it is at the verge of collapse and 
extinction. The most important reason for this is non-availability of raw materials at affordable 
prices. Raw material rate of the Government owned Central Public Sector Enterprises are 
higher than the market rate.  Apart from the over regulated  system that hurt the khad i 
establishments and the raw material becoming co stly, spurious khadi which are either not 
made out of handspun thread or is not hand woven (power loom made) enter the market. 
This has resulted in in stitutions producing gen uine khadi not being able to withstand 
competition from private traders who tr ade ch eaper quality powerloom cloth. Hence, 
thousands of genuine khadi units in many parts of the country have closed  down.
The cotton bales and tapes which are the principal raw material supplied b y the 
Government sliver plants in the country to the khadi establishment is used to produce 
handspun yarn by the spinners (kathin) and this handspun yarn in tur n becomes the raw 
material for handwoven  fabric called khadi.  As on date, in majo rity of the ar eas in the 
country, spinners on an average do not earn even two thousand rupees per month which 
means their income is less than on hundred rupees per day. In many places, if at all, they get 
work for a maximum of 150 days or 200 days in a year. Same is the case with majority of the 
Khadi weavers who ar e not able to earn an  average of even four thousand  ru pees per 
month, which is less than two hundred and fifty rupees per day which is much less than the 
income of a manual labourer. This is because they do not understand the fact that khadi is 
called khadi only because it is handspun and hand woven. I f khadi spinners and weavers 
become extinct, handspun and hand woven fabric will not be availab le in the market. 
Unemployment is the mother o f most problems in the coun try and the world. Lakhs of 
people who wer e hitherto weavers have quit weaving becasu e of the above reasons and 
have migrated to far off places in search of manual work. Overwhelming majority of the 
people in the civil society do not know the employment generation potential of khadi. 
Whenever these things are discussed with the civil society people they become passionate  
about it and commit themselves to the cause. Multifold employment opportunities in khadi 
sector can be generated  only if people ask  for and buy pure khadi.  At present, whatev er 
welfare schemes exist are either not reasonable and not available timely to the spinners and 
weavers. In the absence of service conditions, spinners and weavers who have wo rked all 
their life in the Khadi sector get frustrated in old age. In view of this situation, new people 
hesitate to join this work. Overwhelming majority of khadi spinners and weavers them are in 
debt and many have reported to have committed suicide.
Hence, this Bill.
ANEEL  PRASAD  HEGDE.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish the National Khadi Spinners, Weavers and 
Khadi Establishment Welfare Authority and to have a Secretariat with officers and members 
of staff. Clau se 5 provides for the establishment of Kh adi Spinners, Weavers and Khadi 
Establishment Welfare Fund. Clause 6 inter alia provides th at the Central Government 
should ensure regular supply of yarns to khadi spinners, weavers and establishments at 
subsidized rates. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide appropriate 
funds to the Authority for performing its functions.
The Bill,  if enacted and brought into force, will involve an expenditure from the  
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of five thousand crore rupees per 
annum may be involved as recurring expenditure.
A non-recurring expenditure of two hundred crore rupees is also likely to be incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of this Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of  distressed Khadi Spinners,Weavers and Khadi 
establishments who are debt ridden, exploited and are committing suicide and 
for introduction
 of welfare measures like life insurance coverage, interest free 
working capital and consumption loan, healthcare, education to the
children, availability of affordable raw material, modernization
of looms, housing and compulsory purchase of Khadi cloth
by Government and for the establishment of an authority
and a welfare fund and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde, MP)
RS—P&PS-PMB(E)-073—13.12.2023.