1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Constitution of India, after article 44, the following new article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"44A. The State shall take all necessary steps to control population growth by promoting
small family norms by all reasonable incentives and education through print and electronic
media and other means as may be deemd appropriate to achieve a stable population."
3. In article 51A, after clause (k) the following shall be inserted, namely:—
"(l) to encourage, incentivise and adopt small family norms and set targets
towards achieving a stable population."
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Bill No. XCVI of  2022
Insertion of
new article
44A.
Control of
population.
Amendment
of article 51A.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the second most populous country after China with the highest birth rate in the
world. According to a report, India is slated to become the world's most populous country
with a population of 1.6 billion by 2030.
India has had a State-sponsored family planning programme since 1951. Of late, the
programme has shown some results. The Total Fertility Rate (TFR) has fallen from around 6
at the time of independence, to around 2.3. The results of the programme have, however,
been skewed. It is very unfortunate that despite the availability of various birth control
means and family planning programmes, the population is continuing to rise menacingly.
This has caused over-crowding due to which law and order situation is also deteriorating.
Unemployment is rising rapidly causing frustration amongst unemployed, particularly amongst
the youth who are being lured by anti-national and anti-social elements. There is unparallel
transformation of human values, social institutions and economic structures. Agricultural
land holdings are becoming smaller and smaller and farming is becoming uneconomical. As
a result, many farmers are committing suicides. The housing needs are far beyond the available
finances and the shortage is appalling. Educational and health care facilities are far from
satisfactory. If the population is not stabilized, achieving a quality life would be a distant
proposition.
Further, the benefits of collective efforts of national building have been squandered
by the rise in population or evident from economic data. India's per capita GDP in 1998 was
413 dollars and it has grown to about 2016 dollars in the year 2018. However, during this
period, our population is estimated to have grown from 1 billion to 1.4 billion. Had there been
a stable population during this period, the per capita GDP would have been higher by
another 40 per cent. Certainly, a rising population limits the ability of the State to provide
better quality of life to its citizens, since a large chunk of national income is spent on
maintaining the existing facilities.
It is, therefore, imperative that a focused approach must be taken to check the increasing
population. The Bill seeks to insert a new article in Part IV of the Constitution enjoining upon
the State to take all steps to control population growth by promoting small family norms and
achieve a stable population. The Bill also makes it a fundamental duty for citizens to adopt
small family norms and work towards achieving a stable population in the country.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE.
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E )–051–13-12-2 023.