Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006
Bill No. XCVII of 2006
THE WOMEN WELFARE BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of women by providing fund and creating employment
opportunities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women Welfare Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a state, the Government of that
State in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "fund" means Women Welfare Fund set up under Section 3;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette set up a
Fund to be known as Women Welfare Fund for the purposes of taking welfare measures for
women.
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/ 3336RS
5
Definitions.
Women
Welfare Fund.
10

2
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/ 3336RS
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions by Central Government and State
governments in such ratio as may be prescribed and donations received from organisations
and individuals.
4.  The Central Government shall reserve at least thirty-three per cent of jobs for
women in all Central Government Services and organisations under its control.
5. The appropriate Government shall,—
(i) set up such number of women employment centres in every district as may be
prescribed to provide assistance to women for employment/self employment;
(ii) reserve land or housing sites for women;
(iii) provide free health care facilities and maternity benefits upto first two
children;
(iv) set up women hostels wherein all facilities shall be provided free of cost;
(v) pay sustenance allowance or old age pension to women who are destitute or
widows and having no source of regular income;
(vi) provide free training to women for taking up employment or self
employment;
(vii) provide scholarships to girl students; and
(viii) reserve at least thirty per cent of seats for women in all educational
institutions including higher professional and technical institutions.
6. The Central Government shall provide funds to the State governments for setting
up of special courts for women in every district.
7. The Central Government shall ensure that every commercial bank, including a private
and foreign bank provide loans to women at the rate of five per cent simple interest for
setting up self employment units.
8. The Central Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
Reservation
of jobs in
Central
Government.
Appropriate
Government
to undertake
Welfare
Measures for
Women.
Central
Government to
provide funds
for special
Courts.
Central
Government
to ensure loan
to women.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Women constitute fifty per cent of the population in the country. Though sixty years
have passed since independence, yet there has been no improvement in the condition of
women. Several efforts taken by the Government have yielded some results, yet much has to
be done to improve their lot.
The women do not have ample access to schools or employment opportunities, only a
concrete reservation system in educational institutions or government jobs or special
employment or self employment opportunities will help them.
Crimes against women are increasing and it takes very long for disposal of cases.
Special courts can only help quick disposal of cases.
There is no social security for women in distress. The Government should make some
provision for them.
Therefore, it is proposed to bring a comprehensive legislation for women welfare.
Hence this Bill.
SYEDA  ANWARA TAIMUR
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides the setting up of Women Welfare Fund contributions by
Central Government and other sources. Clause 5 provides for setting up of employment
centres, reservation of land and providing hostels, pensions, scholarships, etc. to women by
the appropriate government. Clause 6 of the Bill contains the provision for setting up of
special courts in every district by the Central Government.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per
annum and rupees two thousand crore by way of non-recurring expenditure.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of women by providing fund and creating employment
opportunities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 ————
(Shrimati Syeda Anwara Taimur, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4135RS(S-3)—08.12.2006.