Short title
and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006
Bill No.  XCVI of  2006
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India.
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force, at once.
2. In article 102 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for sub-clause (a) the
following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:—
(a) if he holds any office, under the Government of India or the
Government of any State, which is declared by Parliament, by law, as an “office
of profit”;
3. In article 191 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for sub-clause (a), the
following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:—
(a) if he holds any office, under the Government of India or the
Government of any State, which is declared by Parliament or State Legislature,
by law, as an “office of profit”.
Amendment
of article
102.
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\3303RS
Amendment
of article
191.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Experience has shown that article 102 and article 191 of the Constitution of India which
disqualify Members of Parliament and State Assemblies in case they hold any office of
profit, have not succeeded to bring in any purity in politics, which appears to be the objective
with which the two articles were inserted.
The said articles neither define the term “Office” nor the term “Profit”, as a result of
which, what constitutes the office of profit has always remained a mystery.
Plethora of decisions of the Supreme Court and the High Courts have also not being
able to give any finality to the two concepts.
Parliament as also, State Legislatures have enacted legislations incorporating certain
posts to take them away from the purview of the concept of “Office of Profit”.
These laws contain lists of corporations/boards, besides other constitutional posts,
which the legislations have sought to take out of the purview of the term “office of profit” so
as to exempt the holders thereof from being disqualified.
Additions to the lists of exemptions, whether by Parliament or by State Legislatures,
have met with public criticism on account of misconception regarding “Office of Profit”.
To put an end to this legal chaos, the present Bill seeks to amend article 102 and 191
of the Constitution of India, which, as amended will provide for disqualification of members
of Parliament or State Legislatures only if they hold posts declared specifically as posts
constituting “Office of Profit” and not vice versa.
The proposed amendment is essential to make the law simple and devoid of any legal
riddles.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK
2
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\3303RS

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
102. Disqualifications for membership.—(1)  A person shall be disqualified for
being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of Parliament—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government
of any State, other than an office declared by Parliament by  law not to disqualify its holder;
* * * *
191. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a
State—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government
of any State, specified in the First Schedule, other than an office declared by the Legislature
of the State by law not to disqualify its holders;
* * * *
3
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\3303RS

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
Bill
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4123RS(S-3)—08.12.2006.