Short title,
extent &
commencement.
Establishment
of a
permanent
Bench of
Supreme Court
at Kolkata.
Bill No. XI of 2015
THE SUPREME COURT (ESTABLISHMENT OF A  PERMANENT BENCH
A T KOLKATA) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent bench of the
Supreme Court at Kolkata .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the The Supreme Court (Establishment of a Permanent
Bench at Kolkata) Bill, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be estalished a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at Kolkata with
such number of Judges of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of India, till the National
Judicial Appointments Commission comes into force, may with the approval of the President
decide, to exercise jurisdiction in respect of cases arising in the States of West Bengal,
Odisha, Jharkhand, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Assam, Nagaland, Manipur,
Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura and such other territory as may be notified by the
Central Government with the approval of the Chief Justice:
Provided that the number of  judges at the bench at Kolkata shall not be less than five.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2015

STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES AND REASONS
The pursuit of justice before law is a costly endeavour which has been made
more expensive by chronic delays. The logistical problems encountered by appellants
aggravate costs and further delays. Moreover, the appellants are already burdened
and are further shunned to face the ordeal of having to travel thousands of kilometres
to the seat of the Supreme Court in Delhi for their trial and the consequent follow up of
their cases.
Moreover, the rate of pending court cases in the country has crossed the 3 crore
mark, West Bengal itself has 3.5 lakh appellants awaiting justice. Figures on the chronic
backlog of court cases are an indictment of the country's beleaguered legal system.
The plight of persons awaiting trial needs to be understood and addressed. It is not
just the wastage of time but also an increased financial burden that makes the process
inconvenient, cumbersome and expensive.
Article 130 of the Constitution of India says that the Supreme Court shall sit in
Delhi or in such other place or places as the Chief Justice of India may with the
approval of the President from time to time appoint. The language of the article clearly
indicates that there was an intension of the founding fathers of the Constitution to
have more than one seat of the Supreme Court.
Hence, the Bill seeks to establish a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at
Kolkata in West Bengal. Calcutta High Court is the oldest and geographically, Kolkata
is a strategic location for a permanent bench as it is easily accessible for litigants of
central, eastern, south-eastern and especially north-eastern States. This will provide
for a robust mechanism to not only manage pendency of court cases but simultaneously
makes the judical procedure for justice apportune, public-friendly and efficient.
Hence, the Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be a permanent bench of the Supreme
Court at Kolkata. The Bill, if enacted, will involved recurring expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India to the tune of rupees ten crore per annum.
However, a non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore is also likely to
be involved.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent bench of the
Supreme Court at Kolkata.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5361RS(S3)—13-03-2015.