AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XI of 2001

THE PREVENTION OF ABUSE OF GIRL CHILD BILL, 2001
A
BILL
to prevent the abuse of girl child by providing deterrent punishment for forcing the girl
child into prostitution and for immoral traffic of a girl child or procuring a girl child
Sor prostitution or dedicating a girl child as devdasi which ultimately forces her into
prostitution and for the rehabilitation of such girl child and other welfare measures

to be initiated by Central and State Governments and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows:
1. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention of Abuse of Girl Child Act, 2001. Short title,
(2) It extends to the whole of India. comments:
5 (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect. ment.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of that
State and in other cases the Central Government;

(6) “devdasi” means a girl child who is dedicated to an idol of god or goddess or a
10 temple for its services;

(c) “girl child” means a female human who is below the age of fifteen years;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(e) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian
45 of 1860... Penal Code or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the meaning respectively
15. assigned to them in those Acts.


Punishment
for abuse of
girl child.

Prohi ion
of offering a
girl child as a
devdasi.

Penalty.

Appropriate
Government
to establish

special courts.

Offences to
be cognizable
and non-
bailable.
Appropriate
Government
to set up
special cells.
Appropriate
Government
to formulate
rehabilitation
and welfare
measures for
girl child
prostitutes.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.

Power to
make rules.

2

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code or the Immoral Traffic
(Prevention) Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force, whoever—

(a) abets or induces a girl child to prostitution, notwithstanding the relation of
such girl child with the accused, shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not
be less than three years but may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend
to twenty five thosuand rupees.

(6) forces a girl child to prostitution, notwithstanding the relation of such girl
child with the accused, shall be punished with death;

(c) indulges in the immoral traffic of a girl child or for any unlawful or immoral
purpose shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years and
also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;

(d) hires or otherwise obtains possession of a girl child prostitute for promis-
cuous sexual intercourse with her shall be punished with life imprisonment and also
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.

4, The dedication or offering a girl child as a devdasi or bhavin is hereby prohibited.

5. Whoever contravenes the provision of Section 4, notwithstanding that the, person
is a natural guardian of the girl child or the priest or purohit by whatever name called who
performed the rituals of such dedication or offering shall be punishable with rigorous impri-
sonment which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years and with
fine which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees.

6. The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Special Courts as it
may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act for the quick disposal of cases under this
Act.

7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.

8. The appropriate Government shall set up such number of special cells in the police
department as necessary for investigation.

9. The appropriate Government shall formulate rehabilitation and other welfare meas-
ures for such girl child prostitutes who may be rescued from the profession or who may be
rendered out of profession after the commencement of this Act and these measures shall
include free medical care, shelter, free education including vocational education and such
other facilities as may be prescribed.

10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds from time to time, for the purposes of this Act.

11. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time applicable to the subject matter of this Act.

12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

45 of 1860.
104 of 1956.

20

2 of 1974,
25

30

35

40


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

These days adventure tourism is gaining popularity throughout the world in which
child prostitution is also gaining momentum particularly in Asian, African and third world
countries. The reason is very simple—the girl child prostitutes are preferred by the tourists
who indulge in promiscuous sex for fun and enjoyment and thereby these hapless child
prostitutes fetch more money from the rich and neo rich prospective clicnts. The greed for
more and more moncy is forcing more and more adolescent girls into prostitution by profes-
sional pimps, anti-social elements, organized criminal gangs, brothel keepers and call girl
rackets, hotclicrs, tour operators and in many cases unfortunately even by their natural
guardians. In majority of the cases the innocent girls are lured into the flesh trade on one
pretext or the other promising them a decent, comfortable and lavish lifestyle apart from fun
and enjoyment. in many cases the girls are kidnapped and forced into prostitution and
similarly girls are procured from the unsuspecting poor parents and forced into the profes-
sion. Print media frequently reports about procuring innocent girls from the neighbouring
countries by the anti-social elements for this purpose. Sometimes the customary rituals play
havoc in the lives of innocent girls, For instance in some parts of our country the young girls
are dedicated and offered as devdasis to subsist on prostitution.

Now with the spread of deadly AIDS the lives of girl child prostitutes have become
vulnerable and are in constant danger as there is no cure for AIDS. They are also victims of
other sexually transmitted diseases. Apart form the dreaded diseases the hapless girls arc
tortured ruthlessly to transform them as professional prostitutes. In such an alarming situa-
tion the time has come when the Central and State Governments have to take effective steps
to control this dangerous menace by coming heavily on the defaulters and providing deter-
rent punishment. It is felt that for those who force a girl child into prostitution capital
punishment is the only alternative for deterrence, Similarly deterrent punishment is also
necessary for those who abet, lure or coerce a girl child for immoral trafficking and also for
those who hire a girl child prostitute and who offer them as devdasis in temples irrespective
of their relation with the girl child or prevalent customs. Then only the hapless and innocent
girls can be saved not only form the cruel profession of prostitution but also from AIDS and
sexually transmitted diseases.

Hence this Bill.
K.B. KRISHNA MURTHY


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government to establish special
courts. Clause 10 provides that Central Government will provide funds for the implementa-
tion of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted and brought into force, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India to the tune of one hundred crore rupee per annum as recurring
expenditure.

A sum of rupees one hundred crores may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules wil! relate to matters of details only.

Thé delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL .
to prevent abuse of girl child by providing deterrent punishment for forcing a gir! child into
prostitution and for immoral traffic of a girl child or procuring a girl child for prostitu»
tion or dedicating a girl child as devdasi which ultimately forces her into prostitution
and for the rehabilitation of such girl child and other welfare measure to be initiated by
Central and State Governments and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

(Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—6407RAS—-15.2,2001.