As INTRODUCED IN THE Rarya SABHA

Bill No. XT of 2000

THE FOOD CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Corporations Act, 1964.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2000.

(2) ॥ shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifi-
5 cation in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In the Food Corporations Act, 1964, for section 34, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—

"34. (1) A Food Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant

records and prepare and annual statement of accounts including the profit and loss

10 account and the balance-sheet in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

(2) The accounts of a Food Corporation shall be audited annually by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Food Corporation to the Comptroller

15 and Auditor-General of India,

Short title
and com-
‘tmencement.

Substitution of
new section for
section 34 of
4०३37 of 1964,

Accounts and
audit


2

(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of a Food Corporation shall have
the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General has in connection with the audit of Government accounts
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any office of the
Food Corporation.

(4) The accounts of a Food Corporation as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually by the Comptroller and.
Auditor-General of India to,—

(i) the Food Corporation concerned;

(ii) where the accounts relate to a State Food Corporation, also to the
Food Corporation of India;

(iti) the Central Government,

and that Government shall, as soon thereafter as may be, cause the same io be laid
before both Houses of Parliament.".

10

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Food Corporation of India (FCI) was established under the Food Corporations
Act, 1964 (37 of 1964). Section 34 of the Food Corporations Act provides for auditing of
the Corporation’s accounts by qualified auditors appointed annually by the Food Corporation
of India from amongst a list of auditors approved by the Central Government on the advice
of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India (CAG). Food Corporation of India is not
. public sector enterprise falling within the ambit of the CompaniesAct, 1956. It is functioning
as an implementing arm of the Central Government by procuring foodgrains at rates fixed
by the Centre and distributing the same below costs as part of the targeted Public Distribution
System. Under these circumstances, Food Corporation of India needs to be treated on a
different footing. Besides the audit by chartered accountants, Food Corporations Act also
provides for supplementary audit of accounts by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India, The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India audits Food Corporation of India
through his offices, which are situated in the different parts of the country.

2. It is now proposed that the auditing and certification of accounts which was
hitherto being done by the chartered accountants alongwith the supplementary audit by
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may be replaced by Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India as the sole auditor of the accounts of the Corporation. This will help the
Corporation avoid needless expenditure on audit fees, as also provide a more meaningful
audit by Comptroller and Auditor-General of India whose organisation is well aware of the
intricacies of Government policies being implemented by the Food Corporation of India.

3, For making the Comptroller and Auditer-General of India the sole auditor of the
accounts of the Food Corporation of India, it is necessary to amend section 34 of the Food
Corporation Act, 1964 as per the proposed Bill.

4, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deu; SHANTA KUMAR.
The 15th February, 2000.


ANNEXURE
ExrRacts FROM THE Foop Corporations Act, 1964

(37 oF 1964)
* * * * *
Accounts and 34. (1) A Food Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
audit. and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and

balance-sheet in such form as may be prescribed.

(2) The accounts of a Food Corporation shall be audited by auditors duly qualified to
act as auditors of companies under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956,

(3) The auditors shall be appointed annually by the Food Corporation from among a
list of auditors approved by the Central Government on the advice of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.

(4) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of annual balance sheet and the profit
and loss account of the Food Corporation and it shall be their duty to examine them
together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto, and they shall have a list delivered
to them of all books kept by the Corporation and shall at all reasonable times have access to
the books, accounts and other documents of the Corporation and may require from any
officer of the Corporation such information and explanations as the auditors may think
necessary for the performance of their duties as auditors.

(5) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall have power—

(a) to direct the manner in which the accounts of a Food Corporation shall be
audited by the auditors appointed under sub-section (3) and to give such auditors
instructions in regard to any matter relating to the performance of their functions 88
such;

(8) to conduct a supplementary or test audit of the accounts of a Food
Corporation by such person or persons as he may authorise in this behalf; and for the
purpose of such audit, to require information or additional information to be
furnished to any person or persons so authorised, on such matters, by such person or
persons, and in such form, as the Comptroller and Auditor-General may, by general
or special order, direct.

(6) The auditors shall send a copy of their report together with an audited copy of the
accounts—

(a) to the Food Corporation concerned;

(8) where the accounts relate to a State Food Corporation, also to the Food
Corporation of India;

(c) to the Central Government; and

(d) to the Comptroller and Auditor-Geiieral of India who shall have the right

to comment upon, or supplement the audit report in such manner as he may think fit.

(7) Any comments upon, or supplement to, the audit report, made by the Comptroller

and Auditor-General of India under clause (d) of sub-section (6) shall be placed by the Food

Corporation concerned before the Central Government, and where the accounts relate to a
State Food Corporation, also before the Food Corporation of India.

* * * * *