1
THE RIGHT TO PUBLIC SPACE BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to provide for free access to public space to all citizens and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Public Space Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force at once on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. XI of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER,2023
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "local authority" means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or
Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat or Panchayat, by whatever name called and includes
such other authority or body having administrative control or empowered by, or under
any law for the time being in force to function as a local authority in any city, town or
village;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "public space" means any real property or structures thereon or any open
spaces including libraries or buildings of other voluntary organizations, where entry is
completely free and unrestricted to the general public, under the ownership or
jurisdiction of the appropriate Government or local authority;
(e) "citizen" means any citizen of India;
(f) "walking distance" means a distance of three hundred meters.
3. (1) Every citizen shall have the right of access to a public space at a walking
distance from his place of residence.
(2) No citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses which may
prevent him or her from accessing public space.
(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that public space is empowered with
adequate provisions for education, entertainment and physical exercise of citizens.
4. The appropriate Government shall, while ensuring universal access to public
space to all citizens, take special measures to ensure that the senior citizens and the
differently-abled citizens are provided equal access to such public space.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that,—
(i) the public space designed and designated under this Act are secular in nature;
and
(ii) no citizen, on the grounds of religion, faith, caste, community or ethnicity, is
discriminated against, in respect of free access to public space.
6. For implementing the provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government and local
authority shall notify or establish, where it is not so established, within such area or limits
of neighbourhood, as may be prescribed, a public space, within a period of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
7. The Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments, as grants-
in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the purposes of this Act.
8. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government or local authority, as the case
may be, to—
(a) ensure availability of a free and empowered public space within walking
distance and its free access to all citizens;
(b) ensure that no citizen is discriminated against and prevented from accessing
public spaces;
(c) provide infrastructure including building, equipments and staff for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
Right of
citizens to
free public
space.
Special
provisions for
senior citizens
and
differently-
abled citizens.
Universal
access to
public space.
Duty of
Appropriate
Government
and local
authority to
establish
public space.
Central
Government
to Provide
funds.
Duties of
appropriate
Government
or local
authority
.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for carrying out
the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry  of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Free access to a deliberative public space is a fundamental human right. Access to  
empowering, educative and transformative public spaces is the right and necessity for every 
human being. There is a need for establishmen t of public spaces where people can meet,  
discuss, debate, deliberate and learn.
There is an urgent requirement to establish, attain and ensure the right of free access 
to public space to every citizen of the country.
Therefore, the C entral and State Governments and lo cal authorities should take  
necessary measures to ensure that public spaces are established in every single ward of our 
Local Self Governing bodies. Further, public spending and resources for the establishment, 
support and promotion of public spaces should also be increased.
Hence, this Bill.
V. SIVADASAN
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that no citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of charges or 
expenses which may prevent him or her from accessing the public space.
Clause 4 provides th at the appropriate Govern ment shall take special measu res to 
ensure that senior citizens and differently-abled citizens are provided equal access to public 
space.
Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government and local authority shall establish 
public space.
Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall p rovide funds to the State 
Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the purposes of this 
Bill.
Clause 8 provides that the appropriate Government or the local authority, as the case 
may be, shall provide infrastructure including building, equipments and staff for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the expenditure involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Government to 
make rules for  carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free access to public space to all citizens and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—11 7—16.12.2023.