THE ARMED FORCES (SPECIAL POWERS) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 and the Armed Forces
(Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act, 1990.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. For section 6 of the Armed Forces  (Special Powers) Act, 1958, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"6. No prosecution, suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted against
any person in respect of anything done or purported to be done in exercise of the
powers conferred by this Act where the Central Government provides reasons in
writing and the competent court upholds the legal validity of these reasons."
3. For section 7 of the Armed Forces (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act, 1990,
the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"7. No prosecution, suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted against
any person in respect of anything done or purported to be done in exercise of the
powers conferred by this Act where the Central Government provides reasons in
writing and the competent court upholds the legal validity of these reasons."
Short title,
and com-
mencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XI of  2011
Substitution of
new section
for section 7.
Substitution of
new section
for section 6.
       5
     10
     15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) was enacted in the year 1958. It comes
into operation when the Central Government declares a particular part of the Northeastern
States a "disturbed area." Within that area, an officer of the armed forces has the power to fire
upon or otherwise use force, even to the causing of death, against any person who is acting
in contravention of any law or order for the time being in force in the disturbed area prohibiting
the assembly of five or more persons or the carrying of weapons or of things capable of
being used as weapons or of fire-arms, ammunition or explosive substances. In 1990, the
same law was extended to the State of Jammu and Kashmir by a separate enactment.
Over the years AFSPA has been in operation, the Army has resorted to firing a number
of times and killed many people. So long as the persons killed have been armed insurgents or
terrorists, there have been no complaints against the provisions of the Act. However, when
innocent persons—especially unarmed civilians—are killed, the Act came under severe
criticism. The protests in Manipur in 2004 in view of the custodial deaths was a gruesome
incident of such nature. In Kashmir, sentiments against the Armed Forces Act got inflamed
because of fake encounter incidents like Pathribal and Machhil.
Section 6 of the Armed Forces Special Powers Act, 1958 and Section 7 in  Armed Forces
Special Powers (Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1990 says "no prosecution suits or other legal
proceedings shall be instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government,
against any person in respect of anything done or purported to be done in exercise of the
powers conferred by this Act." This requirement confers de facto impunity on all personnel
of Armed Forces violating the Act. The Central Bureau of Investigation had indicted army
officers for the murder of innocent civilians at Pathribal in 2000 but their trial could not take
place because the Central Government refused to give sanction for prosecution. So much so,
under the said provision the Government even do not have to give any reasons for denying
the permission for prosecution. The logic behind this simple section, as in many other Indian
laws, is to protect public servants from frivolous or vexatious law suits. The Apex Court of
the country has often declared that the object of such protection is not to set an official
above the common law. If he commits an offence not connected with his official duty, he has
no such protection. A Government which has faith in the actions of its officers and the
fairness of its judicial system  should not shy away from allowing the courts to step in when
doubts arise. And yet, in case after case, legal proceedings could not take place against
erring officials for want of permission.
It is, therefore, long over that this provision should be amended by providing that
while denying the permission for prosecution, the Central Government must give reasons in
writing and the competent court upholds the legal validity of these reasons. Such a provision
would prevent good officers from being prosecuted for killings which result from acts of
good faith while allowing the bad apples to be prosecuted for their crimes.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ARMED FORCES (SPECIAL POWERS) ACT, 1958
(28 OF 1958)
6. No prosecution, suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted, except with the
previous sanction of the Central Government, against any person in respect of anything
done or purported to be done in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act.
3
Protection to
persons acting
under Act.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ARMED FORCES (JAMMU AND KASHMIR) SPECIAL POWERS ACT, 1990
(21 OF 1990)
7. No prosecution, suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted, except with the
previous sanction of the Central Government, against any person in respect of anything
done or purported to be done in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act.
4
Protection of
persons acting
in good faith
under this Act.

GMGIPMRND—974RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 and the Armed Forces
(Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act, 1990.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)