1
THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act,  1952.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 6A of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘6AA. Notwithstanding any law for the time being in force, no person shall,
without the written authorisation of the author, be permitted to use any audiovisual
recording device in a place to knowingly make or transmit or attempt to make or
transmit or abet the making or transmission of a copy of a  film or a part thereof.
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
6AA.
37 of 1952.
Prohibition of
unauthorised
recording.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. XI of  2019
5
10

2
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “author”
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( d) of section 2 of the
Copyright Act, 1957.’.
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 1), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A). If any person contravenes the provisions of section 6AA, he shall
be punishable with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees or with both.”.
Amendment of
section 7.
14 of 1957.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Cinematograph Act, 1952 (the Act) was enacted with a view to make provisions
for the certification of cinematograph films for exhibition and for regulating exhibitions by
means of cinematographs.
2. Section 3 of the Act provides for the constitution of a Board of Film Certification
which certifies the films for public exhibition. The medium of cinema, the tools, the technology
associated with it and its audience have undergone radical changes over a period of time
and the certification process for public exhibition needs to be contemporised in order to
make the process in tune with the changed time. There have also been many changes in the
field of cinema with the proliferation of Television channels and cable network throughout
the country. Further, the film industry is facing huge losses due to the advent of new digital
technology, decline in number of the people visiting cinema theatres, increase in piracy,
particularly release of pirated version of the films on internet, copyright violation, etc., which
in turn causes loss to the government exchequer.
3. With a view to overcome the aforesaid difficulties and to prohibit the unauthorised
recording of films, it is proposed to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952 by a Bill, namely, the
Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019, which provides for—
(i) insertion of a new section 6AA in the Act so as to provide that no person
shall, without the written authorisation of the author, be permitted to use any
audiovisual recording device in a place to knowingly make or transmit or attempt to
make or transmit or abet the making or transmission of a copy of a film or a part
thereof; and
(ii) to amend section 7 of the Act so as to punish the persons who contravenes
the provisions of section 6AA for a term which may extend to three years or with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees or with both.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Col. RAJYA V ARDHAN RATHORE (Retd.)
N
EW DELHI;
The 8th February,  2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill, if enacted would not involve any financial expenditure either recurring or
non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.
————
(Col. Rajyavardhan Rathore (Retd.), State Minister, Ministry of  Information and
Broadcasting )
MGIPMRND—3762RS(S3)—08-02-2019.