1
Bill No. XI of 2022
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860, in clause (a) of Explanation to section 498A, for the
words “any wilful conduct”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“any conduct, whether or not under the influence of voluntary or involuntary
intoxication, including liquor, drugs (both addictive and non-addictive), etc.”
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST  APRIL, 2022
Amendment of
section 498A.
5
45 of 1860.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
1. COVID induced lockdown from March to September, 2020 saw around 13,000
complaints being registered with the National Commission for Women (NCW). This was
exacerbated by financial instability and dependence on intoxicants, as a result of which
women in households had to bear the brunt of domestic violence. At the same time, it is the
responsibility of society as a whole to ensure that women are treated with dignity.
2. Domestic violence within the households is a social menace that is often left
unaddressed and left within the contours of the four walls. There needs to be a directive to
ensure that there is an institutional framework to address the same. Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 did address the issue at large but still scope remains for
expanding the breadth of the legislation within the definitions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Under Section 498A of the IPC, any cruelty by the husband or the relative of the husband,
inflicted on the wife is liable to attract imprisonment of up to three years, however, by adding
the world ‘wilfully’, it shields violence that can be accrued under the influence of alcohol and
similar intoxicants.
3. Considering the trauma that is faced by the women, it is important that involuntary
intoxication does not become a justified excuse to inflict cruelty on the women, and therefore,
such acts need to be dealt with stringently.
Hence this Bill.
MAHESH  PODDAR
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
498A. Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects
such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “cruelty” means—
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman
to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
mental or physical) of the women; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing
her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet
such demand.
* * * * *
Husband or
relative of
husband of a
woman
subjecting her
to cruelty.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Mahesh Poddar, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—48RS(S3)—04-04-2022.