1
THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND
REMAINS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
Act, 1958.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. On and from the 16th day of 1992 in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as principal Act), in section 2—
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 2.
Bill No. XI of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 20TH JULY, 2018
24 of 1958.
5

2
Insertion of
new section
3A.
Certain
ancient
monuments,
etc. declared
protected
under the
Ancient
Monuments
Preservation
Act, 1904.
Amendment
of section 4A.
Insertion of
new section
6A.
(i) in clause (db) after the words "not below the rank of", the words
"Superintending Archaeologist or" shal be inserted.
(ii) for clause (dc), the following shall be substituted namely:—
"(dc) 'construction' means any erection of a structure or a building, including
any addition or extension thereto either vertically or horizontally, but does not
include any re-construction, repair and renovation of an existing structure or
building, or, construction, maintenance and cleansing of drains and drainage
works and of public latrines, or private latrines within an existing house
constructed prior to 16th day of June, 1992 or constructed after 16th day of June
1992 as per permission or licence granted by the Central Government or Director-
General or the Competent Authority, as the case may be, urinals and similar
conveniences, or, the construction and maintenance of works meant for providing
supply of water for public, or, the construction or maintenance, extension,
management for supply and distribution of electricity to the public or bridge
over rivers, canals or drains, railway line, or, widening, or, relaying of existing
roads and pathways, or, construction of roads, fly-overs, or, construction of
under bridge, or, laying of piped, or, open drains to restrain river pollution, or,
laying of railway line, or, creation of surface parking, or, such works fall within
the overall definition of infrastructure development for the benefit of public or
provision for similar facilities for public;".
3. On and from the 15th day of October, 1959, after section 3 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"3A. The ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains, which had
been declared as protected under the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 but
could not be declared protected under the Ancient and Historical Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Declaration of National Importance) Act, 1951 or
by section 126 of the States Reorganisations Act, 1956 to be of national importance,
but are still under the care and maintenance of the Central Government, shall be deemed
to be ancient monuments and historical monuments or archaeological sites and remains
as if declared to be of national importance for the purpose of the principal Act:
Provided such monuments and archaeological sites and remains have not been
declared protected by the States under the respective Acts."
4. On and from the 16th day of June, 1992, in section 4A of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Authority,
prescribe the ancient monuments or archaeological sites and remains, declared
to be of national importance as per sections 3 and 4 of the principal Act under
categories 1, 2 and 3, and while placing them under each of the categories it shall
have regard to the historical archaeological, architectural and artistic value and
such other factors as may be relevant for the purpose of such categorisation."
(ii) in sub-section (2) for the words 'on the recommendation of the Authority',
the words 'in consultation with the Authority' shall be substituted.
5. On and from the 15th day of October, 1959, after section 6 of the principal Act, the
following shall be inserted, namely:—
6A. (1) No person, including the owner or occupier or a protected monument,
not covered by any agreement signed between the Central Government and the owner
or occupier, shall construct any building within the protected monument or carry out
any mining, quarrying, excavating, blasting or levy any fee for entry into or any other
operation of a like nature in such area or utilize such area or part thereof in any other
manner without the permission of the Central Government.
Preservation
of protected
monument
not covered
under
agreement.
7 of 1904.
71 of 1951.
37 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
Amendment
of section
20A.
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct that any building constructed by
any person, including the owner or occupier, at the protected monument or part thereof in
contravention of sub-section ( 1) shall be removed within a specified period and, if the
person refuses or fails to comply with the order, the Collector may cause the building to be
removed and the person shall be liable to pay the cost of such removal.
(3) The Central Government may, by order, direct any person, including the owner or
occupier, who has indulged in any of the activities in contravention of sub-section ( 1) to
stop such activity forthwith and if he fails to comply with the order, the Collector may cause
such activity to be stopped.
6. On and from the 16th day of June, 1992, in section 20A of the principal Act, or
sub-section (1) the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Every area, beginning at the limit of the protected area or the protected
monument, as the case may be, and extending to a distance of one hundred meters in
all directions shall be prohibited area in respect of protected area or protected
monument categorized by the Central Government under Category-1.
(2) Every area, beginning at the limit of protected area or protected monument,
as the case may be, and extending to a distance of fifty meters in all directions shall be
the prohibited area in respect of protected site or protected monument categorized by
the Central Government under Category-2.
(3) Every area, begining at the limit of protected area or protected monuments,
as the case may be, and extending to a distance of twenty five meters in all directions
shall be the prohibited area in respect of protected site or protected monument
categorized by the Central Government under Category-3.
7. On and from the 16th day of June, 1992, in section 20B of the principal Act, after the
words in respect of every ancient monument and archaeological site and remains the words
irrespective of the category prescribed by the Central Government shall be inserted.
8. On and from the 16th day of June, 1992, in section 20E of the principal Act for
sub-section (1) the following shall be substitute, namely:—
“(1) The competent authority, in consultation with heritage experts or registered
expert heritage bodies, shall prepare heritage bye-laws in respect of each protected
monument and protected area”.
9. On and from the 16th day of June, 1992, in section 20F of the principal Act, the first
proviso of sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
10. On and from the 16th day of June, 1992, in section 20 I of the principal Act, in
sub-sections (a) and (b) for the words ‘make recommendations the words ‘provide assistance
and advice’ wherever they occurs shall be substituted.
11. On and from the 16th day of June, 1992, for section 20K of the principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(20K) On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or whole-time member of the
Authority, as the case may be, subject to the provisions of this Act, shall not accept
further employment (including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in any agency or
organisation of any nature mainly dealing with archaeology, country and town
planning, architecture, heritage and conservation-architecture or whose matters had
been before the Chairperson or such Member without the prior approval of the Central
Government and in all such cases the decision of the Central Government shall be
final and binding.”
12. In section 30 of the principal Act, in clause (1)—
(i) in sub-clause (i) after the word ‘imperils’ the words ‘encroaches, excavates
or constructs’ shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section
20B.
Amendment
of section
20E.
Amendment
of section
20F.
Amendment
of section
20 I.
Amendment
of section
20K.
Amendment
of section 30.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(ii) in sub-clause ( iv) after the words ‘does any act in contravention of’ the
words, bracket and figures ‘sub-section (1) of section 6A and’ shall be inserted.
13. In section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2) after the words ‘before the
commencement of this Act’ the words ‘or the ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains which could not be declared to be of national importance
due to oversight in the Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Declaration of National Importance) Act, 1951 or the Reorganisation Act, 1956
shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section 39.
71 of 1951.
37 of 1956.
5

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Parliament had enacted the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958 on 28th August, 1958 to provide for the preservation of ancient and
historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains of national importance, for the
regulation of archaeological excavations and for the protection of sculptures, carvings and
other like objects after repealing the Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Declaration of States Reorganisation) Act, 1951 and section 126 of the
State Reorganisation Act, 1956. Subsequently, the Parliament passed an Act to further
amend the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 on 29th
March, 2010 to define prohibited area and regulated area of the protected monuments and
archaeological sites, declared to be of national importance, imposing restrictions on modern
constructions in the defined prohibited area and regulated area and to make provision for
validation of certain actions taken by the Central Government.
As per section 2 (db) inserted by the amendment and validation Act of 2010, the
functions of the competent authority could be performed only by an officer of the rank of
Director or Commissioner of archaeology of the Central or State Government. This provision
has made the appointment of competent authority fairly complex since the Central Government
in most of the cases does not have in place officers of the rank of Director or Commissioner
of archaeology and under compulsion has no option than to nominate Director of archaeology
or Commissioner of the State Governments to perform the functions of competent authority.
Since the Directors of archaeology or Commissioners nominated as competent authority by
the Central Government are burdened with their own responsibilities the work of competent
authority suffers badly.
After the amendment and validation Act of 2010 came in to force the people having
built up properties in the prohibited area and regulated area of protected monuments
throughout the country are facing acute problem since they cannot undertake reconstruction
or additions and alterations of their houses located in the prohibited area because of
blanket prohibition imposed. The problem is common to urban as well as rural areas because
in a minimum area of 10.000 sq. m. of a protected monument (even if the area of protected
monument is assumed as naught) nobody can carry out any construction, except repairs,
irrespective of category or significance of an ancient monument or archaeological site,
declared protected, which vary from a grave, small tomb, a rock-sculpture to an ancient
monuments, as significant as Taj Mahal or Ajanta Caves or Red Fort. The Problem has
assumed gigantic proportion because sometimes the entire village of a locality is subsumed
within the prohibited area of the protected monument or archaeological site, irrespective of
its historical, archaeological or architectural value.
The amendment and validation Act of 2010 does contain a provision of categorization
of monuments, as per section 4A, to be undertaken on the basis of their historical,
archaeological and architectural value. But, the difficulty is that the minimum distance
prescribed for the prohibited area is one hundred meters where no construction activity
could be undertaken, even if the area is inhabited from a period much before the monument
was declared protected by the Central Government. The owners of the houses located in
the prohibited area may only carry out repairs and not any addition and alteration, expansion
or reconstruction even if the house has outlived its age and is likely to collapse anytime. In
hilly or undulating area, the problem is much more grave because for arriving at the prohibited
area, crow-fly distance from the monument is measured which in most of the cases covers
an entire village or town even though the monument and the house concerned are located
at different altitudes and the construction activity is not likely to affect the visibility of the
monument even remotely. Further, this prohibition on construction activities has badly
affected a large number of infrastructure projects relating to construction of roads, bridges,
fly-overs, laying of railway lines, over-bridges and under-bridges, under-passes expansion

6
of railway stations, river-front development, laying of open or piped drains along the rivers
to make them pollution free, etc. which are basically aimed to provide facilities to public.
There are a large number of monuments which had been protected originally under
the Ancient Monuments and Preservation Act, 1904 but due to oversight some of them
could not be brought under the ambit of the Ancient and Historical Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Declaration of National Importance) Act, 1951 and section
126 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956 irony is that many of such monuments are still
being maintained by the Central Government in view of their historical, archaeological and
artistic importance. But legally, these have lost the tag of ancient monument or archaeological
sites and remains of national importance as per section 3 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 since the Acts of 1904, 1951 and 1956 have
been repealed.
Section 6 of the Act of 1958 provides for agreement between the Central Government
and the owner or occupier of protected monument for maintenance including restrictions
on owner’s rights upon use, levying fee, construction, etc. But, the bare fact is that most of
the protected monuments are not covered under any agreement signed between the owner
or occupier and the Central Government. In such a situation, if the owner or occupier or
someone else encroaches upon, excavates or undertakes construction at the protected
monument there is no direct provision in the Act of 1958 under which action could be taken
by the Central Government, contrary to protected archaeological sites and remains. This is
a major reason why the removal of encroachments, stopping excavations or removal of
construction and alike activities at the protected monuments without the permission of
Central Government is difficult.
Section 20E of the amendment and validation Act of 2010 provides for preparation of
heritage bye-laws in consultation with Indian National Trust for Arts and Cultural Heritage
or other notified expert heritage bodies. But, this process is so cumbersome that the
Competent Authorities have not been able to prepare the heritage bye-laws of even a
handful of monuments and archaeological sites and remains even after a lapse of more than
seven years. The provision hence requires to be eased by authorizing the Competent
Authorities to seek consultation with heritage experts and expert heritage bodies, as per
convenience, to expedite the process of preparation of heritage bye-laws for each protected
monument and archaeological site and remains.
The provision under section 20F debarring the officials of Archaeological Survey of
India or Ministry of Culture of the Government of India or a State Government to be eligible
to hold the office of Chairperson or whole-time Members, who are otherwise well conversant
with the subject matter is unreasonable and discriminatory because their expertise and rich
experience cannot be availed.
Further, making the person(s) who has held the post of Chairperson or whole-time
Member of the Authority ineligible for five years from the date on which he ceases to hold
the office for further employment (including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in any
institution, agency or organization of any nature mainly dealing with archaeology, country
and town planning, architecture, heritage and conservation-architecture or whose matter
had been before the Chairperson or such member is not only discriminatory but a major
deterrent for attracting competent persons to hold the office of Chairperson or whole time
member because many of them may not wish to become ineligible for future employment as
consultant or expert in any institution, agency or organization of any nature dealing with
archaeology, country and town planning, architecture, heritage and conservation-
architecture for five years. The provision under the section has thus been proposed for
omission.
Hence this Bill. SAMBHAJI CHHATRAPATI

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill, if enacted, shall not cause any financial burden on the Consolidated Fund of
India since it would be possible to nominate the Superintending Archaeologists of the
Archaeological Survey of India under the Central Government as competent authorities,
already in place in each State.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
ACT, 1958
(24 OF 1958)
* * * * *
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(db) “competent authority” means an officer not below the rank of Director of
archaeology or Commissioner of archaeology of the Central or State Government or equivalent
rank, specified, by notification in the Official Gazette, as the competent authority by the
Central Government to perform functions under this Act:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify different competent authorities for the purpose of sections 20C, 20D and 20E;
(dc) “construction” means any erection of a structure or a building, including any
addition or extention thereto either vertically or horizontally, but does not include any
re-construction, repair and renovation of an existing structure or building, or, construction,
maintenance and cleansing of drains and drainage works and of public latrines, urinals and
similar conveniences, or, the construction and maintenance, of works meant for providing
supply of water for public, or, the construction or maintenance extension, management for
supply and distribution of electricity to the public or provision for similar facilities for public;]
* * * * *
[4A. Categorisation and classification in respect of ancient monuments or
archaeological sites and remains declared as of national importance under sections 3 and
4.—(1) The Central Government shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, prescribe
categories in respect of ancient monuments or archaeological sites and remains declared as
of national importance under sections 3 and 4, and while prescribing such categories it shall
have regard to the historical, archaeological and architectural value and such other factors
as may be relevant for the purpose of such categorisation.
(2) The Central Government shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, classify all
the ancient monuments or archaeological sites and remains declared as of national importance
under sections 3 and 4, in accordance with the categories prescribed under sub-section (1)
and thereafter make the same available to the public and exhibit the same on its website and
also in such other manner as it may deem fit.]
* * * * *
20A. Declaration of prohibited area and carrying out public work or other works in
prohibited area.— (1) Every area, beginning at the limit of the protected area or the protected
monument, as the case may be, and extending to a distance of one hundred metres in all
directions shall be the prohibited area in respect of such protected area or protected monument:
Provided that the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Authority,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify an area more than one hundred metres to be the
prohibited area having regard to the classification of any protected monument or protected
area, as the case may be, under section 4A.
* * * * *
8

9
[20B. Declaration of regulated area in respect of every protected monument.—
Every area, beginning at the limit of prohibited area in respect of every ancient monument
and archaeological site and remains, declared as of national importance under sections 3
and 4 and extending to a distance of two hundred metres in all directions shall be the
regulated area in respect of every ancient monument and archaeological site and remains:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify an area more than two hundred metres to be the regulated area having regard to the
classification of any protected monument or protected area, as the case may be, under
section 4A:
Provided further that any area near any protected monument or its adjoining area
declared, during the period beginnig on or after the 16th day of June, 1992 but ending before
the date on which the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2010, receives the assent of the President, as a regulated
area in respect of such protected monument, shall be deemed to be the regulated area
declared in respect of that protected monument in accordance with the provisions of this
Act and any permission or licence granted for construction in such regulated area shall, be
deemed, to have been validly granted in accordance with the provisions of this Act, as if
this section had been in force at all material times.]
* * * * *
20E. Heritage bye-laws.—(1) The competent authority, in consultation with Indian
National Trust for Arts and Cultural Heritage, being a trust registered under the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), or such other expert heritage bodies as may be notified by the
Central Government, shall prepare heritage bye-lays in respect of each protected monument
and protected area.
* * * * *
20-I. Functions and powers of Authority.—(1) The Authority shall exercise or discharge
the following powers or functions, namely:—
(a) make recommendations to the Central Government for grading and classifying
protected monuments and protected areas declared as of national importance under
sections 3 and 4, before the commencement of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010);
(b) make recommendatins to the Central Government for grading and classifyng
protected monuments and protected areas which may be declared after the
commencement of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), as of national importance under
section 4;
(c) oversee the working of the competent authorities;
(d) to suggest measures for implementation of the privisions of this Act;
(e) to consider the impact of large-scale developmental projects, including public
projects and projects essential to the public which may be proposed in the regulated
areas and make recommendations in respect thereof to the competent authority;
(f) to make recommendations to the competent authority for grant of permission.
(2) The Authority shall, for the purpose of discharging functions under this Act, have
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(5 of 1908) while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examing him
on oath;

10
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.
* * * * *
20K. Restriction on future employment by Chairperson and members.—On ceasing
to hold office, the Chairperson or whole-time member of the Authority, as the case may be,
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be ineligible, for a period of five years from the
date on which they cease to hold office, for further employment (including as consultant or
expert or otherwise) in any institution, agency or organisation of any nature mainly dealing
with archaeology, country and town planning, architecture, heritage and conservation-
architecture or whose matters had been before the Chairperson or such member.
* * * * *
30. Penalties.—(1) Whoever—
(i) destroys, removes, injures, alters, defaces, imperils or misuses a protected
monument, or
* * * * *
(iv) does any act in contravention of sub-section ( 1) of section 19,
shall be puishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with
[imprisonment which may extend to two years], or with [fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees], or with both.
* * * * *
39. Repeals and Savings.— The Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 (7 of
1904), shall cease to have effect in relation to ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains declared by or under this Act to be of national importance,
except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the commencement of this Act.

MGIPMRND—901RS(S3)—23-07-2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
Act, 1958
————
(Shri  Sambhaji Chhatrapati,  M.P .)