THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In Section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956 thereinafter referred to as the principal Act,
after clause (19AA) the following clause shall be inserted, namely,—
19AAA. “Independent Director” means an Independent Director as defined in
section 255A.
3. After section 255 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely,—
255A. “Independent Director”, in relation to a company, means a non-executive
director of the company, other than a nominee director,—
Bill No. XI  of  2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 31ST JULY, 2009
Amendment of
section 2.
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
255A.
5
10

2
(a) who, in the opinion of the Board, is a person of integrity and possesses
relevant expertise and experience;
(b) who, neither himself nor any of his relatives—
(i) has or had any pecuniary relationship or transaction with the
company, its holding, subsidiary or associate company, or its promoters,
or directors amounting to ten per cent or more of its gross turnover or
total income during the two immediately preceding financial years or
during the current financial year;
(ii) holds or has held any senior management position, position of a
key managerial personnel or is or had been employee of the company in
any of the three financial years immediately preceding the financial year in
which he is proposed to be appointed;
(iii) is or has been an employee or a partner, in any of the three
financial years immediately preceding the financial year in which he is
proposed to be appointed, of—
(A) a firm of auditors or company secretaries in practice or
cost auditors of the company or its holding, subsidiary or associate
company,
or
(B) any legal or a consulting firm that has or had any
transaction with the company, its holding, subsidiary or associate
company amounting to ten per cent or more of the gross turnover of
such firm;
(iv) holds together with his relatives two per cent or more of the total
voting power of the company; or
(v) is a Chief Executive or director, by whatever name called, of any
non-profit organization that receives twenty-five per cent or more of its
income from the company, any of its promoters, directors or its holding,
subsidiary or associate company or that holds two per cent or more of the
total voting power of the company; or
(c) who possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed.
Explanation—For the purposes of this section, "nominee director" means a
director nominated by any institution in pursuance of the provisions of any law for the
time being in force, or of any agreement or appointed by any Government, to represent
its shareholding.
4. After section 312 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be inserted namely,—
312A.  (i) Notwithstanding anything to the country contained in this act or in
any other Law for the time being in force, any Independent Director on the Board of
Directors of a Public Limited Company shall not be liable or punishable for any act or
omission by the Company or any officer of the Company which constitutes a breach or
violation of any of the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force.
(ii) No arrest warrant shall be issued against an Independent Director without
authorization by a judge of the rank of the District Judge, who shall give to the
Independent Director an opportunity of being heard before issuing such authorization.
Provided that the aforesaid provisions in this Section shall not apply if such
Independent Director was directly involved in or responsible for such breach or violation
or such breach or violation had been committed with this knowledge or consent or he
was guilty of gross or wilful negligence or fraud in relation thereto.
Insertion of
new section
312A.
Protection to
Independent
Directors
from criminal
liability.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In view of recent developments in Corporate Sector the role of independent Directors
has assumed importance.
It is also observed that non executive independent Directors are often harassed for the
wrong doings of the full time Executive Directors who are hands on with the day to day
administration of the Companies. It has therefore become necessary to immediately make the
provisions in the existing Companies Act to effectively protect the interest of the community
of independent Directors in the larger interest of healthy growth of Corporate Governance in
the corporate Sector. In the absence of such provisions it will be very difficult for the
Corporate Sector to attract eminent persons with professional knowledge and unquestionable
integrity to be independent Directors on their Board.
In view of this it has been considered necessary to amend the Companies Act, 1956 by
inserting a definition of independent Director at appropriate places in the Companies Act,
1956 and by inserting a new Section providing protection to independent Directors in respect
of any act or omissions by the Company or any of its officers which constitutes a breach or
violation of any of the provisions of the Companies Act or any other law.
Hence this Bill.
Y.  P.  TRIVEDI
3

RAJY A   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956.
—————
(Shri Y.P . Trivedi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3550RS(S5)—31.07.2009.