1
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4896RS.PM5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2002
A
BILL
further to amend the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition)
Amendment Act, 2002.
(2) It  shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970
(hereinafter referred to as principal  Act), for clause (a) the following clause be substituted,
namely:—
‘(a) “appropriate government” means the Government of the State  or of the Union
Territory, as the case may be, in whose territorial jurisdiction an establishment is situated.’
3. In section  10 of the principal Act, after the  Explanation  the following proviso
shall be added, namely:—
“Provided that where the appropriate Government decides that the process, operation
of other work in an establishment is of perennial nature, the contract labour employed for
such work shall be given regular employment for such perennial work in the concerned
establishment.”
Bill No.  XI of  2002
Amendment of
Section 2.
Amendment of
Section 10.
Short  Title and
Commencement.
37 of 1970.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been provided  in the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970
that in case of establishments of Central Government, the appropriate Government will be
the Central Government and in case of all other establishments, the Government of
the State will be the appropriate Government. Especially after the judgment of Airport
Authority Case, Bombay, the Labour Department has issued a circular that the
Administrative Department should be treated as appropriate Government unless until the
Act is amended. The Central Government is to be considered as appropriate Government
for the purpose of Contract Labour issues. It is totally impracticable.The Central
Government does not have the infrastructure to solve all the matters.  It  results in
unnecessary delay in the matters of contract labour and their welfare. The State Governments
have all the infrastructure such as Labour Commissioners etc. in their respective territories.
Hence it will be in the fitness of things if the State Governments may be treated as
appropriate Government in the case of all the establishments.
Similarly, though Section 10 of the Act provides for prohibition of employment of
contract labour in an establishment where the work is of perennial and permanent nature
and is of sufficient duration, yet it fails to ensure regular employment to the workmen
employed for the purpose. Regular employment should be given to the same workmen in
that establishment in case the contract work of that establishment is abolished.
The Bill proposing amendments in the Sections 2 & 10 of the Act seeks  to achieve
the aforesaid objectives.
RAMA CHANDRA KHUNTIA
2
2

3
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4896RS.PM5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION)
ACT, 1970 (NO. 37 OF 1970)
————
* * *
2. Definitions
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
1[(a)  “appropriate government” means—
(i) in relation to an establishment in respect of which the appropriate
government under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), is the
Central Government, the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to any other establishement, the Government of the State in
which that other establishement is situate;]
* * * *
10. Prohibition of employment of contract labour
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the appropriate government
may, after consultation with the Central Board or, as the case may be, a State Board,
prohibit, by notification in the Official Gazette, employment of  contract labour in any
process, operation or other work in any establishment.
(2) Before issuing any notification under sub-section (1) in relation to an
establishment, the appropriate government shall have regard to the conditions of work
and benefits provided for the contract labour in that establishment and other relevant
factors, such as—  
(a) whether the process, operation or other work is incidental to, or necessary for
the industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation that is carried on in
the establishment;
(b) whether it is of perennial nature, that it is to say, it is of sufficient duration
having  regard the nature of industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupa-
tion carried on in that establishment;
(c) whether it is done ordinarily through regular workmen in that establishment
or an establishment similar thereto;
(d) whether it is sufficient to employ considerable number of whole-time workmen.
Explanation: If a question arises whether any process or operation or other work is
of perennial nature, the decision of the appropriate government thereon shall be final.
* * *

4
G:\BILL 2002\RS\4896RS.PM5
MGIP(PLU)MRND—4896RS—18-2-2002
RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
(Shri Ramachandra Khuntia, M.P.)