1
THE DOMESTIC WORKERS (REGULATION OF WORK AND SOCIAL
SECURITY)  BILL, 2017
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent, application  and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Act not in derogation of other laws.
CHAPTER II
REGISTRATION
4. Registration of domestic workers.
5. Compulsory registration of Service Provider.
6. Compulsory registration of Employer.
7. Compulsory Duty to Register.
8. Registration of part time domestic workers.
9. Migrant worker.
10. Effect of non-Registration
11. Effect of non-payment of Annual Contribution.
12. Renewal of Registration Certificate.
13. Effect of non-renewal.
14. Beneficiaries of the Fund.
15. Identity cards.
16. Maintenance and digitisation of records
CHAPTER III
I
MPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT
17. Central Advisory Committee.
18. Functions of the Central Committee.
19. Constitution of State Social Security Boards.
20. Secretary and other Officers of State Boards.
21. Meeting of State Boards.
22. Proceedings of the State Board to be valid.
23. Functions of the State Board.
24. Grants and loans by the Central Government.
25. Budget.
26. Annual Report.
Bill No. XI of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH APRIL, 2017

27. Accounts and Audit.
28. District Social Security Board.
29. Functions of the District Board.
30. Powers of the District Board.
31. Disqualification and removal of Member of the District Boards
32. Resignation from Office by Member.
33. Proceedings presumed to be good and valid.
34. Secretary and other Officers of the District Board.
35. Dissolution of the District Board.
36. Employment of a Child.
CHAPTER IV
E
STABLISHMENT OF FUND
37. Domestic workers social security fund.
38. Contribution of domestic workers and Employers.
39. Effect of non-payment of contribution.
CHAPTER V
R
EGULATION OF THE WORKING CONDITIONS
40. Duties of the employer and service provider.
41. Basic Amenities.
42. Accommodation for live in Domestic Workers.
43. Payment of wages.
44. Termination from employment.
45. Leave.
46. Employee State Insurance.
47. Crimes.
48. No discrimination at place of work.
49. Minimum wages.
CHAPTER VI
G
RIEV ANCE REDRESSAL AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION
50. Grievance redressal mechanism.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
51. Offences and penalties.
52. Complaint mechanism.
53. Emergency aid, medium term assistance and legal aid.
54. Court not to take cognizance of any offence punishable.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
55. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act.
56. Supersession of State Board.
(ii)
CLAUSES

(iii)
57. Power to remove difficulties.
58. Accounts and Audit.
59. Power to make rules.
60. Application of other Acts.
61. Power to make rules by the appropriate Government.
C
LAUSES

THE DOMESTIC WORKERS (REGULATION OF WORK AND
SOCIAL SECURITY) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of work of Domestic Workers in order to improve their working
conditions and to provide social security to them, for setting up of State and
District Boards for the purpose and for compulsory registration of Domestic
Workers, employers and service providers to such Boards and also for setting
up of Domestic Workers Social Security Fund and matter connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Domestic Workers (Regulation of Work and Social
Security) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir.
(3) It shall not apply to domestic workers migrating for employment to any other
country.
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
extent,
application
and
commencement.
Bill No. XI of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH APRIL, 2017
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the concerned State
Government and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “beneficiaries” means every domestic worker registered as a beneficiary
under this Act;
(c) “child” means a person who has not completed eighteen years of age;
(d) “Central Advisory Committee” means the Central Advisory Committee
constituted by the Central Government under section 17 of the Act;
(e) “District Board” means the District Domestic Workers Regulation of Work
and Social Security Board established under section 28 of the Act;
(f) “Domestic Work” means work performed in or for a household or households;
(g) “Domestic Worker” means any person engaged in domestic work within the
employment relationship;
and shall include:
replacement worker who is working as a replacement for the domestic
worker for a short and specific period of time as agreed with the domestic worker
and the employer.
“Full Time Worker” means a person who is employed as a domestic worker
in a single household for working hours as specified in section 40 (4);
“Live-in-Worker” means a person employed as a domestic worker who
lives in the employer’s premises;
“Part Time Worker” means a person who is employed as a domestic worker
for less than prescribed daily working hours of that of a full time workers, whether
employed in single or multiple households.
(h) Domestic Worker’s Social Security Fund means the fund established under
section 37 of the Act;
(i) “discrimination” means any form of differential treatment on the basis of
caste, race, region, language, colour, sex, creed and religion, nature of work or age at
the place of work;
(j) “employer” means any person who engages the domestic worker to do any
work in a household whether part time or full time either directly or through service
provider and who has an ultimate control over the affairs of the household which
includes any other person to whom such affairs of the household are entrusted and in
relation to contract labour, the principal employer;
(k) “employment agreement” means an agreement that lays down conditions of
employment between the employer and domestic worker;
(l) “forced labour” means compelling a person to offer his services as a domestic
worker against his will;
(m) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under the Act by the
appropriate Government.
(o) “service provider” means any voluntary association or placement agency or
company registered under any law for the time being in force, which espouses the
cause of domestic workers or provides or engages them in employment with the principal
employer but excludes those collectives or cooperatives that are created by the workers
themselves as a means of collective bargaining;
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Explanation.— “Placement Agency” means any agency, bureau, contractor or
person(s) registered under this Act which provides or engages in employment of
domestic workers or which facilitates the placement of domestic help for prospective
employers and includes such agency or person offering services through any print,
electronic or any form of communication.
(p) “State Board” means the State Social Security Board established under section
19 of this Act;
(q) “trafficking” means to recruit, transport, transfer, harbour, or receive a person
by means of abuse of power or taking advantage of his position of vulnerability by
threat or use of force or coercion, abduction, fraud, deception; and that includes
giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of such person
having control over another person;
(r) “workplace” means any houshold or a place where a domestic worker works
as per the terms of the employment agreement;
(s) “wages” means all emoluments which are earned by an employee while on
duty or on leave in accordance with the terms and conditions of his employment and
which are paid or are payable to him in cash and includes dearness allowance but does
not include any bonus, commission, house rent allowance, overtime wages and any
other allowance.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law, for the time being in force.
CHAPTER II
R
EGISTRATION
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, all
domestic workers shall be registered as per procedure here in after prescribed.
(2) An application for registration shall be made in such form, as may be prescribed, to
the District Board in this behalf.
(3) Every application under sub-section (2) shall be accompanied by such documents
together with such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) If the District Board is satisfied that the applicant has complied with the provisions
of this Act and the rules made there-under, it shall register the name of the domestic worker
as a domestic worker under this Act:
Provided that an application for registration shall not be rejected without giving the
applicant an opportunity of being heard and without assigning reasons in writing.
(5) Any person aggrieved by the decision under sub-section ( 4) may, within thirty
days from the date of such decision, prefer an appeal to the State Board and the decision of
the State Board on such appeal shall be final:
Provided that the State Board in this behalf may entertain the appeal after the expiry of
the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the domestic worker was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
5. Every service provider shall prior to the process of recruitment or engagement of
domestic worker register itself with the district Board by submitting an application along
with prescribed fee, and providing such details as may be prescribed:
Provided that the District Board  or any such person so authorized by it may entertain
any such application for registration after expiry of the period fixed in this behalf, if he is
satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for delay in making the application.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Registration
of Domestic
Workers.
Compulsory
Registration
of Service
Provider.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
6. Every employer, within one month of the commencement of the employment of a
domestic worker, shall submit to the District Board an application along with prescribed fee,
and providing such details as may be prescribed:
Provided that the district Board or any such person so authorized by it may entertain
any such application for registration after expiry of the priod fixed in this behalf, if he is
satisfied that the applicant had sufficient reason for the delay in making the application in
time.
7. (1) Wherever a domestic worker undertakes work through a service provider, it shall
be the duty of such service provider to get the domestic worker registered within one month
from the commencement of the work, with the District Board by making an application along
with prescribed fee and providing such details as may be prescribed.
(2) Where a domestic worker undertakes work under a single employer and is not
engaged through any service provider, then it shall be the duty of such employer to ensure
that the domestic worker is registered with the district Board within one month from the
commencement of the work :
Provided that the District Board  or any such person so authorized by if may entertain
any such application for registration after expiry of the period fixed in this behalf, if he is
satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for delay in making the application.
8. Where a domestic worker undertakes part-time work in two or more households and
is not engaged through any placement agency, the employer shall ensure that the domestic
worker is registered with the District Board and the prescribed fees is paid.
9. Where a domestic worker leaves the work in a District and moves to any other area
in any part of the territory of India and takes up work in any household in such part either on
his own or through any agency or employee, it shall be the duty of such worker or agency or
middleman respectively, to inform the concerned Board where so registered regarding the
move and register with the District Board at the place where work has been taken up.
10. (1) No employer/service provider shall employ a domestic worker unless a certificate
of registration in respect of such employment is issued by the respective District Board or
government servant so authorized.
(2) If the District Board or any government servant so authorized by it is satisfied,
either on a reference made to it in this behalf or otherwise that the service provider or
employer has failed to register, then the penalties prescribed under this act shall apply.
11. In case of failure to pay annual contribution to the District Board, the worker
ceases to be beneficiary under the Act.
12. A registration certificate shall be renewed at an interval of one year, on the payment
of fee as may be prescribed.
13. (1) No employer to which this Act applies shall employ domestic worker unless the
renewal of registration certificate is carried out by him in respect of such employment as
issued under this Act. (2) If the District Board or any person authorized by it is satisfied,
either on a reference made to it in this hehalf or otherwise that the service provider or
employer has failed to carry out the renewal of registration certificate, then the penalties
prescribed under section 51(1) of this Act shall apply for non-renewal.
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every domestic worker above the age of
eighteen years, registered under this Act shall be entitled to the benefits provided by the
Board from its Fund under this Act.
(2) Every domestic worker above the age of sixty years shall continue to be beneficiary
under this Act, however, shall not pay annual contribution to the Fund.
Compulsory
Registration
of Employer.
Compulsory
Duty to
Register.
Registration
of part-time
Domestic
Worker.
Migrant
Worker.
Effect of
non-
Registration.
Effect of
non-payment
of annual
contribution.
Renewal of
registration
certificate.
Effect of
non-renewal.
Beneficiaries
of the Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
15. (1) The District Board shall give to every beneficiary an identity card with his
photograph duly affixed.
(2) A beneficiary who has been issued an identity card under this Act. shall produce
the same whenever demanded by any officer of Government or the District Board, or any
other authority for inspection.
16. The District Board shall maintain records or register of all its records duly catalogued
and indexed in a manner and in prescribed form and shall ensure that all records are
computerized within a reasonable time. The digitisation of the records shall be introduced
through software established by the Central Government and databases available with the
District Boards should be connected through a network all over the country on different
systems so that access to such records is facilitated:
Provided further that it shall be the duty of the District Board to submit the computerized
records to the Central Advisory Committee under this Act within reasonable time.
CHAPTER III
I
MPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT
17. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee to be called the Central
Advisory Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Central Committee) to advise the Central
Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be referred
to it and to carry out other functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The tenure of the Committee shall be three years and proportionate representation
shall be ensured from Government, Civil Society Organizations/Trade Unions, Domestic
Workers and employers.
(3) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) such number of members, as the Central Government may nominate that
shall include association, Union or persons representing and espousing the cause
of domestic workers, individuals having expertise in issues relating to labour matters,
women and child issues, law and any other interests which in the opinion of the
Central Government, ou ght to be represented on the Committee. State & Union
Territory Representation:
Provided that the Committee shall consist of at least eight members excluding the
Chairperson.
(4) The number of persons to be appointed as members from the categories specified
in sub-section (2), the term of officer and other conditions of service, the procedure to be
followed in the discharge of their functions and the manner of filling up of vacancies shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(5) The members of the Central Committee shall meet once every six months to review
the working of the Act.
18. (1) The Central Committee shall perform the following functions:
(a) To review and monitor implementation of the Act and rules made thereunder
and recommend to the Central Government and State Govts./Union Territories any
changes in the said Act and rules and shall prepare an annual report of the administration
of the Act.
(b) Review and monitor the implementation of the Act in all the States & Union
Territories.
Identity
cards.
Maintenance
and
Digitisation
of records.
Central
Advisory
Committee.
Functions of
the Central
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(c) Advise the State Boards regarding schemes in relation to social security,
health, medical, education and other beneficial schemes for the welfare of Domestic
Workers and their family members.
(d) Advise upon such matters arising out of the administration of this Act or any
scheme made under this Act or relating to the application of the provisions of this Act
to all Domestic Workers and Employers, and co-ordination and monitoring of the work
of various Boards to ensure portability of registration and delivery of benefits across
the country.
(e) Prescribe minimum standards to achieve decent conditions of work in
consultation with State Boards.
(f) Recommend appropriate strategies on eleimination of any form of trafficking/
forced/bonded labour and child labour.
(g) Any other matter prescribed by the Central Government.
19. (1) Every appropriate Government shall, with effect from such date as it may, by
notification  appoint, constitute a Board to be known as the State of UT Domestic Worker
Regulation of Work and Social Security Board to exercise the powers conferred on, and
perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.
(2) The State Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The State Board shall consist of a Chairperson, a person to be nominated by the
Central Government and such number of other members, not exceeding fifteen, as may be
appointed to it by the appropriate Government:
Provided that the State Board shall include an equal number of members representing
the State Government, the employers and the Domestic Workers and that at least one-third
members of the Board shall be women.
(4) The terms and conditions of appointment and the salaries and other allowances
payable to the Chairperson and other members of the State Board, and the manner of filling
of casual vacancies of the members of the State Boards, shall be such as may be prescribed.
20. (1) The State Board shall appoint a Secretary and such other officers and employees
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The Secretary of the State Board shall be its chief executive officer.
(3) The terms and conditions of appointment and the salary and allowances payable to
the Secretary and the other officers and employees of the State Board shall be such as may
be prescribed.
21. (1) The State Board shall meet at such time and place and observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at
such meetings) as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the State
Board, any member nominated by the Chairperson in this behalf and in the absence of such
nomination, any other member elected by the members present from amongst themselves at
the meetings, shall preside over the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the State Board shall be
decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of
equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the person presiding, shall have a
second or a casting vote.
Constitution
of State
Social
Security
Boards.
Secretary and
other officers
of State
Boards.
Meetings of
State Boards.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
22. No act or proceedings of a State Board shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the State Board; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the State Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Board not affecting the merits of the
case.
23. (1) The State Board Shall—
(i) with the previous approval of the appropriate Government, make regulations
consistent with this Act and the rules made there under for all or any of the matters to
be provided under this Act.
(ii) review and monitor the District Boards constituted for the State and take
appropriate steps to ensure its proper and effective implementation;
(iii) allocate funds to the District Board and administer the State Domestic
Workers Welfare Fund and allocate such amounts to District Boards as may be
considered necessary;
(iv) prescribe the fees to be charge from the employers, service providers/
placement agencies and domestic workers from time to time;
(v) prescribe fee for registration as beneficiaries under the Fund and rate per
mensem for the beneficiearies of the fund;
(vi) implement such schemes and welfare measures as formulated in consultation
with the Central Committee;
(vii)  prescribe the form of resiter to be maintained for registration of domestic
workers under the fund;
(viii) procedure for renewal of registration certificate;
(ix) entertain appeals with respect to any decision by the District Board;
(x) ensure decent conditions of service, including rates of remuneration, hours
of work and conditions;
(xi) provide immediate assistance to a beneficiery in case of accident;
(xii) make payment of pension to the beneficiaries who have completed the age
fo sixty years;
(xiii) sanction loans and advances to a beneficiary for construction of a house
not exceeding such amount and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed;
(xiv) pay such amount in connection with premium for Group Insurance Scheme
of the beneficiaries as it may deem fit;
(xv) give such financial assistance for the education of children of the
beneficiaries as may be prescribed;
(xvi) meet such medical expenses for treatment of major ailments of a beneficiary
or, such dependant, as may be prescribed;
(xvii) make payment of maternity benefit to the female beneficiaries; and
(xviii) make provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and
facilities as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board may grant loan or subsidy to a local authority or an employer in aid of
any scheme approved by the appropriate government for the purpose connected with the
welfare of  domestic workers in any establishment.
Proceedings
of the State
Boards to be
valid.
Functions of
the State
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(3) The Board shall pay annually grants-in-aid to a local authority or to an employer
who provides to the satisfaction of the Board welfare measures and facilities of the standard
specified by the Board for the benefit of the domestic workers and the member of their family.
However, the amount payable as grants-in-aid to any local authority or employer shall not
exceed,—
(a) the amount spent in providing welfare measures and facilities as determined
by the appropriate Government or any person specified by it in this behalf, or
(b) such amount as may be prescribed, whichever is less:
Provided that no grant-in-aid shall be payable in respect of any such welfare measures
and facilities where the amount spent thereon determined as aforesaid is less than the
amount prescribed in this behalf.
24. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, make to a state board grants and loans of such sums of money as the Government
may consider necessary.
25. The State Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure
of the Board and forward the same to the State Government and the Central Government.
26. The State Board  shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year as
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the State Government and the Central Government.
27. (1) The State Board shall maintain proper accounts and othe revelant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by
him in connection with the auditing of the accounts of the State Board under this Act shall
have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptoller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the auditing of the Government
accounts and, in particular shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of
the State Board under this Act.
(3) The accounts of the State Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall
be payable by the State Board to the Comproller and Auditor-General of India.
(4) The States Board shall furnish to the appropriate Government before such date as
may be prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with the auditor's report.
(5) The State Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid,
as soon as may be after they are received, before the State Legislature.
28. (1) The appropriate Government may for the purposes of preparation and
implementation of the schemes for welfare of domestic workers, in a District, by notification
in the Official Gazette, establish such number of Boards to be known as "District Domestic
Workers regulation of work and Social Security Board:
Provided that, the State Government may constitute such District Board for two or
more Districts:
Provided further that, the State Government may, by like notification, also constitute
more than one Board for a District and specify the local limits in which such Boards shall
have jurisdiction or authorize any existing Board under any other law dealing with labour
related matters.
Grants and
loans by the
Central
Government.
Budget.
Annual
Report.
Accounts and
Audit.
Establishment
of District
Social
Security
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(2) The District Board shall consist of members nominated, from time to time, by the
State Government representing the employers, the domestic workers and the State
Government.
(3) The members representing employers and domestic workers shall be equal in number,
and the members representing the State Government shall not exceed one-third of the total
number of members representing employers and Domestic Workers.
(4) The Chairperson of the District Board shall be one of the members appointed to
represent the State Government, nominated in this behalf by the State Government.
(5) The term of office of members of the District Board shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(6) Every member shall be paid (not being a member representing the State Government)
from the fund of the District Board; traveling and daily allowances for attending meetings of
the District Board at such rates as may be prescribed.
(7) The members of the District Board shall meet once every four months to review the
operation of the Act and evaluate the implementation of the Act.
(8) The meetings of the District Board and the procedure to be followed for the purpose
and all matters supplementary or ancillary thereto shall be such as may be laid down by the
regulations.
29. (1) The District Boards shall perform the following functions—
(a) to carry out or cause to carry out the registration of domestic workers,
employers, service providers and placement agency as per the procedure prescribed
under the Act in the name and Account of State Board either directly or through the
Workers Facilitation Centres and maintain records and registration of domestic workers
as beneficiaries under the Act;
(b) to collect cess in the name and account of the State Board from service
providers and employers at the time of registration as prescribed;
(c) to grant following benefits to beneficiaries which they are entitled to under
the Act:—
(i) provision for immediate assistance and rehabilitation to a beneficiary in
case of an accident arising in the course of employment;
(ii) financial assistance for the education of beneficiary and his/her children;
(iii) provision for medical expenses for treatment of ailments of a
beneficiary or his/her such dependent;
(iv) provision for maternity/paternity benefit to the women/men
beneficiaries:
Provided that, such maternity/paternity benefit shall be restricted to two
children only;
(v) make payment of funeral expenses to the legal heir on the death of the
beneficiary;
(vi) facilitate the settlement of disputes through conciliation;
(vii) renewal of registraton certificate and collection of annual contribution;
(viii) issue of identity card for the beneficiary;
(ix) disseminate information on available social security schemes for the
Workers;
Functions of
District
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(x) authorize the Workers Facilitation Centre to act as an authorized
intermediary in collecting contributions from the workers and others as mandated
under the Act and remit them to the District Board;
(xi) authorize Workers Facilitation Centre to carry out surprise visits to the
working place of the Domestic Workers and check the implementation of the
Act;
(xii) training and imparting skills to the domestic workers;
(xiii) authorize the Workers Facilitation Centre to conduct surveys for
beneficiaries;
(xiv) provide legal aid to beneficiaries in case of a court proceeding to
address their claims;
(xv) implement any schemes or any welfare measures framed by the State
Boards;
(xvi) maintain complaint registers for grievance redressal of Domestic
Workers;
(xvii) board shall also establish or devise establishment of creche facilities
for children of  domestic workers;
(xviii) such other benefits as may be decided by the District Board, from
time to time.
(d) The District Board in consultation with the State Board may make available
such schemes as applicable under other laws such as the Unorganized Workers Social
Security Act, 2008.
(2) The District Board shall designate any one or more of the following at such areas as
may be considered necessary, as Workers' Facilitation Centres (WFC) for purposes of
facilitating registration of workers:
(i) Local Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI) or urban local bodies;
(ii) Resident Welfare Associations/Society;
(iii) Non-profit organizations working among the Domestic Workers:
Provided further that such Workers' Facilitation Centers (WFC) shall function under
the supervision of the District Board.
(3) The District Board shall maintain such registers and records giving such particulars
of domestic workers employed, the nature of work performed by the domestic worker, and
such other particulars in such form as may be prescribed.
(4) The District Board may implement any welfare schemes under any other law with
prior approval of the appropriate Government.
(5) Upon request of the aggrieved Domestic Worker, the Board shall admit them into
rehabilitation homes of the Government.
30. (1) Subject to any rules made by the State Government in this behalf, the District
Board may, within the local limits:—
(a) make such examination and hold such inquiry as may be necessary for
ascertaining whether the provisions of this Act have been or are being complied within
any place or premises;
(b) require the production of any document, record or evidence (written or oral);
(c) enter, any place or premises with such assistance as it may consider necessary,
at all times if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that any domestic worker
Powers of the
District
Board.
Act 33 of
2008
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
has or is being subjected to any form of sexual exploitation or wrongfully confined in
any such place or premises or rescue any child being as a domestic worker.
(2) Every employer shall accord to the District Board, all reasonable facilities in the
discharge of his duties under this Act.
(3) Each District Board shall have the same powers as are vested in civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when adjudicating a dispute in respect of the following
matters, namely—
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;
(d) in respect of such other matters as may be prescribed.
31. (1) No person shall be chosen as, or continue to be, a member of the Board who,
(a) is a salaried officer of the District Board;
(b) is or at any time has been adjudged insolvent;
(c) is found to be a lunatic or has become of unsound mind; or
(d) is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude.
(2) The State Government may remove from office any member, who
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in sub-
section (1); or
(b) is absent without leave of the District Board for more than three consecutive
meetings of the Board;
(c) in the opinion of the Government, has so abused the position of member as to
render that person's continuation in the office detrimental to the public interest or is
otherwise unfit or unsuitable to continue as such member:
Provided that, no person shall be removed under clause (c), unless person has been
given a reasonable opportunity to show cause as to why he should not be removed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, the
members shall hold office during the pleasure of the State Government and if in the opinion
of the State Government.
(a) the member representing employers and the domestic workers, ceases to
adequately represent the employers or, as the case may be, the domestic workers, or
(b) having regard to exigencies of circumstances or services in the State
Government, the member representing the State Government cannot continue to
represent the State Government,
then it may, by an order, remove all any of them from office at any time.
32. Any member of the District Board may at any time resign his office by writing under
his hand addressed to the State Government, and his office shall, on acceptance of the
resignation, become vacant.
33. No act or proceeding of the District Board shall be questioned or invalidated
merely by reason of any vacancy in its membership or by reason of any defect in the
constitution thereof.
34. (1) The Board shall, with the approval of the State Government, appoint a full time
Secretary and such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient
discharge of its functions under this Act.
Disqualification
and removal
of member of
the District
Boards.
Registration
from office
by member.
Proceedings
presumed to
be good and
valid.
Secretary and
other officers
of the District
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Act of 1908.

12
(2) The Secretary of the District Board shall be its Chief Executive Officer.
(3) The functions, terms and conditions of appointment and the salary and allowances
payable to the secretary and other officers and employees of the District Board shall be such
as may be laid down, from time to time, by regulations.
35. (1) In the case of complaints relating to non-functioning of the District Board, a
complaint shall be filed with the State Board.
(2) The State Board shall conduct an enquiry and if found, the complaint to be true and
as the District Board dysfunctional shall dissolve the District Board.
(3) Upon dissolution of a District Board, new Board shall be constituted within fifteen
days.
36. No child shall be employed as a Domestic Workers or for any such incidental or
ancillary work which is prohibited under any law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER IV
E
STABLISHMENT OF FUND
37. (1) There shall be formed a Fund, to be called the Domestic Workers Social Security
Fund, and credited thereto—
(a) one percent of House Tax collected by the Local bodies as contribution to
wards Social Security Funds of Domestic Workers every month.
(b) Employers' contribution collected by the District Boards in the name and
Account of the State Board as annual registration fee under section 6.
(c) any grants made to the Fund by the Central Government and State Government
or any other person or organisation;
(d) any amount received by the District Board in the name and Account of State
Board from the beneficiaries as registration fees/workers contribution under section 8.
(e) all amount from the District Boards received as registration and other fees of
domestic workers, Empoyers and Service providers.
(f) any income from investment from Nationalized Bank of the amounts in the Fund.
(g) share from GDP and state revenue;
(h) all fines collected.
(i) all other sums received by the District Board from any other sources.
(2) The Fund allocated by the State Board to a District Board shall be administered and
applied by the District Board to meet the expenditure incurred in connection with measures
and facilities which are necessary or expedient to promote the welfare and social security of
Domestic Workers;
(i) to defray the cost of such welfare measures or facilities for the benefit  of
Domestic Workers/beneficiaries as may be decided by the State Board.
(ii) to sanction any money in aid of any scheme for the welfare of the Domestic
Workers including family welfare. family planning, education, insurance and other
welfare measures;
38. A domestic worker or Employer who has been registered as a beneficiary under this
Act shall, until he attains the age of sixty years, contribute to the Fund at such rate per
mensem, as may be specified:
Provided that the District Board may, if satisfied that a beneficiary is unable to pay his
contribution due to any financial hardship, waive the payment of contribution for a period
not exceeding three months at a time.
Dissolution of
the District
Board.
Employment
of a child.
Domestic
Workers
Social
Security Fund.
Contribution
of Domestic
Workers and
Employers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
39. When a beneficiary has not paid his contribution under sub-section (1) of section 37
for a continuous period of not less than one year, he shall cease to be a beneficiary, but he
will continue to be a member:
Provided that if the District Board is satisfied that the non-payment of contribution was for a
reasonable ground and that the domestic worker is willing to deposit the arrears, he may allow the
domestic workers to deposit the contribution in arrears and on such deposit being made, the registration
or entitlement to receive benefits of domestic workers shall stand restored.
CHAPTER V
R
EGULATION OF THE WORKING CONDITIONS
40. (1) Every employer and service provider shall provide such particulars of the
domestic workers engaged directly or through agency, to the District Board or any person so
authorized by it, in such form and on paying such fees as may be prescribed.
(2) No service provider or a person/agency shall carry on the business of providing
services of domestic workers to any employer unless the said service provider or agency or
person is registered under the Act.
(3) The service provider shall maintain the records, in a standard format as prescribed
by the District  Board, of all domestic workers being contracted by them for purposes of
employment from any part of the territory of India and provide the details thereof in such
form as may be prescribed.
(4) Working Hours of the domestic servant shall be as follows:
(a) Weekly Working Hours—No domestic worker shall be required or allowed to
work for more that fourty-eight hours in any week.
(b) Daily Working Hours Subject to the provision of section  40 (4) (a), no
domestic worker shall be required or allowed to work for more than Nine hours in any day.
(c) Duration of Working hours—The period of work of a domestic worker shall
be so arranged that inclusive of the intervals for rest, it shall not spread over more than
Twelve hours per day.
(d) Weekly holidays—Every domestic worker irrespective of being a full-time,
part-time, live-in, night-shift domestic worker will be entitled to a weekly day off.
(e) Restriction on overtime—The total hours of work in any day shall not exceed
ten hours in a day and in the aggregate Twelve hours in any week.
(f) Wages for overtime work—Where a domestic worker works for more than the
maximum working hours as prescribed in Section 40 (4) (a) and (b) he shall, in respect of
the overtime work, be entitled to wages at the rate of twice his ordinary rate of wages.
(g) Interval for rest—The periods of work of a domestic worker each day shall be
so fixed that no period shall exceed five hours and that no domestic worker shall work
for more than five hours before he has had an interval for rest of at least half an hour.
41. The employer shall provide the domestic worker with basic amenities like safe
drinking water, food, first aid and washrooms.
42. The employer shall provide a live-in domestic worker with private and decent
accommodations for rest and dressing.
43. The employer shall directly pay the wages to the bank account of the domestic
worker within the first five days of the month.
44. The employer and domestic worker shall provide one month notice to the domestic
worker and employer before termination of employment and provide wages worth fifteen
days of employment.
Effect of
non-payment
of
contribution.
Duties of the
employer and
service
provider.
Basic
Amenities.
Accommodation
for live-in
domestic
worker.
Payment of
Wages.
Termination
from
employment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
45. (1) Every domestic worker shall be entitled to a paid sick leave on the account of
being sick, provided that the No. of days for sick leave shall not exceed fifteen days.
(2) Every domestic worker who has worked for a period of two hundred fourty days or
more in a household shall be entitled to fifteen days of annual paid leave which shall not
include the weekly holidays or sick leave.
46. Every domestic worker shall enroll under ESI so as to avail domestic worker to be
enrolled under benefit from health cover, including maternity benefit.
47.  No domestic worker shall be subjected to the offence of sexual, physical or verbal
assault, violence, trafficking wrongful confinement and bonded/forced labour by any
employer or a member of his household.
48. (1) No employer registered under this Act shall discriminate on the basis of caste,
race, region, language, colour, sex, creed or religion, in matters such as recruitment, conditions
of employment, payment of wages etc.
(2) No voluntary association or agency shall discriminate on the aforesaid grounds
in rehabilitation recruitment, placement and payment on these grounds, nor shall it cause an
employer to do so.
Explanation.—For the purposes of the section there shall be equal payment for equal
work requiring the same amount of work, skill set, and effort.
49. (1) The appropriate Government shall be notification fix the minimum rates of
wages payable to domestic worker.
(2) The appropriate Government shall review minimum wages at such intervals as it
may think fit. Provided that the intervals of review shall not exceed five years.
(3) The appropriate Government may fix—
(a) a minimum rate of wages for time work (hereinafter referred to as 'a minimum
time rate');
(b) a minimum rate of wages for piece work (hereinafter referred to as 'minimum
piece rate');
(c) a minimum rate of remuneration to apply in the case of domestic worker
employed on piece work for the purpose of securing to such domestic worker a minimum
rate of wages on a time work basis (hereinafter referred to as 'a guaranteed time rate');
(d) a minimum rate (whether a time rate or a piece rate) to apply in substitution for
minimum rate which would otherwise be applicable, in respect of overtime work done
by domestic worker (hereinafter referred to as 'overtime rate');
(e) minimum rates of wages may be fixed by any one or more of the following
wage-periods, namely:—
(i) by the hour,
(ii) by the day,
(iii) by the month
CHAPTER VI
G
RIEV ANCE REDRESSAL AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION
50. (1) Every District shall have one or more Grievance Redressal Committee for the
resolution of disputes arising out of grievances relating to rejection and denial of registration,
cancellation of registration and claims as well as other grievances regarding District Board.
(2) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of equal number of members from
the employer and the domestic worker .
Leave.
Employees
State
Insurance
(ESI).
Crimes
against
employees.
No
discrimination
at place of
work.
Minimum
Wages.
Grievance
Redressal
Mechanism.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(3) The Chairperson of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall be selected from the
employer and from among the workmen alternatively on rotation basis every year.
(4) The total number of members of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall not
exceed more than six:
Provided that there shall be, as far as practicable, one woman member if, the Grievance
Redressal Committee has two members and in case the number of members are more than
two, the number of women members may be increased proportionately.
(5) No withstanding anything contained in this section, the setting up of Grievance
Redressal Committee shall not affect the right of the domestic worker to raise any dispute on
the same matter under the provisoins of this Act.
(6) The Grievance Redressal Committee may compete its proceedings within forty-five
day on receipt of a written application by or on behalf of the aggrieved party.
(7) The Domestic worker who is aggrieved of the decision of the Grievance Redressal
Committee may appeal to the District Collector against the decision of Grievance Redressal
Committee and the Collector shall, within one month from the date of receipt of such appeal,
dispose off the same and send a copy of his decision to the works concerned.
(8) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the Domestic worker for whom
there is an established Grievance Redressal Mechanism in the establishment concerned.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
51. (1) Any service provider or placement agencies or employer who is not registered
under this Act or has not renewed the registration certificate as per this act shal be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months and with fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(2)Any service provider or agency or employer who contravenes the provisions of the
Act or any rules made there under shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three months and with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or
with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may
extend to one hundred rupees for every day of continuing offence.
(3)If any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable under sub-
section (2) is again guilty of an offence involving a contravention or failure of compliance of
the same provision, he shall be punishable on a subsequent conviction with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which shall not be less than fourty
thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both:
(4)In case of default of payment to the domestic worker the employer shall be liable to
make payment along with the interest on such payment as per the State rules and if pays to
any domestic worker less the minimum rates of wages fixed for that employee's class of work,
or less than the amount due to him under the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to
twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(5)Any person who willfully obstructs any officer so authorized by the District Board
to conduct inspection under the Act or refuses or willfully neglects to afford such officer any
reasonable facility for making any inspection, examination, inquiry or investigation authorized
by or under this Act in relation to the employer or a service provider to whom, this Act
applies, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months
and with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(6)Whoever willfully refuses to produce on the demand of such an inspecting person
so authorized by the District Boards, any register or other document kept in pursuance of
this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anythign which he has reason to believe
is likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by an inspecting
Offences and
Penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

16
person acting in pursuance of his duties uner this act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three months or with a fine which may extend to twenty
thousand rupees, or with both.
(7) Any person who—
(i) knowingly sends, directs or takes any girl or women/domestic worker to any
place for immoral purposes or to a place where she is likely to be morally corrupted or,
(ii) in any manner sexually exploits or indulges in trafficking of such man domestic
worker or child or,
(iii) if found ill treating or discriminating any domestic worker on the basis of
caste, sex, class, race, religion or region or,
(iv) in any manner abuses or illegally confines any domestic worker or,
(v) compels any domestic worker to render any forced labour or,
(vi) provides any child as domestic worker,
shall be subjected to imprisonment for not less than three years and which may extend up to
a period of seven years and fine up to fifty thousand rupees.
52. On identification of victim by service provider or District Board, the complaint shall
be initiated to the District collector by the service Provider or District Board, as the case may be.
53. For the victims of forced labour, sexual eploitation, discrimination, illegal
confinement or any kind of abuse, the District Board or service provider shall provide with
emergency aid, medium term assistance and legal aid in conduct of the legal proceedings and
admit the victim to rehabilitation homes.
54. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except
on a complaint—
(a) made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, the State Board or the
District Board or
(b) made by an office-bearer of a voluntary organization registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 or Trade Unions Act or any other law for the time
being in force; or
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
55. ( 1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any agreement or contract
of service, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act:
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any domestic
worker from entering into an agreement with the principal employer as the case may be, for
granting them rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to them
than those to which they would be entitled under this Act.
56. (1) If the appropriate Government is satisfied that, or otherwise is of the opinion
that,—
(a) The State Board is unable to perform its functions, or
(b) The State Board has persistently made delay in the discharge of its functions
or has exceeded or abused its powers, then the State Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, supersede the State Board and re-constitute it in the manner
Complaint
Mechanism.
Emergency
Aid, Medium
Term
Assistance
and Legal Aid.
Courts not to
take
cognizance of
any offence
punishable.
Effect of laws
and
Agreements
Inconsistent
with the Act.
Supersession
of State
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
21 of 1860

17
specified in section 19 within a period of twelve months from the date of supersession
provided that the period of supersession may be extended for sufficient reasons by a
like notification by not more than six months:
Provided further, before issuing a notification under sub-secion ( 1) on any of the
grounds mentioned in clause ( b), the appropriate  Government shall give a reasonable
opportunity to the Board to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider
the explanations and objections, if any, of the State Board.
(2) After the supersession of the State Board and until it is reconstituted, the powers
and functions of the State Board under this Act shall be exercised and performed by the
appropriate Government or by such officer or officers as the appropriate Government may
appoint for this purpose.
(3) When the State Board is superseded, the following consequences shall ensue, that
is to say—
(a) all the members of the State Board shall, as from the date of publication of the
notification under sub-section (1), vacate their office;
(b) all the powers and functions, which may be exercised or performed by the
State Board shall, during the period of supersession, be exercised or performed by
such persons as may be specified in the notification.
(c) all funds and other property vesting in the State Board shall, during the
period of supersession, vest in the State Government and on the reconstitution of the
State Board, such funds and property shall reinvest in the State Board.
57. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
58. (a) The State and District Boards shall maintain proper accounts an other relevant
records and prepare annual statements of accounts in such form as may be prescribed.
(b) The Cental Committee shall furnish to the Central Government, before such date as
may be prescribed, the audited copy of the consolidated account of itself and the Funds
together with the auditor's report.
(c) The State and District Boards shall furnish to the appropriate Government before
such date as may be prescribed its audited copy of accounts together with the auditor's
report.
59. (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous
publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the appropriate Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified from or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity or anything previously
done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Accounts and
Audit.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
60.  The Welfare provisions of the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948,
Equal Remuneration Act, 1976, Industrial Dispute Act, 1947, Inter State Migrant
Workmen Act, 1979, Maternity Benefit Act, Minimum Wage Act, 1948, Payment of
Bonus Act, 1965, Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, Payment of Wages Act, 1936,
Prevention of Sexual Harassment Act, Trade Union Act, 1926, Unorganised Worker
Social Security Act, 2008, Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 shall also apply to
the domestic workers registered under this Act.
61. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Offical Gazette, and
subject to the conditions of previous publication except when the rules are made for the first
time, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing provision, such
rules may be made for all over any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) term of office of members of the State and District Board as the case may be;
(b) rate of travelling and daily allowances to be payable to members of the State
and District Board for attending meetings of the State and District Board the case may
be;
(c) form of application for registration as a beneficiary;
(d) documents to be accompanied along with application for registration as
beneficiary and fees for the same;
(e) registers to be maintained by the Secretary of the State and District Board as
the case may be;
(f) form of an application to be made by a beneficiary to the District Board and
documents which may be accompanied to such application, for grant of payments out
of the fund;
(g) amount of contribution of the beneficiaries to the fund;
(h) form of annual statement of accounts including a balance sheet;
(i) form in which and the time when the budget of the Board is to be prepared and
forwarded to the appropriate Government;
(j) form in which and the time when the annual report of the Board is to be
prepared and submitted to the State Government;
(k) number of members of the Committee and the manner in which they may be
chosen;
(l) term of office of members of the Committee; and
(m) rate of travelling and daily allowances to be payable to members of the
Committee for attending meetings of the Committee.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made,
before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session, and if, before the expiry
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule shoud not be made
and notify such decision in the Official Gazette, the rule shall, from the date of publication of
a notification in the Official Gazette, have effect only in such modified form, or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity or anything previously done or omitted to be done under that rule.
Power to make
rules by the
Appropriate
Government.
Application
of other Acts.
Act 38 of 1948
Act 25 of 1976
Act 14 of 1947
Act 30 of 1979
Act 11 of 1948
Act 21 of 1965
Act 39 of 1972
Act 4 of 1936
Act 16 of 1926
Act 33 of 2008
Act 8 of 1923
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the last few decades, there has been a tremendous growth in the demand for domestic
workers, Poverty has also forced people to migrate in search of work and workers with no
other skills, turn to domestic work. This has also led to the trafficking and other forms of
exploitation of millions of women and children of the both sexes. To meet growing demand
for domestic help, there has been a spurt of thousands of placement agencies providing
domestic workers in metro-towns of many States which remain outside the purview of any
legislative control.
Absence of any legal protection has led to severe exploitation of women and children
which include depriving domestic workers of a decent wage and excessive working hours of
work. For the live-in domestic workers, there is absence of proper food and living/sleeping
space, lack of freedom of mobility, isolation, exposure to harassment and sexual exploitation
by agent during transit and work.
In 2011, the domestic workers won a victory at the International Labour Conference
when an overwhelming majority of member countries voted in favor of a Convention to
uphold the rights of Domestic Workers. Convention 189 and Recommendation 201, to which
the Government of India is a signatory, explains in details how Domestic Workers need to be
protected and awarded. Where as the GoI has not yet ratified Convention 189, the GoI has
included domestic workers in the Anti Harassment at the Workplace Act and some schemes
like the RSBY . A few State Governments have notified Minimum Wages for Domestic Workers
and included them in some welfare schemes while the State of Maharashtra has enacted a
Welfare Act for Domestic Workers. Nevertheless, in the absence of a central legislation
capable of reaching all Domestic Workers, none of these State level measures will deliver
justice to Domestic Workers.
As Domestic Workers are an important segment of the service sector of the Indian
economy and who have a multiplier impact on the economy be enabling the women in
particular to work by sharing the family burden, only a comprehensive central legislation
specifically designed to meet the working condition of the Domestic Workers can ensure the
end of the exploitation of these workers.
It is in the public interest that Domestic Work, employing, as it does, a very large
number of poor and vulnerable women and whose conditions of work and living need
amelioration and to whom regularity of employment must be assured, Placement agencies
must be  regulated so that the Directive Principles of the Constitution more particularly the
relevant provisions of Articles 39, 41, 42, 43, and 43-A of the Constitution are given effect to
by a law made by Parliament with reference to entries 22, 23 and 24 of List III in the
7th Schedule in the Constitution.
OSCAR FERNANDES
19

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clauses 17, 19, 20, 24 of the Bill provide respectively for constitution of Central Advisory
Committee, establishment of State Social Security Boards, appointment of Secretary and
other officials of the State/UT Boards and grants and loans by the Central Government to the
State Boards. Clauses 28, 34 and 37 of the Bill provide respectively for establishment of
District Social Security Boards, appointment of Secretary and other officials of the District
Boards and establishment of Domestic Workers Social Security Fund. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is, however,
difficult of assess the expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, that is likely to be
involved.
20

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 59 of the Bill empowers the Central Government while Clause 61 of the Bill
empowers the appropriate Governments to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislation power is of
a normal character.
21

GMGIPMRND—427RS(S3)—10.04.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of work of Domestic Workers in order to improve their working
conditions and to provide social security to them, for setting up of State and
District Boards for the purpose and for compulsory registration of Domestic
Workers, employers and service providers to such Boards and also for setting
up of Domestic Workers Social Security Fund and matter connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, M.P.)