1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill  No.  XI of 2008
THE PROTECTION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the implementation of convention regarding the protection of world cultural
and natural heritage adopted by United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation and accord legality to its provisions, exercise greater vigilance in the
protection of cultural heritage, constitute a Board for the protection of cultural
heritage, giving deterrent punishment to the persons guilty of causing harms to the
cultural heritage and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the General Conference of United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation had, in its 17th session held on 16th November, 1972 adopted a
Convention in regard to Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage;
A
ND WHEREAS , there is an urgent need to provide for the constitution of a
Cultural Heritage Protection Board for having greater monitoring and supervision on the
conservation, protection and preservention of cultural heritage; and
A
ND WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for deterrent punishment for the offence of
causing harm to the cultural heritage.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Cultural Heritage Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means Cultural Heritage Protection Board constituted under
section 4;
(b) “Convention” means Convention regarding the protection of world cultural
and natural heritage adopted by General Conference of United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation in its 17th session on 16th November, 1972;
(c) “cultural heritage” includes:—
(i) cultural heritage and natural heritage included in articles 1 and 2 of the
Convention;
(ii) “ancient monuments” and “archaeological sites and remains” included
in clause (a) and clause (d) respectively of section 2 of Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958.
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(e) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Convention or Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958
or Indian Penal Code or Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the national interest to implement the
Convention regarding the protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage adopted by
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation for having greater monitoring
and supervision on the conservation, protection and preservation of cultural heritage of the
country.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
provisions and obligations contained in the Convention shall have the force of law, till the
commencement of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Cultural Heritage Protection Board for the purpose of performing
functions assigned under this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than fourteen members to
be appointed by the Central Government after consultation with the leaders of opposition in
both the Houses of Parliament.
(3) A member of the Board shall hold office for a period of five years from the date of
his appointment.
(4) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of the Board
and the procedure of filling up of contingency vacancies shall be such as prescribed.
(5) The Board shall, after consultation with the Central Government, appoint such
number of officers on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(6) The Board shall, subject to approval by the Central Government, make regulations
to convene its meetings and the conduct of business in its meetings.
6. (1) The Board shall have following functions and powers:—
(a) supervising and superintending the proper implementation of the Convention
by concerned Ministries and Government Departments and authorities and issuing
such directions, as it shall deem appropriate and expedient for the effective enforcement
and implementation of Convention;
Definitions.
24 of 1958.
24 of 1958.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Declaration for
expediency.
Convention to
have force of
law.
Constitution of
the Board.
Powers and
functions of
the Board.

3
(b) advising to adopt legal, scientific, technical and administrative measures for
the identification, conservation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of cultural
heritage;
(c) exercising vigilance and issuing directions to ministries and Government
Departments and authorities regarding measures for protecting the cultural heritage
from outbreaks and threats;
(d) interrogating or making enquiry or inspection or initiating proper legal
proceedings in regard to the offences committed against cultural heritage which include
offences committed under the Indian Panel Code or the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 or any other law for the time being in
force;
(e) making proper arrangements to ensure implementation of the provisions of
this Act;
(f) carrying out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
(2) Any directions issued under this section by the Board shall be obligatory.
7. (1) Every year the Board shall prepare an annual report regarding the implementation
of the provisions of the act and submit it to the Central Government which shall cause the
annual report to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(2) The Board, whenever it deems appropriate and necessary, shall prepare and submit
an interim report or reports to the Central Government which shall cause the said report or
reports to be laid before each of the Houses of Parliament without delay.
8. Whosoever—
(a) is involved or deliberately assists or deliberately takes part directly or indirectly
in any process or activity of causing any harm to the cultural heritage, which also
includes its modification, or is associated or involved actively in the wrong publicity
of it;
(b) commits any offence under section 30 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958; or
(c) commits any offence against cultural heritage under the provisions of Indian
Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force,
shall be guilty of crime against cultural heritage under this Act.
9. Whosoever commits any offence against cultural heritage under section 6, shall be
punishable with regorous imprisonment which shall not be less than five years and with fine
and that such imprisonment and fine shall be in addition to any sentence under any other law
for the time being in force;
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 468 and section 469 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in any other law for the time being in force, any action in pursuance
of section 8 shall not be rendered abortive as the result of a delayed or late action or an action
prohibited by lapse or expiration of the stipulated limit of any period.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
each of the offences punishable under this act shall be cognizable.
12.  All Ministries, Government Departments, police, Intelligence & Inspection Agencies
and all Civil Authorities shall work to assist the Board in the execution of its tasks.
45 of 1860.
24 of 1958.
Annual report
of the Board.
Offences
under this Act.
24 of 1958.
Penalty.
2 of 1974.
No bar for
taking Cogni-
zance after
the limitation
period.
Cognizable
offences.
Government
agencies to
assist the Board
in its work.

4
13. ( 1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any law in force.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in place of or derogation
of provisions, related to cultural heritage, contained in any other law for the time being in
foce.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid before each
House of Parliament as soon as it is made, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty five
days, which period may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The General conference of United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation has adopted a Convention regarding the protection of world cultural and
natural heritage in its 17th session held on 16th November, 1972. It is necessary in the
interest of the country that this Convention should be implemented and be given the force
of  law.
There is a need for greater vigilance and supervision for the protection of cultural
heritage. Therefore it would be expedient to constitute a Board for this purpose.
Keeping in view the increasing number of offences against "cultural heritage", there is
a need to provide for deterrent punishment for such offences.
The expression "cultural heritage" has been assigned comprehensive meanings so
that the cultural and natural heritage included in this Convention, ancient monuments and
archaeological sites and remains included in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 may be covered.
The Bill seeks to achieve the said objectives.
Hence this Bill.
JAI  PRAKASH  AGGARWAL
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Board and its staff  etc. for
the protection of cultural heritage. This will involve both the types of expenditure recurring
and non-recurring.
Thus, the Bill, if enacted, will involve a sum of rupees one hundred crore as recurring,
expenditure per annum as also a sum of rupees one hundred and fifty crore as non-recurring
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGRADING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purposes
of this Bill. Since the rules relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power
is of a normal character.
7

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the implementation of convention regarding the protection of world clutural
and natural heritage adopted by United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation and accord legality to its provisions, exercise greater vigilance in the
protection of cultural heritage, constitute a Board for the protection of cultural  heritage,
giving deterrent punishment to the persons guilty of causing harms to the cultural
heritage and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4744RS(S5)—29.12.2008.