1
THE HUMAN TRAFFICKING (PREVENTION) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of expanding trade of human trafficking in the country by
establishing a Central Human Trafficking Prevention Commission and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Human Trafficking (Prevention) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as Cental Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;—
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No.  XI of  2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
(a) "appropriate government" menas in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Commission" means Central Human Trafficking Prevention Commission
established under section 3 of this Act.
(c) "human" means women and men of any age;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(e) "trafficking" means sending people illegally within the country and abroad,
engaging children, women and other people in domestic works or as bonded labour
and engaging women in flesh trade;
(f) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act defined in the Indian
Penal Code, 1860, or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the commencements of
this Act and in consultation with the Government of the States, formulate a national policy to
prevent human trafficking in the country and for the overall welfare, care and protection of
every human being so that the expanding trade of human trafficking could  be prevented.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national policy formulated
under section 3.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette establish a
Central Human Trafficking Prevention Commission for prevention of the human trafficking
taking place at international and at national level with its head quarters in Delhi.
(2) The Composition of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name of aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(4) The Commission may establish its branches in the States and Union Territories in
such manner as may be presecribed.
(5) The Commission may appoint such number of officers and employees as may be
necessary for the efficient functioning of the Commission and carrying out the purposes of
this Act with such terms and conditions of service and is such manner as may be presecribed.
6. The appropriate Government shall formulate rehabilitation scheme for person rescind
from trafficking and take such other welfare measures for prevention of human trafficking
under this Act in such manner as my be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Government for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
45 of 1860.
104 of 1956.
National policy
on human
trafficking.
Appropriate
Government to
implementation
of the national
policy.
Establishment
of Central
Human
Traffcking
Prevention
Commission.
Welfare
measures.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India has become the largest base of human trafficking in the world. In the abominable
market of human trafficking, India is being identified both as a consumer and producer.
According to the United States "Trafficking in Persons", Report, 2009, India is in the league
of such nations where the concerned Government have proved to be unsuccessful in
preventing human trafficking.
Human trafficking has been striking deep roots in the society. The network of human
trafficking has been spreading from Punjab to Goa. According to the Ministry of Women and
Child Development, thirty lakh women are being trafficked every year in India, out of which
more than forty per cent are minors. The innocent girl child and women are being sent to
Britain, Russia, Canada and Gulf Countries from here. Forty per cent of the kidnapped children
are forced into child labour and prostitution within India.
Human trafficking is a heinous and disgraced trade. The web of human trafficking is
spreading rapidly in the country and it is not only spoiling the image of India in the world, but
also contaminating the Indian Society on a large scale. If the expanding market of human
trafficking is not checked in time, the situation would go out of control.
Hence, this Bill.
PRABHAT JHA
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that there shall be established Central Human Trafficking
Prevention Commission for prevention of human trafficking in the country. Clause 7 provides
that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out
purposes of the Act. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure  from the Consolidated
Fund of India. The exact details of the expenditure cannot be calculated, at this stage. But, it
is estimated that an expenditure of rupees one thousand crore per annum  would be involved
for the Consolidated Fund of India.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purposes
of this Bill. The rules relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2344RS(S5)—03-05-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of expanding trade of human trafficking in the country by
establishing a Central Human Trafficking Prevention Commission and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P.)