THE  BASIC  AND  PRIMARY  EDUCATION  (COMPULSORY
IMPARTING  IN  MOTHER  TONGUE)  BILL,  2006
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of mother tongue in imparting basic and primary
education to children of tender age by all educational institutions so as to enable them
to learn their lessons easily which will help them in properly developing their faculties
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Basic and Primary Education (Compulsory Imparting
in Mother Tongue) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “basic education” means education provided in preparatory schools or
kindergarden and such other schools by whatever name called;
(c) “educational institution” includes all schools whether run by Government
or Government body or private individual, association or trust, whether aided by
Government or not, recognized or unrecognized, imparting education to the children
from beginning of basic education;
Bill No. XII of  2006
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MARCH, 2006.
5
10
15

2
(d) “mother tongue” means the language generally spoken in the family of the
child who learns it from his mother and other family members and which is one of the
languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “primary education” includes education up to the level of middle class or
standard.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every educational institution including those established by minorities, religious or linguistic
ones, shall impart basic and primary education to the children in their mother tongue or
dialect generally spoken in the region or State, as the case may be, where such an institution
is located, in addition to Hindi or English language, as the case may be, so as to properly
develop the faculties of the children.
(2) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure strict compliance of
the provisions of sub-section (1) in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1) the appropriate Government shall appoint
language teachers in all Government run or aided schools and shall provide requisite
infrastructure for that purpose.
(4) The appropriate Government shall derecognize the educational institutions not
complying with the provisions of this Act for such period as it may deem necessary and
impose such other sanctions as may be prescribed after giving such institutions a reasonable
opportunity to defend their cases.
4.  The appropriate Government may either retrospectively from the enactment of this
Act or prospectively exempt from the operation of the provisions of this Act, the members of
any race, sect or tribe to which it may consider it impossible or inexpedient to apply the
provisions of this Act.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the States for appointing language teachers and
providing other infrastructure required for the purposes of this Act.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made or direction be given after three years of the
commencement of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be made in addition to
and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
30
Compulsory
imparting of
basic and
primary
education in
mother
tongue of the
child.
Power to
exempt.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10
15
20
25
35

3
3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
For a child the easiest language is his mother tongue. He learns to speak his mother
tongue from his mother and family members who generally speak the language spoken from
generations or the dialect of their forefathers or of the area or region in which they reside. In
major parts of our country, hindi is the main language with different dialects at different
places but it is written in Devanagari script and can be understood easily. Then there are
regional languages. A total of 22 languages have been recognized by our Constitution. The
mother tongue, no doubt, is the best language for a child to develop his faculties but when
he or she is admitted in the play school or Kindergarden or primary school more so in the so-
called elite or public schools, the child has to switch over to English medium, which is the
medium of instruction in such schools. At this stage the real difficulty of the child begins. He
speaks a particular language but the education is imparted in a different language. This
causes strain and in order to become a part of the system  he starts ignoring his own mother
tongue. In the Hindi speaking areas, students of public schools cannot count in Hindi and
do not recognize Hindi alphabets because they cannot speak in their language and have to
speak only in English. In many schools students are penalized if they speak in any other
language than English. Though the child learns English in compulsion but he is not at ease
with this language and on the other hand he does not develop sufficient knowledge of his
own language. It is therefore necessary that a child should be imparted basic and primary
education in his mother tongue, which is the easiest language for him. Thereafter, the child
grows up and he can acquire the skills in other languages and opt for the language of his
choice for his further studies.
Hence this Bill.
SUSHMA  SWARAJ

4
4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of  the Bill  makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill if enacted will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one
thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

MGIPMRND—5994RS(S-4)—03-03-2006.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of mother tongue in imparting basic and primary educa-
tion to children of tender age by all educational institutions so as to enable them to learn
their lessons easily which will help them in properly developing their faculties and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P .)