1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE WELFARE OF YOUTH
BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for the Welfare of Youth and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for the Welfare of Y outh
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XII of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "member" means a member of the National Commission;
(c) "National Commission" means the National Commission for the Welfare of
Youth established under clause 3;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "youth" means any person who has attained the age of eighteen years but is
not above the age of forty years.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a body  to be known as the National Commission for the Welfare of  Y outh to exercise powers
conferred on and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, below the age of forty years, having specialised knowledge
and remarkable experience in the field of youth welfare to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) four members, below the age of forty years, to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, from amongst persons of ability,
integrity and standing who have extensive professional experience in or with—
(i) law or legislation and legal bodies; or
(ii) voluntary organisations working for the welfare and empowerment of
youth; or
(iii) organisations or industrial units or educational institutions
committed to increasing the employability of youth; or
(iv) organisations working towards causes relating to health or social
welfare, with a special focus on youth;
(c) one member-secretary, who shall be a senior member of the Indian Civil
Service having at least ten years of professional experience in the management of
matters related to the welfare and empowerment of youth.
4. (1) The Chairperson and members of the Commission may hold office for a period
not exceeding three years from the date on which they assume office, or for such period as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) The salary and allowances payable  to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1)  The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff, including
experts, to the Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning in such manner as 
may be prescribed.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the officers and staff including experts appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall be 
such as may be prescribed.
6. The National Commission shall function as an authority for ensuring the
welfare and empowerment of youth in the Country and perform the following functions, 
n
amely,:—
(a) formulate a comprehensive national policy for the welfare and empowerment
of youth in the country;
Definitions.
Establishment
of a National
Commission
for the
Welfare
of Youth.
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
the
Chairperson
and the
members.
Staff of the
Commission.
Duty and
functions of
the National
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Youth Welfare
Fund.
Annu al report.
Commission
to have
powers
of Civil Court.
(b) study, investigate and review all matters relating to the safeguards provided 
for youth under the Constitution and other laws and make recommendations f or the 
effective implementation of these safeguards to improve the condition of youth in the 
country;
(c) formulate and implement schemes for the welfare of youth as may be assigned 
to it by the Central Government;
(d) coordinate with the departments of the appropriate Government for securing 
better education, well-being and employment opportunities for youth;
(e) undertake educational research to advise the Central Government to improve 
and ensure employment and entrepreneurial opportunities for the youth;
(f) advise the appropriate Government in the plann ing p rocess for the 
socio-economic development of the youth, especially those belonging to Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections o f the society;
(g) monitor the o ccupational health, safety and welfare-related issues of the 
youth working in the unorganised sector and other hazardous employment;
(h) act as a national-level grievance redressal mechanism in matters related  
to youth development, welfare and empowerment;
(i) receive and enquire into any complaints concerning the deprivation of rights
of youth and recommend to the appropriate Government the action to be taken in that 
matter;
(j) advise the appropriate Government in any other matter as may be referred for
its consideration, from time to time.
7. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be known as the Youth
Welfare Fund to implement the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Youth
Welfare Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
8. (1) It shall be the duty of the Commission to present annually to the President a
report as to the work done by the Commission within six months of the close of the year
under report.
(2) The President shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament the report
submitted to him along with a memorandum explaining the reasons for not accepting any of
the recommendations made thereto.
(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues connected with a
State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of that State,
who shall in turn, along with an explanatory memorandum concerned with the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for not
accepting any of the recommendations, cause such report to be laid before the State
legislature.
9. The National Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to it under
clause (i) of section 6 of this Act, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in
particular in respect of the following matters, namely,:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or document or copy thereof from any Court
or  office;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and/or documents;
and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
10. The appropriate Government shall consult the National Commission on all policies
affecting the interests of the youth.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty.
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised  in one session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry  of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any  modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Appropriate
Government
to
consult the
Commission.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
an
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India has one of the youngest p opulations in th e world. Recently , the Ministry  of 
Statistics  and Programme Implementation released the 'Youth in India 2022' Report, according 
to which India is experiencing a demographic window of opportunity, known as the "youth 
bulge". Youth bulge refers to a demographic pattern in which a large proportion of the 
population is comprised of children and young adults. In this context, there is a need to reap 
the potential of our youth population through adequate policies, schemes and investments 
that can ensure the welfare and empowernment of the young population in this country.
Although youth constitute a significant share of our population, Indian youth is 
seriously constr ained by vario us developmental ch allenges including lack of access to 
education and gainful employment, gender inequality, child marriage, lack of youth-friendly 
health services and adolescent pregnancy. There is an alarming rate of drug abuse among 
the youth as well. Hence, th ere is an urgent need to add ress th ese problems and make 
concrete efforts to ensure the welfare and empowerment of the Indian youth.
One of the serious limitations of our current policy framework for youth is the absence 
of an institutional mechanism at the national level to design, oversee and coordinate all the 
relevant matters related to youth in the country. Besides, even after 75 years of independence, 
we do not have a comprehensive youth policy that can effectively channelise the potential 
of our young population. Therefore, setting up a National Commission for the Welfare of 
Youth equipped with necessary powers and functions is an urgent policy priority.
The Bill seeks to attain the objectives mentioned above through the establishment of 
the National Commission for the Welfare of Youth.
SANDOSH KUMAR P.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the consitution of a National Commission for the
Welfare of the Y outh to carry out the responsibilities assigned to it. It also provides for the
appointment of a Chairperson, members and member-secretary. Clause 4 of the Bill provides
for the term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of Commission.
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of officers, staff and experts for the efficient
functioning of the Commission and their salary and allowances. Clause 7 provides for the
Central Government to establish a Youth Welfare Fund for the effective functioning of the
Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India which cannot be estimated at present. Recurring expenditure is also likely to be
incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for the Welfare of Youth  
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P .)
RS–P&PS–PMB(E)–03 9–12.12.2023