Bill No.  XII of  2010
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE MIGRANT LABOUR SECURITY BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide security to labourers migrating from the rural areas to the metro cities and
towns in the industrial areas of the country in search of livelihood and to provide for
the welfare measures to be undertaken by the States for the migrating labour by
setting up a Welfare Authority and a Welfare Fund and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto .
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Migrant Labour Security Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the Migrant Labour Security Authority established under
section 4;
(c) "migrant labour" means those labourers who are not members of any labour
or trade union and are working in private or unorganized sector or engaged in self-
employment;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010
5
10

2
National
policy for
Migrant
Labourers.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(e) "wages" means the remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of
money which shall be payable to a person in respect of the work done in any
employment;
(f) "Welfare Fund" means the Welfare Fund set up for the migrant labour under
this Act;
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be but within one year of the
commencement of this  Act and in consultation with the Governments of the States, formulate,
a national policy for the welfare of the migrant labours and for providing proper security and
amenities them uniformly throughout the country.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an authority be called the Migrant Labour Security Authority for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the Authority may
establish offices at other places in the country as it may deem necessary.
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having the
background of labour related issues or of the judiciary;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having
such qualifications as may be prescribed;
(c) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by Lok Sabha and
one by the Rajya Sabha;
(d) three members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent
respectively:—
(i) the Ministry of Central Government dealing with labour and
Employment;
(ii) the Ministry of Central Government dealing with Rural Development;
(iii) the Ministry of Central Government dealing with Finance;
(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
Non-Governmental Organisations working for the welfare of the migrant labours;
(f) four members to be nominated by the State Governments to be rotated amongst
the States in alphabetical order.
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such officers and staff and with such
terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to promote and undertake by such measures
as it thinks fit or deem necessary, welfare measures for the migrant labours.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the measures
referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) Security of migrant labour against any protest and discrimination by local
people.
Establishment
of the
Migrant
Labour
Security
Authority.
45

3
(b) welfare measures to be undertaken by the States for the migrant labour;
(c) maintaining a district-wise register for migrant labour with such particulars
and in such manner, as may be prescribed;
(d) providing different amenities to migrant labour viz. medical care, free of cost,
both the indoor and outdoor patient facilities to the migrant labour and maternity and
creche facilities for the female labours covered under this Act;
(e) availability of work round the year to the migrant labour and rehabilitation
thereof;
(f) payment of old age pension to the migrant labour;
(g) provident fund facility to the migrant labour;
(h) such other provisions as the Authority may deem necessary for the purposes
of this Act.
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall as soon as may be, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish a Security Fund to be known as the Migrant Labour Security
Fund for the purposes of this Act with initial corpus of rupees one thousand crore to be
provided by the Central Government by due appropriation made by law by Parliament in
this behalf and thereafter the Central Government, State Governments and employers
shall contribute to the Security Fund to such extent and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) Corporate houses, financial institutions both domestic and international, individuals
and bodies may also contribute through donations or otherwise to the Security Fund.
(3) All moneys received in the Security Fund shall be utilised for the welfare of the
migrant labour by the Authority in such manner as the Central Government may prescribe
from time to time.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,—
(a) no employer shall engage any migrant labourer, as the case may be, unless he
has registered himself with the Authority;
(b) every employer shall pay a minimum of rupees four thosand five hundred per
month or rupees one hundred fifty per day to a migrant labourer or worker covered
under this Act engaged by him for work and this rate of wages shall be subject to
change in accordance with the rise in price index;
(c) every day of the work done by the migrant labourer covered under this Act,
shall be counted for the purpose of calculating the total period of service rendered by
migrant labourer in a month of a year.
8. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act and shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which shall not be less than
six months but may extent to two years and also with fine, which may extend to two lakh
rupees.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may by notification make such order to give such direction, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal
of the difficulty and any such order shall be final.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Migrant
Labour
Security Fund.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Penalty.
Savings.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A wide gap exists between the urban and the rural India which leads to migration of
large number of people from one State to the other. Seventy-five per cent of the total population
of urban population has access to electricity whereas only thirty per cent people are able to
avail the bnefit of electricity in the villages. The literacy rate in six lakh villages of the country
is fifty-nine per cent whereas eighty per cent people of 5, 161 cities of the country are literate.
Maximum migration from one State to the other State in India, especially from the rural areas
of eastern India, to the metro cities and towns of industrial areas, is taking place for want of
employment. Even today, 72.22 per cent population of the country is residing in villages
where the Government have started Employment Guarantee Schemes and still they are forced
to wander from one place to another in search of employment. Industrialisation in the country
has been limited to the metro cities or cities of a particular area. Due to this reason, the
number of persons migrating to these areas from the rural India is rapidly increasing.
Consequently, the migrants labour force is not only protested by the local people but it also
facing discrimination by the local Government and administration. Cases of violent protests
by the local people against the migrants who have come for employment have been increasing.
Therefore, it becomes the responsibility of the Central Government to make proper
arrangements for providing security to the persons migrating from one State to the other in
search of employment as every citizen of India has been granted under article 19(1)(e) and (g)
the right to move freely throughout the territory of India and to reside and settle in any part
of the territory of India.
Hence this Bill.
PRABHAT JHA
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Migrant Labour Security
Authority. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the Migrant Labour Security Fund. The Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Apart from one
thousand crore rupees of initial corpus of the welfare fund, it is estimated that a sum of
rupees three thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one hundred crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Bill. As such the matter relates to details only. The delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide security to labourers migrating from the rural areas to the metro cities and
towns in the industrial areas of the country in search of livelihood and to provide
for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the migrating labour
by setting up a Welfare Authority and a Welfare Fund and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2346RS(S5)—03.05.2010.