1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) it shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For article 331 of the Constitution of India, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"331. Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President shall, if he is of the
opinion that the transgender community is not adequately represented in the House of
the People, nominate not more than two members of that community of the House of
People."
Short title and
Commencement.
Bill No. XII of 2020
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2020
Representation
of the
transgender
community in
the House of
the People.
5
Substitution of
article 331.
10

2
3. For article 333 of the Constitution of India, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"333. Notwithstanding anything given under article 170, the Governor of a State
shall, if he is of the opinion that the transgender community needs representation in
the Legislative Assembly of the State and is not adequately represented therein,
nominate one member of the that community to the Assembly."
Representation
of the
transgender
community in
the Legislative
Assembly of
the State.
Substitutes of
article 333.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The transgenders face various forms of discrimination and trauma in our society. Since
the colonial rule, the eunuchs have been labelled as cross-dressers, beggars and unnatural
prostitutes. They are treated as outcasts right from birth. They have to beg on the streets for
their living. People try to avoid them whenever they see them. We ourselves have rarely seen
them employed in the public sectors. They also have to live at a separate place away from the
society. Due to the social stigma and no protection to them, the Transgender Persons
(Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 was recently passed by the Parliament. The Act gives
recognition to the community as 'third gender' and provides protection again various form of
discrimination.
While the Act is a welcome move, and protects the community from discrimination, the
transgender community has not got representation in Parliament. In the Census 2011, the
transgender population was calculated to be 6 lakhs. Therefore, it becomes more significant
for them to have a representative in the Parliament. In National Legal Services Authority v.
Union of India and others 1 (2014) 5 SCC 438, the Supreme Court had recognized the community
to be from the economically and socially backward class. For the transgender persons,
discrimination is not based on religion, it is more about what they are born with and considering
their sexual practices as 'contamination' and 'filth'. The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes communities have reservation of seats, therefore there should be a similar provision
for the transgender community also.
In such a scenario, if they get two seats reserved, this would help them in voicing their
opinions easily because when the Transgender Person (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 was
passed, there was no one from their community who could voice their opinion or share their
plight in the Parliament. Furthermore, since independence, there has not been a single
transgender Member of Parliament or Member of Legislative Assembly of any State. Since
the Parliament in the winter session of 2019 discontinued the reservation of two seats for the
Anglo-Indians, those two seats can now be reserved for the transgenders. In the State of
Odisha, Aishwarya Rutuparna Pradhan has become the first openly transgender civil servant.
In order to facilitate more people to embrace their identity and to feel safe about accepting
who they, are we can begin with reserving seats for them in the Parliament.
Thus, while there is a demand from the transgender community for reservation in the
public sphere, the call for reservation of two seats for them in the Parliament should also be
pursued. The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 ensures protection for
the transgenders in the society, and this Bill shall ensure their involvement in policies framed
for their own welfare and the dicisions made for the country.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. SASMIT PATRA

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend article 331 of the Constitution, with a view to
provide representation of transgender community in the House of the People. Article 106 of
the Constitution provides that the members of either House of Parliament shall be entitled to
receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by Parliament
by law.
Similarly, clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend article 333 of the Constitution, with a
view to provide representation of transg ender community in the Legislative Assemblies.
Article 195 of the Constitution provides that the members of either Legislative Assembly or
Legislative Council of a State shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may
from time to time be determined by Legislature of the State.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. However, it is not possible to quantify the exact amount required from the Consolidated
Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
331. Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President may, if he is of the opinion
that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People,
nominate not more than two members of that community of the House of the People.
*****
333. Notwithstanding anything in article 170, the Governor of a State may,
if he is of  opinion that the Anglo-Indian community needs representation in the Legislative
Assembly of the State and is not adequately represented therein, nominate one member of
that community to the Assembly.
*****
Representation
of the Anglo-
Indian
community in
the House of
the People.
Representation
of the Anglo-
Indian
community in
the Legislative
Assemblies of
the States.

MGIPMRND—6009RS(S3)—16-03-2020.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra,  M.P.)