1
Bill No. XII of 2021
THE MEDICAL EDUCATION LAWS  (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
A
BILL
 further to amend the Dentists Act, 1948 and the National Medical Commission
Act, 2019.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-Second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Education Laws (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In the Dentist Act, 1948, after the proviso to section 10-D, the following shall be
inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 10D.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021
516 of 1948.

2
"Provided further that notwithstanding any judgment or order of any Court, the
provisions of this section shall not apply, in relation to the uniform entrance examination
at the undergraduate or postgraduate level conducted in accordance with any
regulations made under this Act, in respect of the State Government seats, whether in
Government Dental College or in a private Dental College, in the States which do not
opt for the uniform entrance examination."
3. In the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), after clause (t) of section 2, the following shall be inserted namely:
"(tt) "State Government seats" shall mean and include all seats in the State
Government colleges, State Universities, constituent colleges of said State Universities
and medical educational institutions and includes seats surrendered by private medical
educational institutions, under any arrangement, to the State Government."
4. In the principal Act, after the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 14, the following
shall be inserted, namely:
"Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained in any provisions of
this Act, the provisions of this section shall not apply, in relation to the National
Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test, at the undergraduate level or postgraduate or super-
speciality level in respect of State Government seats unless such state has opted for
such National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test."
5. In the principal Act, after section 15, the following section shall be inserted, namely:
"15A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any provisions of this Act,
section 15 of this Act shall not apply in relation to persons studying in undergraduate
courses in all colleges, universities and medical institutions other than Central
Government institutions in a State which has not opted for National Exit Test.
(2) The Commission shall specify, by Regulations, the manner of conducting
common sounselling by the designated authority for admission to the postgraduate
seats in the medical institutions referred to in sub-section (1)."
6. In the principal Act, after sub-section (1) of section 33, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:
"(1A). Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, all persons who
have completed their undergraduate medical courses from colleges, universities and
medical institutions other than Central Government institutions in States which have
opted out of the National Exit Test, shall, after the completion of their undergraduate
medical course, be entitled to a license to practice medicine and shall have his name
and qualifications be registered on the rolls of the State or National Register, as the
case may be."
10
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 14.
Insertion of
new section
15A.
Exemption
from National
Exit Test.
Amendment
of section 33.
30  of  2019.
15
20
25
30
35
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 10-D of the Dentists Act, 1948 introduced Uniform Entrance Examination to all
dental educational institutions at the undergraduate and post graduate levels. Similarly,
section 14 of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 introduced a Uniform National
Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (NEET) for entry into undergraduate and post graduate medical
courses. Section 15 of this Act also introduced a National Exit Test to be taken after completion
of the undergraduate medical courses, which will serve as qualification for a licence to
practice medicine and registration on the National or State Register as the case may be.
2. It has been felt across the country that NEET not only gives students studying in
the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) schools an upper hand, but also greatly
disadvantages the economically weaker sections of the society. There are three basic grounds
on which NEET is opposed by the people of various States—(i) the examination completely
decimates the right of the State to regulate medical education; (ii) the test is largely based on
CBSE syllabus thereby placing students from other streams of education in an obvious
disadvantage; and (iii) it requires extra coaching at considerable cost apart from ordinary
school education and not everybody is able to afford the same. In so far as the first objection,
education is a matter placed in Entry 25 of List III of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,
meaning thereby the State Legislature also has legislative competence over the field and by
extension, the Executive of that State. The Dentist Act, 1948 and the National Medical
Commission Act, 2019 have been enacted as per powers vested upon the Central Government
under Entry 66 of List I. However, the power of the State Government in the field of admissions
to the colleges by conducting examinations is available to them under Entry 25 of List III.
This has been clearly enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of The Modern
Dental College vs. The Tamilnadu Medical Officers Association.
3. In so far as the second objection, the NEET examination is conducted by the CBSE
as the nodal agency on the CBSE syllabus up to 12th standard. This means that the students
who have studied in CBSE schools are at an obvious advantage when compared to the
students studying in other streams of education, particularly students studying in various
State Boards, that too in regional language. The common medical entrance tests cause grave
hardships and untold miseries to the students who are passing out from the State Board
schools. There are different State Boards across India following different syllabus and
texstbooks, thus leading to different standards of education among students. Further, the
students, after completing regorous examination at the 10+2 level through various
examinations, either conducted at the State level by the respective State Boards or the Indian
Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE) or by the Central Board of Secondary Education
(CBSE) are asked to face a common medical entrance examinations immediately after school.
This places an enormous strain on them. Thus, common uniform entrance examinations for
the undergraduate level does not create a level playing field for all the students as they
graduate from different boards with different syllabus.
4. In so far as the third objection, the experience of the past four years shows that in
order to pass or score well in the NEET examination, students have to opt for private coaching
which is extra-ordinarily expensive and cannot be afforded by a common man.
5. These objections are borne out by the statistics from the last years' NEET
examinations. There is a decrease of students from the State Boards who have applied for
NEET-2020 when compared to NEET-2019. In fact, there has been a steady dip of candidates
from the State Boards since 2016, which shows that students passed out from the State
Boards are not able to afford the requisite coaching to be able to sit for NEET examination. In
3

4
fact, a number of candidates who have applied are older and repeat candidates who have
already taken the examination in the previous years.
6. Further, though the curriculum for medical education is prescribed by the National
Medical Commission, however, the medical colleges located in various States affiliated to
various Universities follow their own syllabus, and text books at the under graduate level.
The syllabus, subjects and textbooks prescribed by the Universities varies from State to
State. Therefore, the education of students is not uniform. Consequantly, there is no possibility
of conducting a uniform test for graduates of undergraduate courses across the country as
the Universities which confer the degrees have different standards.
7. Therefore, it is necessary to amend section 10-D of the Dentists Act, 1948 to grant
exemption to States opting out of Uniform Entrance Examination. It is also necessary to
amend the National Medical Commission, Act, 2019 which provides for a National
Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test under section 14 and a National Exit Test under Section 15 of
the Act so as the exempt from holding NEET and EXIT test. Needless to say that exemption
from these provisions is also the need of the hour for the States which do not opt for National
Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test and National Exit Test. Like-wise, the requirement for the
certificate of National Exit Test to register as a medical practitioner under section 33 is also
required to be amended to fall in tune with new proposed provisions.
The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.
P. WILSON

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE DENTISTS ACT, 1948
(16 OF 1948)
* * * * * * * *
10D. There shall be conducted a unifrom entrance examination to all dental educational
institutions at the undergraduate level and post-graduate level through such designated
authority in Hindi, English and such other languages and in such manner as may be prescribed
and the designated authority shall ensure the conduct of uniform entrance examination in
the aforesaid manner:
Provided that notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, the provisions of
this section shall not apply, in relation to the uniform entrance examination at the undergraduate
level for the academic year 2016-17 conducted in accordance with any regulations made
under this Act, in respect of the State Government seats (whether in Government Dental
College or in a private Dental College) where such State has not opted for such examination.
* * * * * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE NA TIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION ACT, 2019
(30 OF 2019)
* * * * * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * * * * *
(t) “Schedule” means the Schedule to this Act;
* * * * * * * *
14. (1) There shall be a uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to
the undergraduate and postgraduate super-specialty medical education in all medical
institutions which are governed by the provisions of this Act:
Provided that the uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to the
undergraduate medical education shall also be applicable to all medical institutions governed
under any other law for the time being in force.
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test in English
and in such other languages, through such desingnated authority and in such manner, as
may be specified by regulations.
(3) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common
counseling by the designated authority for admission to undergraduated and postgraduate
super-specialty seats in all the medical institutions which are governed by the provisions of
this Act:
Provided that the designated authority of the Central Government shall conduct the
common counseling for all India seats and the designated authority of the State Government
shall conduct the common counseling for the seats at the State level.
15. (1) A common final year undergraduate medical examination, to be known as the
National Exit Test shall be held for granting licence to practice medicine as medical practitioners
and for enrolment in the State Register or the National Register, as the case may be.
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Exit Test through such designated
authority and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The National Exit Test shall become operational on such date, within three years
from the date of commencement of this Act, as may be appointed by the Central Government,
by notification.
5
Uniform
Entrance
Examination
for
undergraduate
and
postgraduate
level.
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
National
Eligibility-
cum-Entrance
Test.
National Exit
Test.

6
(4) Any person with a foreign medical qualification shall have to qualify National Exit
Test for the purpose of obtaining license to practice medicine as medical practitioner and for
enrolment in the State Register or the National Register, as the case may be, in such manner
as may be specified by regulatons.
(5) The National Exit Test shall be the basis for admission to the postgraduate broad-
specialty medical education in medical institutions which are governed under the provisions
of this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and shall be done in such manner
as may be specified by regulations.
(6) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common
counselling by the designated authority for admission to the postgraduate broad-speciality
seats in the medical institutions referred to in sub-section:
Provided that the designated authority of the Central Government shall conduct the
common counselling for All India seats and the designated authority of the State Government
shall conduct the common counselling for the seats at the State level.
* * * * * * * *
33. (1) Any person who qualifies the National Exit Test held under section 15 shall be
granted a licence to practice medicine and shall have his name and qualifications enrolled in
the National Register or a State Register, as the case may be:
Provided that a person who has been registered in the Indian Medical Register
maintained under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 prior to the coming into force of this
Act and before the National Exit Test becomes operational under sub-section (3) of section
15, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Act and be enrolled in the National
Register maintained under this Act.
(2) No person who has obtained medical qualification from a medical institutional
established in any country outside India and is recognised as a medical practitioner in that
country, shall, after the commencement of this Act and the National Exit Test becomes
operational under sub-section (3) of section 15, be enrolled in the National Register unless
he qualifies the National Exit Test.
(3) When a person whose name is entered in the State Register or the National Register,
as the case may be, obtains any title diploma or other qualification for proficiency in sciences
or public health or medicine which is a recognized medical qualification under section 35 or
section 36, as the case may be, he shall be entitled to have such title, diploma or qualification
entered against his name in the State Register or the National Register, as the case may be, in
such manner as may be spcified by the regulations.
* * * * * * * *
Right of
persons to
have licence
to practice
and to be
enrolled in
National
Register and
their
obligations
thereto.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Dentists Act, 1948 and the National Medical Commission Act, 2019.
————
(Shri P . Wilson, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1353RS(S3)—07-12-2021.