1
THE COMPULSORY MEDICAL PREPAREDNESS IN SCHOOLS
BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory medical preparedness in schools to deal with medical
emergencies in the event of injury or sickness to a student in schools; compulsory
appointment of doctors and nurses in schools; first aid training to teachers and staff
and provision of life saving equipments and medicines in schools and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Medical Preparedness in Schools Act,
2009
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XII of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 31ST JULY, 2009
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “doctor” means a medical practitioner registered with the Medical Council
of India;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) “school” means any Government or private institution providing education
upto the standard of five and above and includes any aided institution.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the commencement of this
Act frame a health policy for schools prescribing norms to be followed in case of medical
emergency in schools.
(2) The Central Government shall, in consultation with Medical Council of India,
issue guidelines and directions with regard to medical preparedness in schools, which shall
be binding on all schools.
4. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every school within its jurisdiction
is fully prepared to deal with any medical emergency in accordance with the norms prescribed
in this behalf or directions or guidelines issued in this regard.
5. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every school shall appoint at least
one qualified doctor and one nurse and shall also have a full-fledged first-aid centre with
such life saving equipment and medicines as may be prescribed.
6. (1) Every school shall maintain data of each student who is suffering from any life-
threatening disease and it shall be a duty of the parent of the student to give such information
to the school in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) In the event of a child suffering from any disease and under going medication/it
shall be duty of every parent to keep a slip in the bag of their child mentioning the kind of
medicine being taken by the child.
7. (1) Every school shall in such manner as may be prescribed make arrangement
with any nearby Government or private hospital for the purpose of treating a student in
medical emergency in that hospital immediately.
(2) For the purpose of sub clause (1) every school shall keep a dedicated vehicle for
transportation of the student to the nearby hospital.
8. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every teacher and staff of the school
has undergone a basic level of first-aid training to help the student in case of medical
emergency.
9. The appropriate Government shall ensure monitoring and inspection of medical
preparedness of schools within their jurisdiction and review it after every two years.
10. The appropriate Government shall ensure that no school increases its fee or
charges any extra amount for arranging medical preparedness or refuse admission to any
child if he is having illness which does not affect other students.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, in this
behalf provide requisite funds for the purpose of this Act.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to frame
policy and
issue
guidelines.
Schools to be
prepared for
medical
emergency.
Schools to
appoint
doctor and
nurse.
School to
maintain data
of sick
students.
School to
transport the
child to
nearby
hospital in
medical
emergency.
Teacher and
staff to
undergo first-
aid training.
Monitoring
of medical
preparedness.
Schools not
to increase
fee for
arranging
medical
preparedness.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
12. Whoever found guilty of violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished
with imprisonment, which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to rupees
two lakh or with both.
13. If any difficulty arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
14. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to medical preparedness
in schools and save as provided, the provisions on this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force on the subject.
15. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of
savings.
Power to
make rules.

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Incidents of medical emergency due to injury caused to the students or their sickness
in schools are very common now a days. Of late, many incidents have come to light wherein
students lost their lives for want of proper medical preparedness in schools. One such
incident happened in a prestigious school of the capital wherein a young girl of sixteen years
lost her life as she was not given any first-aid in school and reportedly there was delay in
transporting her to the hospital. As of now, even the Department of Education does not have
any health policy for schools resulting in every school following its own set of norms to deal
with medical emergency. In fact, in majority of the schools there is no proper arrangement for
medical emergency. As of now the Government has not issued any direction to schools in
this regard. Accidents or medical emergencies are quite common in schools. There is an
urgent need that proper attention should be paid towards medical preparedness of schools
in dealing with such emergencies. The schools should have a qualified doctor and nurse
with a full-fledged first-aid centre along with life saving equipment and medicines. The
schools must make some arrangement with a nearby hospital to transport the student to the
hospital in the eventuality of any accident and a dedicated vehicle should be there to
transport the student immediately. The Government should also come out with a policy in
this regard so that a uniform practice is followed in all the schools in the country.
The Bill seeks to achieve above objectives.
VIJAY JAWAHARLAL DARDA

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 11 of the Bill provides that the Central Government, shall after due appropriation,
provide funds for the purposes of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees
one hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of this Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of legislative
powers is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory medical preparedness in schools to deal with medical
emergencies in the event of injury or sickness to a student in schools;
compulsory appointment of doctors and nurses in schools; first
aid training to teachers and staff and provision of life saving
equipments and medicines in schools and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—3548LS(S5)—31-07-2009.