THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In Article 15 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (1) for the word "Sex" the words "sex, gender, sexual Orientation"
shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (2) for the word "sex" the words "sex, gender, sexual Orientation"
shall be substituted.
3. In Article 16 of the Constitution, in Clause (2), for the word ‘‘sex’’, the words ‘‘sex,
gender, sexual orientation shall be substituted.
Short title, and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XII of  2016
Amendment of
article 15.
Amendment of
article 16.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 29TH APRIL, 2016
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS
As our nation evolves, it is important that our Constitution also evolves to address
new challenges and situations, while adhering to its eternal foundational values. Today, we
are faced with a situation where article 15 of the Constitution needs to be extended. Article
15 directs the State to prohibit discrimination on the basis of religion, race, caste, sex, and
place of birth. Over the years, challenges posed in the courts on these grounds have
transformed this formal, legal provision of non-discrimination  into an effort towards
achieving substantive equality. Therefore, it is time that our fundamental rights explicitly
counter exclusion on the basis of gender and sexual orientation.
Parliament has a primary responsibility in this regard, underscored by the Supreme
Court's 2013 judgment in Suresh Kumar Kaushal v. Naz Foundation. The Supreme Court
struck down Delhi High Court's decision to read down Section 377 and specifically called
upon Parliament to lead the way.
Currently, article 15 has a closed list of five specified grounds—religion, race, caste,
sex and place of birth. The same grounds are also applicable to article 16 which guarantees
equality of opportunity in matters of public employment. Other countries have taken a
more lenient view of the grounds on which basis, discrimination is acknowledged and
remedied. Constitutions like that of Canada, and South Africa have used to terms 'grounds
such as...', 'including...', in particular...' or 'other status' to indicate that the list is not exhaustive
and leaves space for terpretation, to include unenumerated or analogous grounds. Article
14 of the European Convention of Human Rights and Section 9 of the South African
Constitution contain the most wide ranging list of expressly prohibited grounds and the
Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution is entirely open-ended, leaving
the courts to determine which grounds should be protected.
India too to seeing a convergence with more liberal non-discrimination clauses. The
Indra Sawhney v. Union of India (1992) judgement indicated that those grounds, "that are
not specified in article 15 but are analogous to those specified therein, and which have the
potential to impair the personal autonomy of an individual" must upon scrutiny, be able to
claim protection under article 15.
However, leaving it to the judicial system alone to respond to issues of inequality on
the basis of sexuality and gender may not be adequate. It is high time to challenge inequality
on the basis of sexual orientation and gender by explicitly expanding article 15 and article
16 to ensure substantive equality.
Hence this Bill.
PROF. M.V. RAJEEV GOWDA
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
* * * * * *
15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment;
or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general
public.
* * * * * *
* * * * * *
16. (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of
birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any
employment or office under the State.
* * * * * *
* * * * * *
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.
Equality of
opportunity in
matters of
public
employment.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—674RS(S3)—03-05-2016.