THE FARMERS (REMOV AL OF INDEBTEDNESS AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of farmers from exploitation by moneylenders and other
unscrupulous elements, removal of indebtedness, extending easy and hassle free
loans, compensation to farmers affected by natural calamities by providing them
adequate relief and for welfare measures such as old age pension, remunerative
prices for their produce to be undertaken by the State and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers (Removal of Indebtedness and Welfare)
Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘farmer’’ means a person who owns land or cultivates land for agricultural or
horticultural purpose and includes the spouse of such a farmer;
(c) ‘‘Fund’’ means the Farmers’ Welfare Fund established under section 5;
Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XII of  2011
Definitions.
5
10

2
(d) ‘‘natural calamity’’ includes drought, floods, cyclones, tsunami, earthquakes,
hailstorms, extreme cold conditions, and such other conditions as may be notified by
the appropriate Government from time to time;
(e) ‘‘old age’’ means where the farmer has attained the age of sixty years or more;
(f) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) ‘‘scheme’’ means the Farmers Credit Scheme framed under section 8.
3.  (1) The appropriate Government shall take such appropriate measures as it may
deem necessary and expedient for the removal of indebtedness amongst the farmers and in
particular shall endeavour to save them from the local moneylenders who exploit the farmers.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) the appropriate Government shall, endeavour
to give remunerative prices and provide compulsory insurance for the produce of the farmers.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
it shall be mandatory for all the public, private and co-operative sector Banks and financial
Institutions to provide loans on easy terms with nominal or without interest to the farmers
affected by natural calamity to restart the agricultutral operations and allied activities and to
withstand the severity of the calamity and its aftermath.
(2) The Banks and Financial Institutions referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall also not
recover the earlier loan given to the farmers by them who have been affected by natural
calamity for at least one year after the calamity and the farmers shall not be denied fresh loans
on this ground.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette establish the Farmers’ Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus of the Fund established under sub-section (1) shall be five
thousand crore rupees of which four thousand crore rupees shall be provided by the Central
Government, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this behalf and one thousand
crore rupees shall be provided by the State Governments in proportion to their farmers
population relevant for the purposes of this Act.
(3) After the initial constitution of the Fund, moneys shall be provided to the Fund by
the Central and State Governments in such proportions and in such manner as may be
prescribed from time to time.
(4) The Fund shall also consist of moneys received from general public, body corporates,
financial institutions, domestic and foreign, as donations, gifts, etc.
(5) The fund shall be utilized for the welfare of farmers in such manner as may be
prescribed.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every farmer who has been affected by natural calamity by losing his crop, livestock, movable
or immovable property shall be entitled to and shall be paid adequate compensation by the
appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) The amount of compensation, payable to a farmer affected by natural calamity
shall be such as may be specified by the Central Government from time to time, by notification
in the Official Gazette and while specifying the compensation, the total loss suffered by a
farmer due to the natural calamity shall be taken into account.
(3) Every claimant for payment of compensation under this Act shall apply to the
officer so appointed by the appropriate Government for the purpose in prescribed form
giving such relevant information as may be prescribed:
Provided that a Village Panchayat may apply for compensation for all the affected
farmers of the village and it shall be deemed that each farmer has applied for the compensation
under this Act.
Removal of
Indebtedness
amongst the
farmers.
Special
provisions
with regard to
loans.
Establishment
of Farmers
Welfare Fund.
Compensation
to farmers
affected by
natural
calamity.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(4) Every claim for compensation under this Act shall be finalized and the payment
made within thirty days of filing of the claim.
(5) The appropriate Government shall provide quality seeds, manure, fertilizers, etc.
to every farmer who lost his crop due to natural calamity for restarting the agricultural
operations.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, on an application made in the prescribed
form, pay old age pension to every old farmer which shall not be less than one thousand
rupees per month from the date of commencement of this Act.
Provided that the old age pension shall be subject to revision on the basis of prevailing
price index.
(2) The old age pension payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid to the farmers by
the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Any farmer who is in receipt of any pension from the appropriate Government
other than the one under this Act or is having adequate source of income shall forfeit his
right to claim old age pension under this Act.
8.  (1) The Central Government shall in consultation with the Government of the States,
frame a scheme to be known as the "Farmers' Credit Scheme" to be executed by Banks and
Financial Institutions.
(2) The Scheme shall provide for,—
(a) the terms and conditions for extending credit to farmers;
(b) the extent to which the credit can be given and settling of previous loans
taken, if any;
(c) the nominal interest that may be charged on farmers credit;
(d) the concessions which are to be given in respect of the credit in case of
natural calamity;
(e) such other things which the Central Government may deem necessary for the
purposes of this Act.
(3) The Central Government shall issue such guidelines to the Banks and Financial
Institutions as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide the adequate funds at the disposal of the States for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
10.  The provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force in any part of the country dealing with the welfare of
farmers.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Old age
pension to
farmers.
Farmers Credit
Scheme.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ours is a vast country and nearly seventy per cent of our total population is engaged
in farming. Due to its vastness, natural calamities do occur in one part or the other almost
round the year. For instance, the whole of Rajasthan, part of Gujarat, West Bengal,
Maharashtra, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, etc. are drought
prone areas. Every year half of Bihar is flooded and the other half faces drought. Similarly, in
Southern States, coastal areas are prone to cyclones or tsunami whereas other part faces
drought conditions. Many parts of the country face earthquake, hailstorm, cloud bursts,
extreme cold conditions and other natural calamities. Farmers mostly bear the brunt of such
natural calamities. They lose their crops, livestock and many a time their dwelling units and
household items including foodgrains. Despite this, the farmers are hounded by the money-
lenders to get back their money taken by the farmers. But natural calamity diminishes their
hopes of returning the money and many of them end their lives in harness. Thounsand of
farmers have committed suicide in recent years in Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab,
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala etc. It is a pity that our
farming community is under indebtedness. Removal of indebtedness has been a chronic and
continuing problem for them which have to be dealt through consistent efforts by the
respective State. Due to increase in life expectancy, the number of old farmers has increased
manifold but most of them are not supported by their children due to various reasons leading
thereby a miserable life. Since ours is a welfare State, the Government is duty bound to
provide social security to the farmers by giving them old age pension, remunerative prices
and providing them adequate compensation, if they are affected by natural calamity and by
taking other welfare measures.
Hence this Bill.
R.C. SINGH
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall give remunerative
prices and provide compulsory insurance for the produce of the farmers. Clause 5 of the Bill
provides for the establishment of the Farmers Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides for
compensation to farmers affected by natural calamity. Clause 7 provides for old age pension
to farmers and Clause 9 provides that Central Government shall provide requisite and adequate
funds to States for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill if enacted will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five
thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum. A non-recurring expenditure
to the tune of rupees one thousand crore may also involve.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—962RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of farmers from exploitation by moneylenders and other
unscrupulous elements, removal of indebtedness, extending easy and hassle free
loans, compensation to farmers affected by natural calamities by providing them
adequate relief and for welfare measures such as old age pension, remunerative prices
for their produce to be undertaken by the State and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri R.C. Singh, M.P .)