As introptcib 1४ iit Ruy ५ 5081४

Bill No. XII of 2001

THE FAMILY WELFARE AND CONTROL OF POPULATION BILL, 2001
A
Bu

to provide for the incentives, to be given to the couples opting for small family or two child
norm through sterlization, by the Central and State Governments and disincentives
for those who do not opt for small family norm and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Family Welfare and Control of Population Act, 2001.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a¥“appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;

(b) “Fund” means National Population Control Fund established under
Section 7;

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Short ttle,
extent and
commence-
ment

Definitions


2

Central * ३. The Central Government shall, through the electronic and print media, non-

G izati
to promote, Governmental organizations, theatre groups and village health guides, promote and

‘one child popularize one child norm vigorously so as to check the ever increasing Population of the
norm through country.
Publicity

Incentives for 4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
opting family the appropriate Government shall provide to a married couple,—

planning.
(a) who opt to remain childless throughout their lives the following incentives,

(@ a dwelling unit, free of cost;
(i) one time out of turn promotion, if in Government service;

wick one time cash reward of rupee fifty thousand, if pot in Government
sel 3

(iv) free medical facilities, pension etc. for old age.
(6) who opts for one child norm the following incentives, namely: —
(@) a dwelling unit on concessional rates, as may be prescribed;

(ii) free education including technical education to the child, free of the
cost;

(iii) one time out of turn promotion to Government Servant and a cash
reward of rupees Twenty Five Thousand to those not in government service.

Provided that if the child is a girl child the couple shall be given a cash
reward of not less than rupees one lakh in fixed deposits for a period of twenty
years.

(iv) employment to the child after completing education.

(c) who have two children and opt for family planning by way of sterlization
thereafter shall be given the following incentives, namely:—

@ dwelling unit at concessional rates, as may be prescribed;
(ii) free education to both the children;

(iii) two advance increments in a grade to Government servant and one
time cash award of rupees twenty five thousand for others.

Disincentives 5. (1) Any married couple who procreates more than two children and thereby violates
and penalty. the provisions of this Act, shall,—

(a) be debarred from availing the facilities of public distribution system;

(b) not be given medical facilities available free of cost to citizens;

(c) not be given the facility of free education to their children;

(d) be debarred from availing loan facilities from Banks and financial institutions;
(e) be debarred from availing such other facilities, as may be prescribed.

(2) Any married couple who procreates more than three children, notwithstanding
anything contained in the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force, shall
on conviction by a court of law be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one year or a fine of not less than twenty five thousand rupees or with both.

20

25

30

35

40


20

3

6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Fundamental Rules or Conduct
Rules or any other law for the time being in force, every Government employee, after the
commencement of this Act, shall observe one child norm and give an undertaking in writing
to his appointing authority that he shall not procreate more than two children.

(2) Any Government employee who contravenes the provisions of Sub-section (/)
shall be terminated with immediate effect.

7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of
the commencement of this Act, establish a Population Control Fund consisting of:—

(@)sums paid to the funds by the appropriate Government after due appropria-
tions made by Law.

(6) donations received from Corporate Bodies, other Bodies, other bodies and
general public,
8. The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes, namely: —

(a) wide publicity through print and electronic media, NGOs, theatre groups,
Village Health Guides etc. regarding dire need for population control;

(b) providing funds to popularize the family welfare programmes;
(c) such other purposes as may be prescribed.

9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any other law, or in any other law, but save as aforesaid
the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for
the time being in force in any part of the country.

10. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Small famuly
norms for
Government
employees.

Establishment
of population
control Fund

Utilization of
the Fund.

Over-riding
effect of the
Act.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECPS AND REASONS

Since independence our population has grown leaps and bounds and has already
crossed one billion mark. Today we are the second highest populous country after China.
This tremendous increase in population has resulted in many socio-economic problems like
shortage of housing, educational facilities, food and potable water, civic amenities,
unemployment, environmental degradation, health facilities, transport facilities etc. The
overcrowding is also resulting in law and order situation and also widening the gap between
the heaves and have nots and it is consistently creating explosive situation. In fact there is
no balance between the population growth and the infrastructure and available opportunities.

If the present trend of population growth continues it will not be possible for us to
tackle these problems effectively as they will be beyond our control. So if we have to survive
we have to go for population control. Therefore the time has come when stringent measures
to control the population growth have to initiated on warfootings otherwise our future
generations will certainly not forgive us for this fatal lapse. It has not become necessary to
give incentives to those who opt for family planning and disincentives and even prison to
those contributing excessively to population explosion.

Hence this Bill.

K.B, KRISHNAMURTHY


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for publicity by Central Government to promote one child
norm in the country. Clause 4 provides for various incentives for adopting family planning.
Clause 7 provides for the establishment of Population Control Fund. The Bill if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India and it is estimated that rupees one
thousand crore will involve as recurring expenditure per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crores is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of Legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for the incentives to be given to the couples opting for small family or two child
norm through sterilization by the Central and State Governments and disincentives for
those who do not opt for small family norm and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

(Shri K.B. Krishnamurthy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6404RS—15.2.2001.