RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Food Corporations Act, 1964.

(Shri Shanta Kumar, Minister of Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3657RS—21.02.2000


AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XII of 2000
THE AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY BILL, 2000
A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of an Aquaculture Authority for regulating the activities
connected with aquaculture in the coastal areas and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. (7) This Act may be called the Aquaculture Authority Act, 2000.

(2) Provisions of section 25 shall come into force at once and the remaining provi-
sions of this Act shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “aquaculture” means culturing, under controlled conditions in ponds, pens
and enclosures or otherwise, of shrimp, prawn, fish or any other aquatic life in saline
water but does not include fresh water aquaculture;

Short title and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


2

(b) “Authority” means the Aquaculture Authority established under sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 4;

(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authonty;

(d) “coastal area” means the area declared as the Coastal Regulation Zone for
the time being in the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of
Environment and Forests No. S.O. 114(E), dated the 19th February, 1991 and includes
such other area as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,

Specify;

(e) ‘membtr” means, the member of the Authority appointed under section 4
and includes the Chairperson and the member-secretary;

(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(g) “regulations” mietins regulations made by the Authority under this Act.

(2) Words and expressidns used herein and not defined but defined in the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 shall have the meanings assigned to them in that Act.

CHAPTER II
GENERAL POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT

Power of 3. The Central Government shall take all such measures as it deems necessary or
Cent en tt expedient for regulation of aquaculture by prescribing guidelines, to ensure that aquacul-
take गा ture farming does not cause any detriment to the coastal environment.
to protect
environment.

CHAPTER III

THE AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY

Establishment 4. (7) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
of Authority tion in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the
and appoint: purposes of this Act an Authority to be called the Aquaculture Authority.

Chairperson (2) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government
and members. may decide.
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall be appointed by
the Central Government, namely:—
(a) the Chairperson who has been a Judge of a High Court;
(b) one member who is an expert in the field of aquaculture;
(c) one member who is an expert in the field of pollution control;
(d) one member who is an expert in the field of environment protection;
(e) one member to represent the Ministry of Environment and Forests of the
Central Government;
(f) one member to represent the Ministry of Agriculture of the Central
Government;
(g) one member’ to represent the Ministry of Commerce of the Central
Government;
(h) four members to represent the coastal States;
(i one member-secretary.
(4) The term of office of the members shall be three years.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of the members shall be such as may be prescribed.

Disqualifica- 5. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member if he-
tions fo ent (a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in
ce member, the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or

(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or

29 of 1986.


(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or

(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a
Corporation owned or controlled by the Government; or

(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other
interest in the Authority as is likely to effect prejudicially the discharge by him of his
functions as a member.

6. Subject to the other terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed, any
person ceasing to be a member shall be eligible for reappointment as such member.

7. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including the quorum
thereat, as may be specified by regulations.

(2) If for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority

any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting. ~

(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided
by the majority ‘of votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality
of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence the person presiding, shall have and exercise a
second or casting vote.

8. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalidated merely by reason of —
(a) any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the Authority; or

(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the
Authority; or

(c) any irregularity in the procedure adopted by the Authority not affecting the
merits of the-case.

9. (1) For the purpose of discharging its functions, the Authority shall appoint
such number of officers and other employees as it may consider necessary on such
terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations.

(2) The Authority may appoint, from time to time, any person as adviser or consultant
as it may consider necessary on such terms and conditions as may be specified by the
regulations.

10. All orders, decisions and other instruments of the Authority shall be authenticated
under the signature of the Chairperson or any other member or any officer of the Authority
authorised by it in this behalf.

CHAPTER IV
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY

11. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under section 3,
the Authority shall exercise the following powers and perform the following functions,
namely:—

(a) to prescribe regulations for the construction and operation of aquaculture
farms within the coastal areas;

(6) to inspect aquaculture farms with a view to ascertaining their environmental
impact caused by aquaculture;

(c) to grant licences to aquaculture farms;

(बी to order removal or demolition of any aquaculture farms which is causing
pollution after hearing the occupier of the farm,

Eligibility of
member for
reappoint-
ment.
Meetings of
Authority.

Vacancy in
Authority not
to invalidate

proceeding.

Appointment
of officers,
consultants
and other
employees of
Authority.

Authentication
of orders and
other
instruments of
Authority.

Functions of
Authority.


Power to enter.

Licences for
aquaculture
farming.

4

(९) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.

(2) Where the Authority orders for removal or demolition of any aquaculture farm
under clause (d) of sub-section (/), the workers of the said farm shall be paid compensation
in accordance with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

12. Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person generally or specially authorised
by the Authority in this behalf, may, wherever it is necessary to do so for any purposes of this
Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any aquaculture land, pond, pen or enclosure and—

(a) make any inspection, survey, measurement, valuation or inquiry;
(b) remove or demolish any structures therein;
(c) do such other acts or things as may be prescribed:

Provided that no such person shall enter on any aquaculture land, pond, pen, or enclosure
without giving such occupier at least twenty-four hours notice in writing or his intention to
do so.

13. (7) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall carry on aquaculture
farming in the coastal areas unless he holds a licence issued in this behalf by the Authority.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), a person engaged in
aquaculture farming immediately before the appointed day may continue to carry on such
activity without such a licence for a period of six months from that day and if he makes an
application for such licence under this sub-section within the said period of six months, till
the communication to him of the Authority disposing of such application.

(3) A licence issued under this section—
(a) shall be valid for a period of five years;
(b) may be renewed from time to time for a like period; and
(c) shall be in such form and shall be subject to such conditions as may be
specified by regulations.
(4) A person who intends to carry on aquaculture farming shall make an application
in such form and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed for the issue of a licence.

(5) No application for the issue of a licence to commence any activity connected
with aquaculture farming shall be granted unless the Authority after making such enquiry
as it thinks fit is satisfied that grant of such licence shall not be deterimental to the coastal
environment.

(6) No licence shall be granted for aquaculture farming proposed to be carried out
within two hundred metres from the High Tide Line:

Provided that in case of creeks, rivers and backwaters, no such licence shall be granted
within the Coastal Regulation Zone declared for the time being under the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986:

Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in the case of an aquacul-
ture farm which is in existence on the appointed day.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "High Tide Line” means the line
on the land up to which the highest water line reaches during the spring tide.

(7) No application for renewal of a licence for carrying on any activity connected with
aquaculture farming shall be rejected unless the holder of such licence has been given a
reasonable opportunity of presenting his case.

14 of 1947,

29 of 1986.


45 of 1860.

5

(8) Every person to whom a licence has been issued or renewed under this section
shall comply with the terms and conditions specified in the licence and the provisions of the
Act and the rules, regulations and orders made thereunder.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “appointed day" means the date of
establishment of the Authority.

CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

14. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, pay to the Authority in each financial year such sums as may be
considered necessary for the performance of functions of the Authority under this Act.

15, (1) The Authority shall have its own fund and all sums which may, from time
to time, be paid to it by the Central Government and all the receipts of the Authority
(including any sum which any State Government or any other authority or person
may hand over to the Authority) shall be credited to the fund and all payments by the
Authority shall be made therefrom.

(2) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested
in such manner as may, subject to the approval of the Central Government, be decided
by the Authority.

(3) The Authority may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its func-
tions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the
fund of the Authority.

16. The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may
be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the esti-
mated receipts and expenditure and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central
Government.

17. The Authority shall prepare once in every calendar year, in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government
and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

18. (/) The Authority shall cause to be maintained such books of account and other
books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may, in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed.

(2) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, after closing its annual accounts prepare a
statement of accounts in such form, and forward the same to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India by such date, as the Central Government may, in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General, determine.

(3) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such times and in such manner as he thinks fit.

(4)The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall
cause the sanie to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

CHAPTER VI
MisceELLANEOUS

19. The Chairperson and other members and the officers and other employees of the
Authority shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.

Paysnent to
Authority.

Fund of '
Authonty.

Budget.

Annual report.

Accounts and
audit.

Members,
officers and
other
‘employees of
Authority to
be public
servants.


Protection of
action taken in
good faith,

Power to
remove
difficulties.

Power of
Cental
Government to
nake rites

Power of
Authority to
make
regulations.

6

20. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or against the Chairperson or other members of the Authority or any other
person authorised by the Chairperson or other members for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made
thereunder.

21. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of thisAct, the Central
Government may, by order published in thé Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.

22, (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) all or any of the matters referred to in section 3;

(b) the terms and conditions of the service of the members under sub-section
(5) of section 4;

(c) the terms and conditions for reappointment of a member under section 6;

(d) to perform such other functions by the Authority under clause (e) of sub-
section (/) of section 11;

(e) the conditions and restrictions with respect to the exercise of the power to
enter under section 12 and the matters referred to in clause (c) of that section;

(f) the application form and fee for grant of licence under sub-section (4) of
section 13;

(g) the form in which and the time within which the Authority shall prepare its
budget under section 16 and its annual report under section 17;

(A) the manner in which the accounts of the Authority shall be maintained and
audited and the date before which the audited copy of the accounts together with the
auditor’s report thereon shall be furnished to the Central Government under
section 18;

(i) any other matters which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

23. (1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and the rules generally to carry out the
purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice in the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —

(a) the times and places of the meetings of the Authority and the procedure to
be followed for the transaction of business at 5001 meetings;

(b) the terms and conditions of service, method of recruitment and the
remuneration of the officers and other employees appointed by the Authority;

(c) the terms and conditions, method of appointment of any person as adviser
or consultant;

(d) the form and conditions subject to which a licence may be granted under
clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 13;

(e) generally for better regulation of the aquaculture farming.


29 of 1986.

2A. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.

25. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (v) of sub-section (2) of
section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 or clause (d) of sub-rule (3) of rule
5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, in the notification of the Government of
India in the Ministry of Environment and Forest No. 5.0. 114(E), dated the 19th February,
1991 (hereafter referred to in this section as the said notification), in paragraph 2, after
sub-paragraph (xiii), the following sub-paragraph shall be inserted and shall always be
deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 19th day of February, 1991, namely:—

“(xiv) nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to aquaculture.”.

(2) The said notification shall have and shall be deemed always to have effect for
all purposes as if the foregoing provisions of this section had been in force at all material
times and accordingly notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order
of any court, tribunal or authority, no aquaculture farming carried on or undertaken or
purporting to have been carried on or undertaken shall be deemed to be in contravention of
the said notification and shall be deemed to be and to have always been for all purposes in
accordance with law, as if the foregoing provisions of this section had been in force at all
material times and notwithstanding anything as aforesaid and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in
any court for the enforcement of any direction given by any court of any decree or order
directing the removal or closure of any aquaculture farms activity or demolition of any
structures connected thereunder which would not have been so required to be removed,
closed or demolished if the foregoing provisions of this section had been in force at all
material times.

Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.

Validation,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Supreme Court in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 561/1994 has held that aquaculture is
an industry and henee it is covered by the prohibition imposed by sub-paragraph (i) of
paragraph 2 of the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment
and Forest No. S.O. 114(E), dated 19.2,1991 issued under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and read with rule 5(3) (d) of the Environment (Protec-
tion) Rules, 1986. The Supreme Court has further directed that an Aquaculture Authority
shall be established to regulate aquaculture in coastal areas. The intention of the Govern-
ment was not to treat coastal aquaculture as a prohibited activity within the meaning of the
said notification. The effect of this judgment is to close all aquaculture farms, except tradi-
tional and improved traditional, in the coastal areas. This activity mainly utilizes saline
areas along the coast-line which areas are not suitable for other activities and provides
employment to approximately three lakh workers. Large investment of public and private
funds has also been made in this farming/activity. If these farms are closed down, it may lead
to about three lakh workers being rendered unemployed. Hence, it is considered necessary
to bring this Bill to save the employment of the workers and also the investment already
made in this economic activity. It is also considered necessary to provide for future growth
of aquaculture farming in a manner which is consistent with the requirement of safeguarding
of the environment. In order to achieve the above objects and to clear all doubts, it has been
decided to amend the said notification to clarify that aquaculture was not intended to be a
prohibited activity within the meaning of that notification. Since it is necessary to validate
all coastal aquaculture farms set up hitherto retrospectively, this legislation has become
necessary . It is proposed to set up an Aquaculture Authority to regulate shrimp farming
activities in coastal areas in future as well as to review the cases of existing aquaculture
farms and to ensure that only those which carry on aquaculture farming in an eco-friendly
manner will be allowed to continue. Further the Bill would provide for making rules by
Government of India for ensuring that aquaculture is not detrimental to coastal environment.
A provision has also been made for payment of compensation to workmen in accordance
with the provision of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 in respect of the farms that are to be
closed down after the review by the Authority.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DeLut; NITISH KUMAR.
The 18th February, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Sub-clause (1) clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an Aquaculture
Authority and sub-clause (5) of the said clause relates to the salaries and allowances of the
Chairperson and other members of the Authority. Clause 9 inter alia provides for the sala-
ries and allowances of the officers and other employees of the Authority.

2. Itis estimated that the Bill, when enacted, will involve a non-recurring expenditure
of rupees fifty-seven lakhs and fifty-four thousands and recurring expenditure of rupees
forty-one lakhs and thirty-four thousands during every financial year.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules may be made, inter alia, includes
to prohibit any activity which is detrimental to coastal environment, the terms and conditions
of the appointment of the members, procedure to be followed by members in the discharge
of their functions, inspection of the aquaculture farms, the form and manner in which the
budget and reports are to be prepared by the Aquaculture Authority and the manner in
which the accounts of the Authority are to be maintained.

2. Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make regulations consistent with
the provisions of the Bill and the rules made thereunder. The matters in respect of which
regulations may be made, inter alia, relate to regulating the meetings of the Authority and
the procedure for conducting business thereat, the terms and conditions of service of the
officers and employees of the Authority, regulations for the construction and operation of
aquaculture farms within the coastal areas.

3. The matters in respect of which the rules or regulations may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail. The delegation of legislative powers is thus of a normal
character.

10