As
PASSED BY Trp RATYs Sana
ON
THE 23Rp JULY, 1984

Bill No. XIL-C of 1984

THE WAKF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1084
A
BILL

further to amend the Wakf Act, 1954.
it enacted by Parliament in the Trity-fifth Year of the Republic

BE ।
iq as follows :—
‘ id Short
1, (1) This Act may be called the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1984. title
ह and
9) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the Central com-

) overnment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and mence
torent dates may be appointed for the different provisions of this Act ment.
“Te different States or for different areas within a State, and any
stare in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall in
tate or area therein be construed as a reference to the

velation to any 9 Pasar
id commencement of that proviSion In such State or area.

184 2. In section 1 of the Wakf Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the Amend-

principal Act), in sub-section (3), for the first proviso, the following ment

proviso shal] be substituted, namely: — : dew

“Provided that, as soon aS may be, after the commencement of

'; the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1984, the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a date on which the
provisions of this Act. as amended by the Wakf (Amendment) Act,
1984, shall come into force in the States of Uttar Pradesh and West
Bengal and in those parts of the States of Gujarat and Maharashtra

2” $n which the provisions of this Act do not apply, and different dates
may be appointed for different States or for different areas, and for



2

ions of this Act, as so amended, d
d, the corresponding law, aPPlicabs. and
| ee in that State or in any part thereof, or, 8६ the कि at
in force 1 | shall cease to operate, and, on such Cesgep may |
in such ne shall be deemed to have been repealed » SUch 4.
ponding = the Legislature of that State, but SUCH cag.” थे।
enacted 4 -evious operation of such corresponding lie shay) |
affect the P thing done or any action taken in eXerciga and muy |
thereto, re or under any such corresponding 1७७ shal] any
—s done or taken in the exercise of power
to have

20%
under this Act, 88 4

the different prov’ .
the date so appo!” ९

$ Co Cen,
mended by the Wakf (Amendment) "थे न

‘a:
thie Act, 88 80 amended, were in force on the date on ५, 1 ss ५

as if this ) tion was taken:”. Which |
thing was done oF actio कह
3. In section ४ of the principal Act—

Ainend- —

ment (i) clause (५) shall be oml

af sec-

मेक (ii) in clause CG) 5

(a) after the words “to be the mutawallj of a y, es
cludes any”, the words “person who is a mutawallj of a Mer in.
virtue of any custom or who is ४ shall be inserted: f by

(b) for the ते “any person or Committee for the tin

being managing or administering any wakf PToperty a. eae 2
| Pat | ५ C

‘he words “any person, Committee or Corporation fo, the tn

Lilu Me

being managing or administering any wakf or wakg Property:

Provided that no member of a Committee or
shal] be deemed to be a mutawalli unless such
office bearer of such Committee or Corporation”
tuted;

Corporation
member ig an :.

shall be subst.

(iii) for clause (9), the following clause shall be substituted
namely: —

‘(g) “net annual income”, in relation to a wakf, means the
net annual income determined in accordance with the

provisions ...
of the Explanations to sub-section (1) of section 46. *

(iv) after clause (k), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely: —

‘(ka) “Survey Commissioner” means the Survey Commis.
sioner of Wakfs appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4 and $5

includes any additional or assistant survey commissioner of
Wakfs;

(kb) “Tribunal”, in relation to any area, means the 1000:
nal, constituted under sub-section (1) of section 55, having
Jurisdiction in relation to that area:’

‘ 40
(०) in clause (1) ,—
(a) in the o

३० Tek bn pening portion, after the words “person pt
‘sing isiam”

' the words “or any other person” shall be inserted

(9) in sub

Clause 1), aft 6; akt by user”,
the words “buf (i) er the words “a w

such wakf shall not cease to be a wakf by 7680 $:

7



3

6 the user having ceased

Irresnectiy
9 P : ड़ . ७ = fy
55९7" shall be inserted: f

only .
euch ce

the

Period of

९) in sub-clause (ii), after the

. Ww 0 rd S
११ 4 ५01 S “mu ‘- aterm 4

ma shrut-y]-

‘ G22) servicae
nh” sha'l be inserted; vices, madad.
a
ub-clause (ili ‘ing |
‘ d) for § lv: (itt), the following sub-clause shall be
gubstituted, namely:— हे

८४ (8) a wakf-alal-aulad;”:

(९) to clause (0), the following proviso shall be added

namely:~~
‘0 “Provided that in the case of a dedication by a person
not professing Is'am, the wakf shall be void if, on the death

of such person, any objection to such dedication is raised
by one or more of his legal representatives:”:

(vi) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted,

—
~~

namely: ~

‘(la) “Wakf Commissioner” means the Wakf Commissioner
, ppointed under sub-section (1) of section 21°’.

4, In section 4 of the principal Act,—

(i) for the word “Commissioner”, wherever it occurs, the words
Commissioner” shall be substituted;

“Survey
(ii) for the word “Commissioners”, wherever it occurs, the words
“survey Commissioners” shall be substituted;
\
(iii) after sub-section, (5), the following sub-section shall ७९
05 ;nserted, namely: —

“(6) The State Government may, by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, direct the Survey Commissioner to make a second
or subsequent survey of wakf properties in the State and 1016
provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) shall apply to
such survey as they app!y to a survey directed under  sub-
४! section (1):

Provided that no such second or subsequent survey shall be
made until the expiry of a pericd of twenty years from the date
on which the report in relation to the immediately previous sur-

५ vey was submitted under sub-section (°).”.

5. In section 5 of the princip2] Act, in sub-section (2), for the words
‘existing in the State, or as the case may be. the part of the State”, the
Words “in the State, or as the case may be, the part of the State, whether
i existence at the commencement of this Act or coming into existence

f फ/ shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substi-
ed,

Amend-
n 2nt

OL Sec.
tien 4,

Amend
ment
of sec
tion 6.


4

न
का Amend- 6. In section 6 of the prine pal Act,—
ment ; re
of sec- (a) in sub-sechion (3), 107 the word “Commissioner” ,
tan 6 ‘ecioner” . subs ed: * » the ,
tion 6. ‘Survey Commissionel shall be substitutea; ९ Worg

(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section bas

inserted, namely: —
“(5) On an

ment) Act, 1984 in a

be instituted 07 com!
lation to शाह question re

d from the commencement of the Wak

State, no suit or other legal sarin {Ameng.

nenced in a civil court in that sea’ shal}
a ‘

ferred to in sub-Section (1). 11 re

7. After section 601 the principal Act, the following section h
Shall be
0

Inser-

tion of inserted, namely: —

new sec-

tion 6A.

Power “gA, (1) If, after the commencement of the Wak

= — ment) Act, 1984, any question arises whether a particular (Amend.

deter- specified as wakf property in a list of wakfs published , Property

mine section (2) of section 5 ig wakf property or not, or wheth nder syp.

disputes specified in such list is a Shia Wakf or a Sunni Wakf me 8 Wake 15

regard- the mutawalli of the wakf, or any person interested th e Board or

ing * apply to the Tribunal having jurisdiction in relation to ache ine
Operty,

for the decision of the question and the decision of the Trib
Unal in

respect of such matter shall be final:
20

Provided that—
(a) in the case of the list of wakfs relatin
g t
the State and published or purporting to have talk Part of
after the commencement of the Wakf (Amendment) pitied
no such application shall be entertained after the expiry ct, 1984,
year from the date of publication of the list of wakfs und of one 25
section (2) of section 5; and er sub-
(b) in the case of the list of wakf
s relati
part of the State and published or purporting oe
been published ai any time within a period of one year “a
mediately preceding the commencement of the Wakf (Amend.
पट कं ४६ बट पा uch an application may be entertained by the
unal within
ment: 1 the period of one year from such commence-

and oe — that Wate any such question has been heard
wai y decided by . civil court in a suit instituted before such 35
ncement, the Tribunal shall not re-open such question.
be oe where the Tribunal has no jurisdiction by reason of
note ‘spe of sub-section (5) no proceeding under this section in
authority be wakf shall be stayed by any court, tribunal! of other
of any appeal a. of हर pendency of any suit, application of 4o
‘ proceeding arisin sui |«
cation, appeal or other proceeding Sant of say ही ad
(3) The Wakf Commiss:
hi ommissi
application under ib edetion, #2) मिला अत हे toes = ey

(4) The list 7
9, and where pt Ae on published under sub-section (2) of section *)
ch list is modified in pursuance of a decision of

the Tribunal
final. under sub-section (1), the list as so modified, shal! be



‘f

j0

90

i)
ae |

39

40

45

g [In
, missione? ’

5

The Tribunal 8118 |] 1101 have

| JUrisdic
nich | the subject-matter of
VW

ion th deter
ar) हु

need in a civil Court कम vt proceed net

pa or comme” eden “yy det sub-section (1) 1 4 154

[01९7७ the commencement of the Wakg (Amendment) a... S<ttion

6, pefo ५ the subject-matter of any appeal from ही a ५ 1984, or

which such commencement in any sye! _ प्यास
९

n for revision or review arising 65४ Of such sujt
5 t? ते कः
the case may be.”. . Proce

Mine an,
lie

‘

\

pelore .

‘catlo
की हा
0 (0-80९४0) (1) of section 7 of the

Principal Act fo
७ c / for t
” the words “Survey Commis

| he word
sioner” shal] be sub

mn Stituted.
«Ce

9. 17. sccessive sessions, and if, before the

{wo

ing

aibstitute

e
be §

jn
हे b
10, After su

5
oh

gub-section (3) of section 8D of the Principal Act, for the words

h _— expiry of the session in
1७ [8 so laid oF the session Immediately following”, the words “in

ore successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
oF eal following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid”
jar’
ubstituted.

-section (2) of section 9 of the

principal Act, the f है
shall be inserted, namely: -.. P e follow

qub-section
«(3) It shall be lawful for the Board to so re

rative set-up in the State as to ensure better
in the State.”.

“Organise its ad.

minist administration of

I

the wast aan |
For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be

d, namely: —

40, (1) The Board shall, in the case of a State. as

also in the
se of the Union territory of Delhi, consist of—
ra

(a) four members, of whom two shall be elected from
among themselves by such of the Muslim members of Parlia-
ment as have been elected thereto from that State or the Union

territory of Delhi, as the case may be, and the other two shall
pe elected from among themselves by such of the Muslim mem-
bers of the State Legislature as have been elected thereto, and
such election shall be held in accordance with the system of
proportional representation by means of a single transferable
vote in such manner as may be prescribed:

Provided that where the number of Muslim members elect-
ed to Parliament from a State, or, as the case may be, the Union
territory of Delhi, is only one, or where the number of Muslim
members elected to a State Legislature is only one, the Muslim
member who has been elected to Parliament from the State or
the Union territory of Delhi, as the case may be, and the Mustim
member who has been elected to the State Lesisleture, shall be-
come, by virtue of such election, member of the Board and the
remainder of the membership of the Board under _ this clause
shall be filled up by the State Government by appointing suitable
persons as members of the Board:

Provided further that where no Muslim has been पकने
from the State or the Union territory of Delhi to Parliament,
or, as the-case my be, to the State Legislature, the vacancy in

Amend.
ment

Of sec.
tion 7

Amend.
ment of
section
81),

Amend-
ment of
section 9

Substi-
tution

of sec-
tion 10,
Composi.-
tion

of the
Board.


Omission
of ste-
tion 11,

Amend-
ment of
section
15.

न

6

1067" this clause sha]] he Al
* filleg

ap pointing suitable ह
pI Perso, Un

Board ul
sembersh'!P of the © + by
the के ८(॥९ Covernmen f
1e 96 बडा
| of the Board: i
that in determining the number
0 ih mbers of the Board, the State Gover Shi;
3 कि ञ Mn
he number and value of the Shia wa,, “Mt ;
vite’ ९ | e Board a $ an
dministered by th ard and the ap tnd

| be made, So far as may be, jp Oint.

by
members

/ a
Sunni Wakfs to be
6 members ५

ment st ‘a determination;

h
ance with suc be appointed by the State Gq
b) five members to | Vern. .
ment err hall be 8 Shia in the States where there 1६
i) 0 no
Shia Board: ] be a person who in the opinion .
(ii) one en recognised scholar in Islamic theolo that

89;

e appointed from among the thee 5
tion in the State; and bers

Government is
(iii) one shall b

of any Muslim organisa
(iv) two shall be persons possessing administrative

experience and knowledge of laws

(c) one mutawalli, to be appointed by the State Govem. 2,

oe Wakf Coramissioner, who shall be, er —
Member-Secretary of the Board. |
ences to “State Legislature” in this 5४३0.

E ion.—The refer
aplanation n relation to the Union territory of Delp; 25

tion shall be construed 1 aud ु
= stereos to the Metropolitan ouncil of Delhi constituted unde,

section 3 of the Delhi Administration Act, 1966.

(2) The Board shall, in the case of a Union territory other than
the Union territory of Delhi, consist of—

(a) five members, to be appointed by the Central Govern. 20
ment from amongst the categories of persons specified in clause

(b) of sub-section (1), and, for this purpose, the provisions of the

said clause shall apply to the composition of the Board under

this sub-section as they apply to the composition of the Board

under sub-section (1); 35

(b) one mutawalli to be appointed by the Central Govern-
ment; and
(९) the Wakf Commissioner, who shall be, ex officio

Member-Secretary of the Board.

(3) Whenever the Board is constituted or reconstituted, 88 the 40
case may be, the members of the Board present at a meeting convened
for the purpose by the Wakf Commissioner, shall elect one from
amongst themselves (other than the Wakf Commissioner) 88 the
Chairman of the Board.’,

12, Section 11 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 45

13. In section 13 of the principal Act, for clauses (d) and (e), the
following clauses shall be substituted, namely: —
sl a if he has beer. convicted of an offence involving moral
= ude, and such e“nviction has not been reversed or he has not
granted full pardon in respect of such offence: ५४
>

/



7

(० if he has been, on a previous occasion,—
(i) removed from his office ag a member or
; aS 8 mutawalli,
(ii) removed by an order of a com
fom any position of trust, either for
corruption.”

petent court or tribunal
mismanagement or for

section 15 of the principal Act,—

14. In Amend.
, है : aul ment of
(a) in sub-section (1), कक;
15,

(i) for the words “general superintendence of all wakfs in

8 State shal] vest”, the words “general superintendence of all

[0 wakfs in 8 State in relation to all matters, except those which

are expressly required by this Act to be dealt with by the Wakf
Commissioner, shall vest” shall be substituted; .

(ii) after the proviso, the following Explanation shall
be inserted, namely: —

‘Explanation.—For the removal of doubts it is hereby declar-
ed that in this sub-section, “wakf” includes a wakf in relation to
which any scheme has been made by any court of law, whether
before OF after the commencement of the Wakf (Amendment)

Act, 1984.’;

20
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shal! be substituted,
namely:—
“(b) to ensure that the income and other property of
8 wakf are applied to the objects and for the purposes for
*) which that wakf was created or intended;”;

(ii) clause (6) shall be omitted;

(iii) in sub-clause (ii?) of clause (०), for the words “or as neary
as practicable similar, to the original object”, the words “or nearly
, similar, to the original object, or for the benefit of the poor or for the
purpose of promotion of knowledge and learning in the Muslim com-
munity” shall be substituted;
(iv) in the Explanation, for the words “shall be exercised”, the
words “shall be exercised under sub-section (1)” shall be substituted;
(v) clauses (f) and (A) shall be omitted;

39

(v) clauses (f) and (h) shall be omitted;

(vi) in clause (j), for the words, figures and letter “or lease, as
required by section 36A”, the words “or lease, in accordance with the
provisions of this Act” shall be substituted;

40 (vii) clauses (1), (mm) and (n) shall be omitted;

(c) in sub-section (3),—

(i) the words, brackets, letter and figure “settled any
scheme of management under clause (d) of sub-section (2) or”
Shall be omitted:


8

affected by such settlemen,

९ *0105 ५.
(ii) for क्र we ected by such direction” dj
ds “or 8 n” shall rete,

tion’, the words
stituted: me

) for the words “getting aside such settlemen,

०, ॥ ह ords “settiD§ aside such directions” shay] OT dip

» the W |
tion 2 |
stituted. .

5

f the principal Act, the following sect;

15. After section 15 0

Inset-
‘ f i
ma on be inserted, namely:
{ions 158,
158, 15५
and 15D. ४ की
Power “5A. (1) Where the Board is ०, = ae that any y
to deve which is wakt property, ané हे ie t in the possession = -/@nd
lop urban mutawalll of the wakf, and 1n relation to which no proce Of the
we quisition has been commenced under any law for the bien of ६६. 16
कर jn force relating to the acquisition of land, and which has . being
property. eq in the State under any aw for the time being in fives ot Vest
(0 land reforms (hereinatter referred to as the specif relati
tial for the development of such ‘te Urban,
or la
nd

jand) offers a poten

uses, such as, the establishment of any shopping centre ७

or for the construction of residential flats or for any a Market
er ९

Om.

mercial uses and that the proposed development of the y

land is in accordance with any land uses specified, un Fy of sue

for the time being mm force, in any Master Plan or sia ANY law 2

any, prepared by any local or other statutory authority er Plan, ig

१0 the area in which such specified urban land is है अंक relation

make an application to the State Government specifying “. it May
which is intended to be executed ae the

९ de. ‘

nature of the work
of such land.

velopment of the use
3

f any application made under sub-sectj
ion (1)

(2) On receipt ०
t shall issue a notice requiring—

the State Governmen
(a). the local or other statutory authority to stat
the intended development of the use of the speci Pry whether
is in accordance with the land uses specified in the rane land
or other Plan which has been prepared by such aster Plan
the area in which such specified urban land _ authority for हि
whether any project for the development of ne gsi and
-the specified urban land hag been, or is proposed and uses of
taken by such authority, and where no such Plan ‘ be, under.
Lapses such authority has any objection +e lias
_ pment, by the Board, of the specified urb € propos-
and uses specified in sub-section (1); an land for

(b) the Director General of Archae
dea fund kia the specified urban pac tor Mgt, _
aia ta swibistek 2 (1) is likely to affect orejudicial pone
esnips —hsenty within the meaning of the pe
saa ie sleeve 0 Act, 1904, or any ancient हि An-
deal tedld Bo? हल site and remains which have b onu- 7 of 19
Ancient Monuments and 3० नह] च
| ites

and Remains Act
, 1958 t ]
0106 of national importance;

24 of 19s


’

10

20

25

१0

4”

>

(c) the mutawalli of (|

+ . . e Conc
he has any objection to the Proposed Wakf ty State
ed urban land for the land uses « development of a >* 67
. Ji

7 . कस S ‘Cc fj e th f
if not, whether he is reag, Pecified in, 16 Speci.

a ork । Y and wi); SUD-see tin
proposed work for the developmen हि then (0 cary or sg
ses withi ? Spe १७६
for such land uses within the time spe > specified urban we
Cihed in | land
the

whether he has the financig] and oth

The notice referred to jp Sub- 2
(3) being Jess than sixty dave section (2) shal |
ge, 1 wy Gays, within which ३ re 2५1५ the

Notice. and

er means to do 80

(4) If no reply is received to th

: : , e notice is
or if after considering such sued

: ; replies

pe ( e , as ma be .
jrsuance of the said hee and if, after making mk oe in
: may think fit, the State Government iS satisfied that ७७ ae
it wh

the specified urban 1
(a) the speci an land is wak |
in the possession of the mutawallj of he Property and is not

isiti wakf and no process
of acquisition कि such land has been commenced under re re
for the tume being in force relating to the acquisitior i aw
and that such land has not vesteg in the 1 of land

ing i State u
for the time being in force relating to bail “ioe any law

(b) no project for the development of the land uses
of the specified urban land has been, or js proposed to be. under.
taken by the local or other statutory authority;

(c) the proposed work for the development of the specified
urban land for the land uses specified in sub-section (1) is con-
ducive to the interests of the wakf and is in the public interest; —

(d) the proposed development of the specified urban land
for such land uses is in accordance with the land uses specified
10 the Master Plan or other Plan as aforesaid, or, where there
[8 no such Plan, has been approved by the local or other statu-
tory authority aforesaid;

(८) the proposed development of the specified urban land
for such land uses is not likely to prejudicially affect any an-
cient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monuments
Preservation Act, 1904, or any ancient monument or archaeolo-
gical site and remains which have been declared to be of na
tional importance under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeo:
logical Sites and Remains Act, 1958; and

(f) the mutawalli does not have any objection to the pre
posed development of land uses and is either unwilling to exe.
cute, or if willing, does not have the means of executing, tne
proposed work within the time specified in the notice issued

to him,
the State Government may take over the management of the speci-
fied urban land for such period, not being more than five years of
period not being more than fifteen years in the ager
gate, as the State Government may, from time to time, specify by
notification in the Official] Gazette. and shall thereafter, entrust the
management of the specified urban land to the Board, for the pur:

such longer


10

7 relopment of the land uses ag ४
, ng such dev : Te spe,
poses ane? (1), and may also authorise the Boarg 4, vet
in sub-s vecified urban land, any building or structure Pia
from the $ val of which is, in the opinion of the State Mding

mo

eon; the re , v
ther i vessary for the purpose of executing any work fo, | et.
ment, t the land uses of such specified urban Jang. “dea ,
pment 0 : ह

velo
Board shall, during the course of m

arry on work for the
ecified urban land, = deve
ment ‘ 0 she the land uses specified in sub-section (1
के wv airection control and supervision of the State Gover
1९ ,

Provided that the Nage,

lo
।
Ament: ४७

Provided further that the High Court may, on the applica
f any person aggrieved by any order made by the State Goa
nent under this sub-section eall for the records of the case f 4

the purpose of satisfying itself a TOM the
State Government for p $ to the hin
rectness, legality or pro

priety of the order and may, after exating, %
the records, Pass such orders as it may think fit. ng
’

Eaplanation.—For the purposes of this section, specifieg urbe
‘and shall include all rights, jeascholds, powers, authorities me
privileges, and shall also include all buildings, workshops and all
other rights and interests arising out of the specified urban land. 20
45 were, immediately before the date on which management hare,
of is taken over by the State Government (hereinafter referreq to
as the eppointed day) in the ownership, possession, power or con:
trol of the mutawalli of the wakt, and all books of accounts, po
gisters and all the documents of whatever nature relating thereto. 25

(5) Any contract, whether express or implied, or other arrange.
meat in so far as it relates to the management of the specified
urban land and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall
be deemed to have become terminated on the appointed day.

(6) All persons in charge of the management of the specified ४१
urban land, immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and
from the appointed day, be deemed to have vacated their offices
as persons in charge of the management thereof,

(7) Any person who, on the appointed day, has in his posses-
sien or under his control, any books, papers or other documents re-
iating to the management of the specified urban land, shall deliver
nae to the Board or such person as the Board may authorise in this:

ehalf .

(8) For every year or part thereof during which the Board
remains in charge of the management of the specified urban land, 4°
there shall be paid by the Board annually to the mutawalli of the
wakf, an amount equal to the average net annual income derived
by the wakf from the specified urban land during the period of
three years immediately preceding the appointed day and the
amount so paid shall be duly credited to the account of the wakt
to which the specified urban Jand pertains.


4 '

(9) The Board may execute any
19110 uses का the specified urban Pe for the dey
phe ‘ its own inances are not sufficie from its own elopment of
wet to raise the necessary fin lent, it shal) के Hnances, but
goat jand ances on the ०७ lawful io a
d yrbat न security of the ace
ci-
10) Any transfer of the specified urb
ent relating thereto “roan Jan
a 7९९77 . , Made within
0 ne ately preceding the date of service Te
jm iawalli under sub-section (2), shall, unles t
ae and for valu नल consideration in the rin
fa ‘ of the specified urban land, be void ue
mer
to the provisi
1 Subject provisions of sub-secti
t ct
i pntinue to control the management of nT vie Board
819. Jy such time as all the expenses incutred specified urban
aD t velopment y it under this
| ction for iat (de { हु ie Be ane land for the land u =
“a p-section me nt er with interest due लि» —
sense sncurred | ° 7 maintenance 6 # 0 ऋलको: की हऋ all
ent nd other ane a e charges incurred in relation to th pad
‘ope! of the 8967. arenes land for such land uses sei हैः aly
ecov® q from the or derived by the Board from such tand
from any shopping centre, market, residential flats raised ther
r commercial uses of the specified urban land 7

d

riod of = ५ contract

he niin ae

was m रा the
ade in good

Course of manage-

सना

yo r
a or from othe
0
T Board shall, after t
(12) he he recovery of all expenses and

si referred to in sub-section (11), or upon the expi

o~ specified under sub-section (4), wititchever is oattibe sedhore

P the person in charge of the management of the specified urban

rand ‘ mmediately before the appointed day, the management of
so developed, together with the shopping centres

guch jand, 88 > |
markets; residential flats and other structures, if any, constructed

(70९07:
3° (13) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4) shall,
as far 2S may be, apply to the proposal for the development of the
1970 uses of any wran wak{ property which is in the possession
f the wakf, subject to the modification that

of the mutawalli ०
instead of taking over the management of such property, the State

45 Government may, by order, remove the mutawalli from possession
thereof and place the same in the possession of the Board and au-
Board to carry out the development of such land uses

‘fied in sub-section (1).

thorise the
of the urban wakf property as are speci

(14) Where, 35 8 result of the development of any specified

0
yrban land, or any urban land referred to in sub-section (13), for
the land uses specified in sub-section (1), there is a substantial
increase in the income of the wakf and the quantum of the increase

is such that the whole of such increased income is not needed for
the purposes of the wakf, the Board may make a direction in accord-
ij । As! है ह
ance with the provisions of clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section
h surplus income shall be utilised and submit such
State Government for approval, and, thereupon,
e shall be utilised for such purposes as may be
d by the State Government,

direction to the

such surplus incom
specified in the direction as approve


powers

of ins-
pection

by Wak f
Commis-
sioner

or persons
authoris-
ed by
him,

12

58. (J) With a view to examining whether, ७

9 है ASG
tailure or negligence 01 the part of a mutawalli in the pe 1 of ;
r administrative duties, any logs ७ tom, y

of his executive ० ee tall rie: © dams hy
heen caused to any wakf or ४४ f property, the Wakg Com, 8

हर . ‘ a8 Mie है hay
authorised by him in Writing ; S$) One
or any other person : i 7 7 g in thi ' .
may inspect all movable and immovable properties Which ». “Mal
properties, and all records, correspondence, plang ie, 7
१

Wak "
हैँ 1 e t . Nts f
other documents reiaung thereto: :

inspection shal] b
Provided that such 175. eke | be made at le
relytion to every wakt having a gro
thousand rupees.

38 anny) Ace in

ine

0

Ny
ines
ly

two vears, In
exceeding twelve

(2) Whenever any such inspection as Is referred i. i
section (1) is made, the concerned mutawalli and aj] offi In sup
other employees working under him, and every person = ia
with the administration of the wakf, shall extend to th 1९९९
making such inspection, 8)! such assistance and facilities as Ati ly
necessary and reasonably required by him to CMY out sy, ey
pection, and shall also produce for inspection any movable
perty or documents relating to the wakf as may be called Dro.
the person making the inspection and furnish to him such
tion relating to the wakf as may be required by him.

(3) Where, after any such inspection, it appears th
cerned mutawalli or any officer or other employee who
under him or had been working under him in the Past, had m;
appropriated, misapplied, or fraudulently retained, any Mies
other wakf property, or had incurred irregular, Unauthorised Pas
improper expenditure from the funds of the wakf, the Wake may
missioner may, after giving the mutawalli or the person shiieeace
a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why an order for न
recovery of the amount or property aforesaid should not be Passed १0
against him, and after considering such explanation, if any. 8६ he
person may furnish, determine the amount or the Property which
has been misappropriated, misapplied or fraudulently retained, or
the amount of the irregular, unauthorised or improper expenditure
incurred, by such person, and make an order directing such Person »-
to make payment of the amount so determined from his _ personal
funds, and not from the funds of the wakf, or, as the case may be.
to restore the property aforesaid to the wakf, within such time as
may be specified in the order. P

y
Informs.

24

at the ein.
3 Working

(4) A mutawalli or other person aggrieved by such order may, 40
within thirty days of the receipt by him of the order, appeal to the
Tribunal:

Provided that no such appeal shall be entertained by the Tri-
bunal unless the appellant first deposits with the Wakf Commis-
sioner the amount which has been determined under sub-section
(3) as being payable by the appellant and the Tribunal shall have *
no power to make any order staying, pending the disposal of the

appeal, the operation of the order made by the Wakf Commissioner
under sub-section (3).

दे (5) The Tribunal, after taking such evidence as it may think ,,
» May confirm, 1 ‘erse or modify the order made by the Wakf


ad
रू

40

39

40

$5

esjoner under sub-section (3

rl a ) (
co” art the amount specilied ३ = Ma rerr
) par’, ee हे 4 वा such a, 11६, @ither :
of ye ag 10 costs as it may think - rder and ma in whole
161० “ ~ “Ppt riaé Ym
ord! se. PTlate in the « lake such
ihe ca Ve Chocumst
0 | ner
| order made by the T
8) a 'y the Tribunal} nd
है| . er o
pal be 1718: - sub-section (5)
sf)
‘ ere anv nN Aw
5C. ir ! ५ 1018७४७)॥ or other per
‘yhether under sub-sect; 7501 w ha
acres w! कक section (39) 6+ atin ho has beer
Hon 158, ४0 ts any Payment or to rest ection (5) o¢ Recovery

ef] ~ न

et S t

५ roperty: omits Or fails to make cych , Of the
हे! payment or amount

any (17९८ specified in sue . |
take such steps as he may think ft for th OMmMissioner Mined
a

jon of the property  aforesaig recovery of Under

Ace 50 oe
rtificate to the Collector of the district in w send isp

h mutawalli or other person igs situate st
nt that has been determined by him or by the Trib

say be, under section 15B, as being pavable by = ee as the
other person ane’ thereupon, the Collector shall is the
amount 5 ecified by sue certificate as if it were. an ace ul tant
“event and on the recovery of such amount, pay the same to the

C icsioner, who shall, on int t
rakf ommls ) ’ receip hereof, credit ¢ t
7 the funds of the concerned wakf. | ७ ie

é hich the property
of § ating therein the

mou

150. (1) Where the Wakf Commissioner is satisfied that the muta
or any other person who has been ordered under sub-secti ]- Condi
sub-section (5) of section 15B to make any payment wath tional

defeat or delay the execution of the said order — eg’
y

Tribunal,

walli
(3) ०
intent to
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his
property: or
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his pro-
perty from the jurisdiction of the Wakf Commissioner,

he may apply to the Tribunal for the conditional attachment of the
said property oF such part thereof as he may think necessary.

(2) The Wakf Commissioner shal', unless the Tribunal other-
wise directs, specify in the application the property required to be
attached and the. estimated value thereof.

(3) The Tribunal may direct the mutawalli or the person con-
serned, as the case may be, within a time to be fixed by it, either
to furnish security, in such sum as may be specified in the order,
[0 produce and place at the disposal of the Tribunal, when required,
‘he said property or the value of the same or such portion thereof
38 may be sufficient to satisfy the amount specified in the certificate
referred to in section 15C, or to appear and show cause why he
should not furnish such security.

(4) The Tribunal may also in the order direct the conditional
attachment of the whole or any portion of the property so specified.

(5) Every attachment made under this section shall be made
in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, as if it were an order for attachment made under the provi-

sion of the said Code.


4

(6) If any attachment is made without com iy
n of sub-section (3), such attachment shal] be’ wrth
00५

provisio
16. In sub-section (2) of section 16 of the principal a |
", the words “and the term a after
Office’

Amend- ४
ment words “functions and duties , ,
of 5००... ६९ inserted. he
tion 16 ही २ thay
17. For section 91 of the principal Act, the following शाह
{on shal}

u
tution of substituted, namely: —

sectio®
21.
“9}, (1) There shall be in each State a Wakf Comm;
oint- , |! om ४
sent of shall be the Chiet Executive Officer of the Board, MUSSione, wh
Wakf
Commis- (2) The Wak Commissioner shall be a person profe-.;
whe and shall be appointed by the State Government by pn i Isla
term of the Official Gazette: ४ DOtification 7
office, :
etc. Provided that in the case of Union territories (ing din
Union territory of Delhi), the Central Government m u the
fication in the Official Gazette, appoint one person to 5५ a at
akt Ir
i

for two or more Union territories irresp
’ eCtiy
९

d has been establisheg for of
SU

ch

Commissioner
whether or not any common Boar

Union territories:

Provided further that where a common Board ha
lished under section 66F for two or more States ne heen estab.
appoint a Wakf Commissioner for such States shall € power
Central Government, and the Wakf Commissioner tae 1 the

’ 1160

the Central Government, as far as may be, in accord

provisicns of this section, shall function as the Wakf ee With the
MmMissig

her

in respect of each of the States for which such
common Boarg
has 25

been established.
(3) The Wakf Commissioner shall be appointed 170
such persons as are holding posts in the Senior Scale हू amongst
the Judicial Service of the State or posts in the Seni lass I of
any Administrative Service in the State: or Scale of 30
Provided that no person shall be so appointed unless h =
e

<0

five years:

Provided further that if in an »
a bop वि बा held the post of Deputy Secretary to the ‘une
हाई 'पह है ate or any other post of an equivalent rank fo |

Fw ve years, or more, is available, it shall be lawfu tis
: है हे an to relax the conditions with tiny पर
of na ghar as or case may be, and the period for which : = .
on or rank should have been held by a ia

igible for such appointment, y a person to become

(4) The Wakf Commissi
not exceeding me Lae Stoner shall hold office for such period
whereby he is appointed, “ wed be specified in the notification 45
dh ahs tinier से or until he attains the age of superannua-
© rules for the time being in force in relation


१5

members of the Service (७ which
‘

the > < eC .
post which he was holding ; h belonps :
(0 the Waki Cc हि ः & १११11 ० ५। , " OF in relatic
1 ihe an -OMMISSiov.er whic! 24९ before } /J0n
‘ + 7 uCnhever ie ear] ad ile appoint.
है < 1७४ ~.

anal all
rire ii

’
le for re.

1९7! isions |
ee act to the Preview of this

016 a li sub-secti
sy ointment for a like term. on,
p

be eligib

/ (5 The Waki Commiss'oner shal] hot, durj
ff C ’ lng is
100 the office of a mutawallj of atlas 8 his term Of office

ch, |

S ich, - a . an
as nole-time and attention to his duties bl का and shall devote
. 116 Act

his W
(6) The Waki Commissioner shall re

ceive such हु
(2 c a 9 1 m ह
not peing 1९85 than the salary drawn by him ee salary,
ate of his appointinent as Wakf Commission ‘ately before

~ er, @S ma
y be

10 the py the State Government, and shal
a € rights privileges as to saan pang, eee he
and other matters a भा have been admissible (० him pi fund
not bee? hn shall continue to do so until his he had
; ment as W akf | ommissioner 15 duly terminated or until अप
| sions of his service are duly altered by the State वाल कक
The State Government may, after consultati
grant leave of absence to the Wak Cionmiant शत with the

(7)
poard,

(s) The salaries and allowances to be drawn by the Wakf
Va

mmissioner during the period of his leave of absence shall be

4 0 हे
pee y the State Government:

provided that such salaries and allowances shall not be less
n the salaries and allowances which he would have drawn had

tha
n appointed as the Wakf Commissioner.

he not bee
25 (9) Whenever leave of absence is granted to the Wakf Com-
ner, the State Government may appoint any other person who
the conditions specified in sub-section (1) to act as the Wakf
100९7 during the period of such leave, and the salaries and
allowances of the person so appointed shal] be fixed by the State
30 Government, and such salaries and allowances shall not be 1655
than the salaries and allowances which he would have drawn had

he not been so appointed.

(10) The Wakf Commissioner may resign his office by writing
under his own hand addressed to the State Government.

= (11) The State Government may give directions to any Wakf
€ as to the carrying into execution in the State of any
of the provisions of this Act or of any order or direction made there-
under and may also cal! for from the Wakf Commissioner such
pe information as it may think fit.”
18. After section 21 of the principal Act, the following se

missio
fuifils
Commiss

Commissione

ctions shall Inser-

be inserted, namely: — tion of
new sec-

tions 21.8,

218, 210,

210, 218

and 2178,


A

Removal
of the
wakf
Commi
gjoner.

Powers to

maXe
appoint»
ments,
etc. to
vest 11
the wakf
Commis
sioner.

Duties
and
other
powers
of the
Wakf
Coninals-
81010.

[

16
«pA, (1) Hf at any time it appears to the State ¢
; Commissioner is unsuitable for his 01106 Vern,
Or hag en

the Wak =o
{hat econduct oF neglect of duties, which render. A a
Wakf Commissioner Necessary jn “ rem

al

from the 0 by inotificat है
न ant may, YY notification ;
tate 1 iM the 0

interest, the }
Gazelle, -emove hi

Governm

m from such. office: 0
i

akf Commissioner shall not be
. : . S
cept after an inquiry in which 1000६
against him and given a h
| ५
n respect of those charges, @ tab,

provided that the W

5 x
from his office as such ९
nformed ९ the charge

being heard !
कार हाई । |

office as vyakf Commissione?, he Stale Governm, Signs

ot, a |

suitable person who fulfils the conditions specifieg t Sh

as the Wakf Commissioner, in gy).

section (1) of section

been 1

opportunity 0
10

from his

appoint a
Commissioner and the

ae Board shal hs

218. (2) The Wa -

tance of such number of olficers and other employe. ° 4

the efficient performance of his op be a
s func.

may be necessary for

{jons under this Act.

(2) The powers of appointment of officers and other emp)
of the Board and of promoting and granting leave to such hag

and other employees and of reducing them in rank or suspend
or dismissing them for misconduct shall vest in the Wakg ¢ ms
Mis.

sioner:

Provided that the Wakf Commissioner shall not appoint ध
॥|

post carrying minimum monthly salary (exclusiy
exceeding one thousand rupees per month cee Of
val of the Board: With

person to a
allowances)
the previous appre

r that where any officer or other empl

a minimum monthly salary te
allowances) exceeding five hundred rupees is reduced in ie
suspended 07 dismissed by the Wakf Commissioner, such office के
other employee may, within thirty days from the date of the da
prefer an appeal to the Board against the order of the Wakf ; ii
missioner and the decision of the Board shall be final. =

Provided furthe
holding a post carrying

210, (1) Subject to the provisions of thi
s Act and o
made thereunder, the functions of the Wakf ania ~%

include—

(a) investigating the nature and extent of wakfs and wakf
— and causing whenever necessary, an inventory _ of
“ properties and calling, from time to time for accounts
eturns and informations from mutawallis; la

" unts, recor .
Seles ds or deeds or documents relating

(c) doin
the due webs dich = acts as may be necessary for 45
€ and administration of

of wakfs.



17

exercising his POWere
the Wakf Commissioner sh

wal is given by the wakf in {

01% xs and such usages

oa शत मी

bs 3) Save as otherwise expressly

' -gjoner shall exercise guch po

comm fe assigned to him or delega

, हु Under this A
all acy in .
he dee Of w,
and Customs of the कि |
ake .

povided in this A,

wer
S ang Perform S

ted to hi hd
g mar 11 by the Uties
"ection 22. Board Under
ere the Wakf Commice;
१10. Where ssloner cong}
{ution passed by the Boarqd— nsiders that an order or
1680

t been passed ;
(a) has no Passed in accordan
Ce .
With law; or

(0) is in excess of, or is an aby

se
the Board by or under this Act or ae Power cont

err
by any other law: op
(c) if implemented, is likely to_

(i) cause financial 1088 (0

th '
cerned wakf or to the wakfs कं € Board or t

0
Nerally, oy lees
(ii) cause danger to human life, health or safety

: » oY
(iii) lead to a riot or breach of the peace, or

(iv) is not beneficial to the Board or to
wakfs generally,

uit, without implementing such order or resolution place the
ne iter before the State Government alongwith a note pointing out
ma spiections which he has to the order or resolution, as the case
atl pe, and the orders of the State Government thereon shall be
“i: and binding on the Board and the Wakf Commissioner.

any wakf or to

217, (1) The Wakf Commissioner may delegate such of the
gministrative, accounting or auditing powers conferred on him
: this Act, to the Area Committee, established by the Board, as
rol be necessary, and may, at any time, revoke the delegation so

कं ade by him.

(2) Subject to the control of the Wakf Commissioner and
general oF special directions given or imposed by him, the Area
Committee authorised by the Wakf Commissioner to exercise any
power, may exercise these powers in the same manner and to the
same extent as if they have been conferred on that Committee
directly by this Act and not by way of delegation.

१17. Any reference in this Act to the exercise of any power
by the Wakf Commissioner shall be construed as a reference to the
exercise by him of those vowers which he is empowered by or
under this Act to exercise,”

Power of
the Wakg
Commis.
Sioner
not to
imple.
ment
Orders
Or reso-
lutions
01 the
Board
in cer-
tain cases,

Delegation
of

powers

by the
Wakf
Commis-
sioner,

Construc-
tion of
reference
with
regard
to exer-
cise of
powers
by the
Wakf
Commis

sioner,


18

a3. aareg tile principal Act, the following sect
section “४ “CUly

% बल ted namely: — है ‘hay

Substitu- be substitu ९७,

tion of , from time to time, by an
08 22. «७9० The Board ™ay ' : order,
section 22.  ammissionet to exercise and perform, subject ‘Uthoni,
Delega- the Wakf Board such of the powers and duties conf the
aon 8 control of के Board by or under this Act, as May } ९१6 है
by the ~ jmposed Bi en q may at any time revoke the atithorisayetieg *
Board. in such भा ad where any such authorisation is made, the "
made by a may exercise those powers and duties jy the Wake
Commission to the same extent as if they कक been confer Sam,
fo directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation» “4 on ,,
inci t, the followi
of the principal Act, Ng sec
- 20. After — 7 tions thay
tion णँ. 726 inserted, name y:
new
sections
228 and
=. “992A, Subject to the provisions et this: Act and of the Tul
Wakf de th ereunder, the Wakf Commissioner may exercise aj ० es |
तप छः the powers conferred on him by or u मल किक आई through the
may Commissioner of the ‘Division or the Collector of the district
ex which the concerned wakf property is situate, or through any other
pong ©” 70801 whom he may appoint for such purpose, and may, from time
ao > ea delegate any of his 9004 5 to any such Commissioner of 2
| | है के
tors, eft. oe Division ar Collector or any other person Ms nd may at any tim
evoke the delegation 80 made by him, Disc wnere any such १९९७६.
| Sok pawl (३ aude OF the Wakf ommissioner, the person to
whom such delegation is mae ey बंका those powers in the
same manner and to the same extent as if they have been conferred 25
on him directly by this Act and not by way of delegation,
हि 998’ The Wakf Commissioner or any officer of the Board duly
Fe ee. authorised by him in this behalf shall, subject to such conditions anq
Commis;  “ ‘restrictions as may be prescribed and subject to the payment of such
dine fees as may be leviable under any law for the time being in force, be 3°
to inspect entitled ४६ all reasonable time to inspect, In any public office, any
paren! records, registers or other documents relating to a wakf or movable
ete, .. or immovable, .properties which are wakf properties or are claimed
+ to be wakf properties.”
a 21. In section 23 of the principal Act,— 35
ent
of ie. (a)'In sub-se¢tion (1), for the words “The Board may allow ins-

tion 25. °° pection of its proceedings or other records in its custody”, the words
| ’"The Wakf Commissioner may allow inspection of the proceedings
of the Board or other records in his custody” shall be substituted;

(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “Secretary of the Board”, 40
the words “Wakf Commissioner” shall be substituted;

_ (c) in sub-section (3) ,—

_ (@ for the word “Secretary”, the words “Wakf Commis
sioner” shall be substituted;


19

4) for the words “authorised in this behalf by
(ii कि «authorised in this behalf by the Wakr (८
(10 +" eubstituted.

the Board”,

a _
8 95 of the principal Act,—

8९९४० Amena-
‘ ” : ment of
9). jn - the word “Board”, wherever 1६ occurs, the words

) fo

15810

»

(a hall be substituted;

co™ _ cyb-section (6), for the words “it may consider”, the words
(b) ‘jsider” shall be substituted;
co

rs

ne

wpe may p-section (7), for the words “as it thinks fit”, the words
(c) मर 4 gt” shall be substituted;

pin |
gs BE sub-section (8), the following sub-sections shal] be

;

after 27
; a namely | ade sel
inset 9) Every wakf registered under this section before the
( sement of the Wakt (Amendment) Act, 1984 shall be
comme 9 have been registered on such commencement, at the
deeme ¢ the Wakf Commissioner,

ce ० 4 at 1
| oft 10) Every application for registration under this section

1 immediately before the commencement of the Wakf
pending ment) Act, 1984 before the Board shall, on such com-
nen nt, stand transferred to the Wakf Commissioner and
77०7९ Commissioner shall deal with such application as if it

30 the = application pending before him.”.
were ¢

> >211115
26 of the pr incipal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section
tion |
/ oot section, and
(1) of
(a) js “Wak Commissioner” shall be substituted;
१ (16 wort.
हो ae
section shall be 7! |
“(2) The register of wakfs maintained under this’ section
diately before the commencement of the Wakf (Amend-
ane Act, 1984 shall be deemed, on such commencement, to be
90 ment) Cl,

the register maintained by the Wakf Commissioner’ under sub-
९

ar sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-
serted, namely: —

१)

section (1) =

After section 96 of the principal Act, the following sections shall

ve inserted, namely: — # + to rh fg: i
i)

11

०५6५, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
Wakt Commissioner may, if he is of opinion that it is necessary so
10 do in the interest of wakfs, appoint, subject to such conditions as
may be prescribed, Executive Officers for every wakf having a gross
annual income of not less than fifty thousand rupees. —

(2) Every Executive Officer appointed under sub-section (1)
shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties as pertain only

“Wakf section
25,

Amend-
Ment of
Section

_, cub-section (1) as so renumbered, for the word “Board”, 26.

Insertion
of new
sections
26A and
26B.

Power
of Wak£

Commis-

sioner to
appoint
Execu-
tive
Officers.


20

= he property of the wakg
nistration of t ‘en | for wr.
to the * 1] and shall exercise hose powers anq digs 4
been pia the direction, control and supervision है lat ge, ne
duties hay the Ww.
Commissioner: ae aly

Provided that the Executive cer who is APpoins

if having @ gross annual income of not less than en to
= ]] ensure that the budget si ne wakf jg Submit ०७३० ।
he wakf are regularly maintained ang tp, .... ९0, th

Q

ene ; e
submitted positively within iach a
ँ |

accounts of t
State.
Me 4
N the

ment of accounts are ,
Wakf Commissioner May specify.
Whi ercising his powers and discharging ‘
(3) While exerct nba oe
under sub-section (2), the xecutive ae shall not ie
any religious duties or any usage or custom of the ir ei
ssi
by the Mus law.
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Executive ay
be fixed by the Wakt Commissioner in accordance wj4p, ° ः sha

made in this behalf under section 67 and in fixing TUleg

c issioner shall h - Wantyum
h salary the Wakf ommissioner ave due regan ‘ of
pos of the wakf, the extent and nature of the duties, the

Executive Officer and shall also ensure that the amount हि the
salaries and allowances are not disproportionate to the income ott ie
wakf and do not operate as an unnecessary financial byr den on =

ly

3

(5) The salaries and allowances of the Executive Ope
be paid from the funds of the concerned wakf.

(6) The Wakf Commissioner may, for good and sede.
reasons, and after giving to the Executive Officer a reasonable कर 5
tunity of being heard, suspend, remove or dismiss him from his ie
as such Executive Officer.

(7) Any Executive Officer who is aggrieved by any order of
removal or dismissal made under sub-section (6) may, within thirty $0
days from the date of communication of the order to him, prefer an
appeal against the order to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may,
after considering such representation as the Wakf Commissioner
may make in the matter, and after giving a reasonable opportunity
to the Executive Officer of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse 35
the order.

er shal]

(8) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that—

(a) a person may be appointed as the Executive Officer
under this section on a whole time basis or on a part time basis;

(b) a person may be appointed as an Executive Officer in
an honorary capacity, that is to say, without payment of salary 4o
or, as the case may be, without payment of salary and of any
allowances;

(c) the same person may be appointed as an Executive
Officer under this section for two or more wakfs, and, where the
said person is not appointed in an honorary capacity, the salary 45
and allowances payable to the person so appointed may be paid
from the funds of the concerned wakfs, in such manner and In
such proportion as the Wak Commissioner may determine,


21

4 268. (1) The Wakf Commissioner shall, if he is eat f
ects, OF 8४ yrs लिन मिस wakf have ceased ts ie oie
uch cosser ray ge हे ater the commencement ० me
; mendment) ch, 4४७3, hold an inquiry, in the prescribed eae
ascertain the properties and funds pertaining to such manner,
tet doing 5° shall pass an order— wakf and
8
5 (a) specifying the property and funds

pertaini
wakf and for the recovery of such property ० reaining to the

r funds so specified:
(b) directing that any property
ich have been recovered |
wake which recovered shall be applied or utjjj
0 the renovation of any wakf property and where there is 25
for making any such renovation or where utilisation of the
funds for such renovation is not possible, be appropriated, after
obtaining the approval of the Board, to any of the purposes
हि pecified in sub-clause (iii) of clause (९) of sub-section (2) of
‘5 section 10.

or funds pertaining to the

2) The Wakf Commissioner may, if he has any reason to
pelieve that any building or. other place which was being used for
-eligious purpose or instruction or for charity has, whether before
ny after the commencement of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1984,

10. eased to be used for that purpose, make an application to the Tribu-
for an order directing the recovery of possession of such build-

||
ता ther place.

118 or 0
(3) The Tribunal may, if it is satisfied, after making such in-
quiry as it may think fit, that such building or other place—

है (a) is wakf property;

(b) has not been acquired under any law for the time being
in force relating to acquisition of land or is not under any pro-
cess of acquisition under any such law, or has not vested in the
State Government under any law for the time being in force
relating to land reforms; and

(c) is not in the occupation of any person who has _ been
wuthorised by or under any law for the time being in force to
occupy such building or other place,

nay make an order—

(i) directing the recovery of such building or place from
any person who may be in unauthorised possession thereof, and

(ii) directing that such property, building or a used
igi ti if such use is
for religious purpose 07 instruction as before, or if

not possible, be utilised, for any purpose specified be sub-clause
” (iii) of clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 15.”.

95 After sub-section (2) of section 27. of the principal Act, the
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: —

“(3) Where the Board has any reason to believe that any are
perty of any trust or society registered in pursuance of the Indian
| के Trusts Act, 1882 or under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or
- under ‘a other Act, is wakf property, the Board may not-

withstanding anything contained in such Act, hold an inquiry in

Powers
of the
Wakf
Commis-
sioner
in rela-
tion to
wakfs
which
have
Ceased
to exist.

Amend-
ment of
section
27.


Amend-
ment

of sec-
tion 28.

Amend-
ment

of sec-
tion 29.

Amend-
ment

of sec-
tion 31.

Inser*
tion of
new
section
31A,
Duties of
Wakf
Commis-
sioner to
prepare
budget
for
wakfs
under
the direct
manage-
ment of
the
Board.

regard to such property and, if after such iNquiry

satisfied that such property is wakf property, ¢qjj ६

society, as the case may be, either to register mak 0 |

this Act as wakf property or show cause why such» °Pert Tay
Pert y

not be so registered:
provided that in all such cases, notice of the — uly

be taken under this sub-section shall be given to ity Propo,

whom the trust or society had been registered. © auth

(4) The Board shall, after duly considering such y

be shown in pursuance of notice issued under 50-86. (8९ 7
19

such orders as it may think fit and the order 50 ma de by May

shall be final, unless it is revoked or modifieq by a wi 6 Bo, ;
competent jurisdiction. . eo 4

26. In section 28 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the word “Board”, the words “Wake Comm
shall be substituted; Sion
(b) for the words “may itself”, the words “may मे ।
be substituted. Mselp» a
27. In section 29 of the principal Act, for the word “Board

J

the places where it occurs, the words “Wakf Commissione,»’ at both
substituted. shall be

20
28, Section 31 of the principal Act shall be renumbere d
४७

section (1) thereof, and— Sub.

(a) to sub-section (1), as so renumbered, the followin
shall be added, namely: —

“Provided that where the gross annual income i 25
wakf exceeds five thousand rupees, such budget shal i the
mitted to the Wakf Commissioner for his approyal,” @ sub.
(b) after sub-section (1), as so renumbered,

sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

“ध(2) The Wakf Commissioner may, after giving 1000५ , 3°
the mutawalli in the prescribed. manner, and after considerin to
his representations, if any, pass an order making such ie:
tions, omissions and additions in the budget as he may think
fit and the budget as so approved or modified shall be
pudget of the wakf for that year.”.

99, After section 31 of the principal Act, the following section

8 Provigo

the following

the 35

shall be inserted, namely:—

१३18. (1) The Wakf Commissioner shall, in every year, prepare,
in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, a separate
budget for the next financial year for each of the wakfs under the
direct management of the Board, showing therein the esii-
mated receipts and expenditure and submit it to the Board for its
approval.

(2) While submitting the budgets under sub-section (1), the
Wakf Commissioner shall also prepare a statement giving details 45
of the increase, if any, in the income of each wakf under the
direct management of the Board and the _ steps which have been


[0

25

39

40

45

23

: ter management an
, for its bet g d the results accTUiNg therefe,
pase (1९ yea r. mm

ing | Commissioner sha 0
007 the Waktf hall keep regular aceo

ansible for the proper Management of
. a direct management of the Board.

ynde pivery budget submitted by the Wak Commissioner und
(2 ion (1) shall comply with the requirements of section -
sub” 7 this PUFPOSE, references therein to the mutawallj ०

f the w
an 1 be construed as references to the Wakf Commissioner. akf
shal The audit of accounts of every wakf under the direct mane.

+ of the Board shall be undertaken by the State Examiner of
geme funds oF any other officer appointed by the State Govern-
ie ५ for this purpose, 'rrespective of the income of the wakf

n ¢) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 33 and
rovisions of sections 34 and 35 shall, in so far as they are not
{he

gistent with the provisions of this section, apply to the audit
con ts referred to in this section.

unts and
every wakf

of accor :
(7) Where any wakf is under the direct management of the
ard, such administrative charges as may be specified by the Wakf
ioe , sioner shall be payable by the wakf to the Board:
0

provided that the Wakf Commissioner shal] not collect, except
4h the previous approval of the State Government, more than
wit r cent: of the gross annual income of the wakf under the
pot management of the Board as administrative charges payable
to the Board.”.
१0. In section 33 of the principal Act,—

(i) for sub-section (1), the | following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—

“(1) The accounts of wakfs submitted to the Board under
section 32 shall be audited and examined in the following
manner, namely: —

(a) in the case of a wakf having no income or a_ net
annual income not exceeding one thousand rupees, the
submission of a statement of accounts shall be a sufficient
compliance with the provisions of section 32, and the
accounts of two per cent. of such wakfs shall be audited
annually by an auditor appointed by the Board;

(b) the accounts of a wakf having a net annual income
exceeding one thousand rupees but not exceeding
three thousand rupees, shall be prepared in the form of a
statement of income and expenditure. supported by pro-
perly maintained vouchers and receipts, and shall be
audited triennially or at such other intervals as may be
prescribed, by an auditor appointed by the Wakf Commis-
sioner:

(c) the accounts of a wakf having a net annual income
exceeding three thousand rupees but not exceeding five
thousand rupees, shall be audited by an auditor appointed by
the Board from out of a panel of auditors prepared by the
State Government and such audit shall be made biennially
or at such other intervals as may be prescribed and while

Amend.
ment

of sec-
tion 33.


24

panel of auditors, the State Cov
९

-eale of remuneration of the audi Ney
५008, |

ying up such
ए the :

shall specif
(d) the account
ding five thous

६ of a wakf having a net annya) |
and rupees, shall be auditeq by the पट

e i
ae all af Local unds or by any other officer
Exa ate G
sa for. the PUTPOSe by the State Government ay Cig, ;
nated shall be made annually or at such other tite?
¢ Iva]

dls

that where the net annual income
ess than sixty thousand rupees, the a

—ure shall be qudited concurrently ag and . Ip
vee enditure is meurred and every such एक hen
wud chal be made in accordance Wat woh. 100

be prescribe "3
ection (3), the following sub-section shall ॥६
| Ij

Provided

CUrrens
88 May

(ii) for sub-s
substituted, namely :-—
«(3) The cost of the audit of the accounts of a wakf ide

be met from the funds of that wakf:

j ta ation of the auditor ;

Provided tha he remuner + ate

from out of the panel drawn by the State Government in cht

tion to wakfs having a net annual income of more than three

thousand rupees but less than five thousand rupees shal] he
with the scale of remuneration specified iy

aid in accordance W | :
the State Government under clause (९) of sub-section (1).

Provided further that where the audit of the accounts of 25
anv wakf is made by the ctate Examiner of Local Funds or
any other officer designated by the State Government in this
behalf, the cost of such audit shall not exceed one and a
half per cent, of the net annual income of such wakf and such

costs shall be met from the funds of the wakf concerned.”. 30
Amend- 31. Section 34 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub.
| mie section (1) thereof, and— |
tion 34. (a) in sub-section (1), as so renumbered,—

(i) after the words “auditor’s report,”, the words, brackets
and figures “or where the auditor’s report is submitted after 35
the commencement of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1984, the
Wakf Commissioner shall examine such report” shall be inserted;

3 (tt) for the words “shall pass such orders on the report
as it thinks fit”, the words, brackets and figures “the Board of,
as the case may be, the Wakf Commissioner shall. pass such 40
_— on the report as it or he may think fit, including orders
or the Tecovery of the amount certified by the auditor undet
sub-section (2) of section 33” shall be substituted;

(b) after sub-section

sections shall be inserted (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-

namely; —

"(2) The mutawalli or

order made by the Board any other person aggrieved by

or the Wakf Commissioner ५7 1



sub-section (1) may, within thirt
of the order, apply to the Tribunals pelle
the order and the Tribunal cay on to modify
as it may think necessary, confirm ple

remit the amount so certified, either =
5 may also make such order as to eaten or in part, and

# कक 4 | 5
priate in the circumstances of the case It may think appro.

receipt by him

Or set asid
8 such ,

(3) No application made under sub-secti
entertained by the Tribunal unless the 7 ‘
the auditor under stib-section (2) of section 3 = na by
[0 deposited in the Tribunal and the Tribunal shall beh been
power to stay the operation of the order made by ve any
or the Wakf Commissioner under sub-section (1). oard

) shall be

(4) The order made by the Tribunal under sub-section (2)
shall be final.

I) (5) Every amount for the recovery of which any order
nas been made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall,
where such amount remains unpaid, be recoverable in the
manner specified in section 15C or section 15D as if the said
order were an order for the recoverp of any amount deter-

27 mined under sub-section (3) of section 15B.”.

tion 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amend.

99, In sec
¢ the Board”, the words “order of the Board, or the Waki = ment

W S “order 0 if b 1 h be.” sh ll be s stituted of sec-
Commissioner or the Tribunal, as the case may be,” shall be substituies. 4:0, 35.
25 38 In section 96 of the principal Act,— आर कट
| ment
(1) in clause (a), for the words “directions of the Board”, 01 sec-
(9९ words “directions made by— eae
(i) the Board, or
(ii) the Wakf Commissioner,
1) jn accordance with the provisions of this Act or of any tule oF
order made thereunder” shall be substituted;
(2) in clause (b), for the words “required. by the —_ , the
ords “required by the Board, or the Wakf Commissioner, as : case
बला ray be, in accordance with the provisions of this Act or of ans
rule or orders made thereunder” shall be substituted.
33
94 For section 36A of the principal Act,. the following section ६ abit |
| tulion ०
shall be substituted, namely:— esol
36A.

anything contained in the wakf  ajiena-

or hypothecation of any immovable tion of

shall be void unless such gift: wake

“४ध36.8. (1) Notwithstanding
deed, any gift, sale, exchange

hich is wakf property. के नंतः sane: property
40 property W thecation is effected with the prio iad
sale, exchange oF hypothecation के

tion of the Boar Official Gazette at Board
lishing in the cla a 1 to be
(@) me et “ml Pe vetion TefetTed to in een void. .
_ lars relating to the “ | “un respect (107९०
: ~ iting any objections and suggestions with ए


Insere
tion

of new
sections

36C, 36D,

36E and
367

Restric-
tion on
purchase
of pro-
perty

or behalf
of the
wakf,

26

‘octions and suggestions ५
| 811 objec S, if

and consider’ it from the concerned mutawa}jj f any ।
may be _ 1 in the wakf, accord sanction to syop, r ahy ant

intereste to ta tr मे
person 17 injon that such transaction 15 Nea t
if it is of OP Oh
ssary OF beneficial to the wakf;
nt with the objects of the wakf; |
deration thereof is reasonable ang ४ deg

ate:

(i) nece
(ii) consiste

(iii) the consi
le of any property sanctioned
‘ded that the धह " ०1९6 b
ie ct y public quetion Se eee = to cn
$ a ime as M rescr ५
by the Board within such ti in

Provided further tha
| tawalli or ०
aggrieved mutaw:
in writing, permit such S
auction, if it is of opinion
of the wakf.
3) The utilisation OF ape: . ban: amoun ; ratings |
sale, exchange OF hypothecation of any property shall be nied : a

mutawalli subject to the approval of the Board, ang Where Y the
amount has been raised by mortgage. of any such property th any
walli or other hall make repayment of the mort न muta,

person $ एल : aay tah जे
stein बे -cincnenge of the गाए काश मे Som ihe “debt ३,
and 0 ble tin:e as the Board may specify, MOF t gage,

t the Tribunal may, on the applicat; हे
ther person, for reasons to be का 00 ७ Ch
ale to be made otherwise ia Mi

that it is necessary so to do in 4... Ublic
$

within such reasona
oval given by the Board under sub sect
n

4) Every appr
(4) y ed to the mutawalli and shall also be Publish d
९0 in

shall be communicat
the prescribed manner.

awalli or any other person having an interest ;

ved by the decision given under suib-sesues
days from the date of communication to : 3),
e pubtication of the decision, as the cage जिया of
prefer an appeal to the Tribunal against such decision, and, Sewn be,
the Tribunal may, after giving the appellant and the Board i. 35
Wakf Commissioner, as the case may be, a reasonable Opportunit
of being heard, confirm, modify or set aside such decision.”, y

2

(5) The mut | ह
wakf who is aggrie
may, within ninety
such decision or th

95 After section 36B of the principal Act, the following sections shal

be inserted, namely: —

| ‘36C. Notwithstanding anything contained in a wakf deed no
immovable property shall be purchased for or on behalf of any wakt
fron the funds of any wakf except with the prior sanction of the
Wakf Commissioner, and the Wakf Commissioner shall not accord
‘such sanction unless he considers that the acquisition of such property

is necessary or beneficial to th [ 48
a | 0 the wakf and that the price proposed to

e paid therefor is adequate and reasonable:

adap that before such sanction is accorded, the particulars
8 to the proposed transaction shall be published in the Official


40

4)

ps
—

sz

peer require the encroacher to
ord! :

encroache

zi

uing objections and sugpest; ह
nviting °°! er shall. a BBestions with
Commissioner shall, after con

Sideriny the as thereto and

क wa ३ that may be received by him hes © objections ani

| ge 9807 25९० in the wakf, make such orde nutawallis or Other

807 ons jntel Ts as he may think 6५

pe हे
५

yy Whenever the Wakf Commissioner considers, whet
. * | कि + 5, , e
‘ving any complaint or on his own motion, that there has —
on 20° achment on any land, building, een
cro

space or other pro
perty which
ne vf pro erty and, pag has been registered as such under
. 1o he shall cause to be served upon the encroach

हे! Cr a notice
{his ee the particulars of the encroachment and calling upon him
spot! yi १4082 before a date to be specified

. | in the notice, as to why
(0 a et requiring him to remove the encroachment before the date

qn ० ५1९0 should not be made and shall

also send a co
५0 sp to the concerned mutawalli; py of such
0

i
nol the n otice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be served in
ner as may be prescribed.
such man ‘ . :
¢ after considering the objections, received during the
| if ed in the notice, and after conducting an inquiry in such
riod न may be prescribed, the Wakf Commissioner js satisfied

net property in question is wakf property and that there has
tire encroachment on any such wakf property, he may, by an
an remove such encroachment and
possession of the land, building, space or other property
eliver व upon to the mutawalli of the wakf.

E janation.—In this section and in section 36E, “encroacher”
the person by whom any encroachment has been made on any
ns

m हर building, space or other property which is wakf property.
Jana,

(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall prevent any per-

grieved by the order made by the Wakf Commissioner under
on at section from instituting a suit in a court of law to establish
tha ‘

+ he has right, title or interest in the land, building, space or other
tha की
property:

Provided that no such suit shall be instituted by a person who

been let into possession of the land, building, space or other pro-
wat as a lessee, licensee or mortgagee by the mutawallj of the wakf
Md any other person authorised by him in this behalf.

365. Where, the person, ordered under sub-section (3) of section

१00 to remove any encroachment, omits or fails to remove such en-
croachment within the time specified in the order or, as the case may
be, fails to vacate the land, building, space or other property to which
the order relates, within the time aforesaid, the Wakf Commissioner

may apply to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction the land, building, space or other property is situate
for evicting the encroacher, and, thereupon, the Magistrate shall make

an order directing the encroacher to remove the encroachment, or, as

the case may be, vacate the land, building, space or other property.
and to deliver possession thereof to the concerned mutawalli, and in

Removal)
of encrow-
chmerts
rom
wakf
property

Enforce-
ment of
the order
made
under
section
36D.


Rese
tions

on the
powers
to grant
1088९ of
wakf

property.

Amend-
ment

of sec-
tion 38.

Amend-
ment

of sec-
tion 39.

Amend-
ment

of sec-
tion 40.

Amend-
ment

of sec-
tion 41.

be ’ ui] a

ase ™ क

shor pr and may, for this purpose, take Such ding ४ .
or ०९ may be necessary: ९० ' १,
8110९ 88 ty

r sub-lease for any period o,

५ ए 1 A ease s हि
67, (४) movable property which is wakf Prope Ng
ontained in the deed or गिल tty thay) My

vears of any BY hing ©

withstanding anyth) e time being in f ‘Dos |
arth ther law for the था g in force be ..... 0. % *
or in any © 7०१ ang "५
effect. Of hy

please for 8 period exceeding one

lease or SU
(2) A (९९ years of any immovable property ७ ae ind,
is . %

exceeding ‘thstanding an thing contai
property shall rine an on law for ee iN the 4. Yak
instrument of ' git or व Oy se enaide ‘et ९ time ७७, (eed ,
be void and of no effect unless it is made with the Previon,. intor.,
| Se है
of the Board. tin
(3) The poard shal, ts granting sanction for the all
al of lease under this section review the terms anq ee OF
which the lease oF sub-lease 78 — to be granteg or (Ons op
and make its apPr oval subject to the a of such terme 3,
jitions in suck manne? as it may direct. aNd cop,
4

1 section ०७ of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), for the word “Board”, the words ॥
and figures “ne Board, or where such refusal or failure ००
the commencement of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1994, ¢ S afte,

Commissioner,” shall be substituted; © Wak व

36. hi

)

for the word “Board”, the words पु
' shall be substitutes

(b) in sub-section (2), है iy
as the case may pe, the Wakf Commissioner’

५. In section 39 of the principal Act, for the words “The Boarg
May

direct the creation and maintenance, in such manner as it may think
the words “The Wakf Commissioner may direct the creation ang fit”
Main. »

tenance, in such manner as he may think fit” shall be substituted "

or,

neipal Act, for the words “The Boarg m
ay,

98 In section 40 of the pri
“The Wakf Commissioner may, if he 1६

if it is satisfied”, the words
satisfied” shall ०९ substituted.

39 In section 41 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “fine which may extend {
one thousand rupees”, the words “fine which may extend to | |
thousand rupees” shall be substituted; | ™

(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be |
serted, namely:— 23 40

“(1A) Notwithstanding anything |

(1), if—

- (a) . mutawalli omits or fails, with a view to concealing

नाक ताक. of a wakf, to apply for its registration under
a 0 i t)

oll (i) 2 the case of g wakf created before the com-

cement of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1964, with

५)

contained in sub-section


a

29

the period specified therefor
25 or within a period of one
ment, whichever period exp

in SUub-section (
month from

N such ¢

oOmmMenca.
or

(b) a mutawalli furnishes any statement, rety ;
formation to the Wak¢ Commissioner or the Board. “ne
case may be, Which he knows or has reason to belleve #29
false, misleading, untrue or incorrect in any अन्न"

particular,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to S!x months and also with fine which May extend to
ve thousand rupees.”;

15 (c) in sub-section (2), for the words “made by the Board or an
ofiicer duly authorised by the Board”, the words “made by the Board
. ७ the Waké Commissioner or by an officer duly ‘authorised by the

| Board or the Wakf Commissioner” sha]] be substituted:
(6) in sub-section (3), for the words «
न agistrate of the first class”, the words
or 2 Judicial Magistrate of the first

presidency magistrate or

“Metropolitan Magistrate
class” shall be substituted;

(९) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be
inserted, namely:—

“(4) Notwithstanding anything Contained in the C

006 of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the fine imposed under

sub-section (1),

when realised, shall be credited to the Wakf Fund.

(5) In every case where an offender is convicted after the
commencement of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1984, of an
offence punishable under sub-section (1) and sentenced to a fine,

४0 the court shall also impose such term of imprisonment in default
of payment of fine as is authorised by law for such default.”,
40. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following sections shall ee
a on 0
35 be inserted, namely: — sill
tions
| 41A and
41B °

“41A. No Mutawalli shall spend any money out of the funds of ag
the wakf, of which he is the mutawalli, for meeting any costs, charges

not to
40 or expenses which are, or may be, incurred by him, in relation to spend

any suit, appeal or any other proceeding for, or incidental to, his ents

removal from office or for taking any disciplinary action against baling:

himself. i ‘ing toa
wakf for
defending
himself.


power of

to deter

mine by

whom
elc.,

shall
pe paid,

Amend-
ment
of sec-
tion 43.

39

shall determine by whom or out of
any costs, charges or expenses, for op rte '
eding before the Board, sha} cider
any 4pP ayment made by the Board shall be dee ९ paig 9
r «il court and may be sent by thee’ t, पं
5 the court within the ae limits of whose Boar hs
is 80 ordered to make such payment Uris tig

| 5 . ers Vo]
ss 01 yersonally wor Untas:
usine ks for gaj tari

1
ries on b

- r |! r x eC ’
resides oF Cl order is $0 sent for execution shal] and
t to which ™ ex th
cour ‘are an order made by it.”, ०) sin,
order as if it wert के *h
( the principal Act,—

41, In section 43 0

(a) in sub-section (1),—

(i) in clause (b), for the words “moral turpitude” 4,

“moral turpitude, and such conviction has not been om: Q

he has not been oranted full pardon with respect to such 1880 ang

chall be substituted; Offence
(ii) clause (c) shall be omitted;

se (e) shall be omitted;

)

(iii) clau
(iv) after clause (९) as 80 omitted, the following
8 Clauses

shall be inserted, namely: —
20

“(f) is an undischarged insolvent; or

(९) is proved to be addicted to drinking liquor
spirituous preparations, oF jg addicted to the takin Or other
narcotic drugs; or 8 of any

(h) is employed as a paid legal practition
of, or against, the wakf; or er on behalf 25

(i) has failed, without reasonable excuse, to mainta:
regular accounts for two consecutive years बह isi hae

to

submit, in two consecutive years, the yearl
; ? st
accounts, as required by sub-section (2) me rs of
) Or
40

(j) is interested, directly or indirectly, in a subsi
lease in respect of any wakf property, or in an ~~
made with, or any work being done for, the wakl er
arrears in respect of any sum due by Biv १७ such walk: i

/
k ‘nuous ॥
Pris! continuously neglects his duties or commits any 3
nce, malfeasance, misapplication of funds or Leoni j

of trust in relation to the
é wal
‘Sion pel ceceasicl हिला <f or in respect of any money or

l) wil
aig ving a persistently disobeys the lawful orders
entral Government, State Government, Board ,,

or Wakf Commissi
missionér und
ry er an
le or order made thereunder.”: y provision of this Act or
= ,

(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted:

(c) in sub-section (4) —


[९

90

30

3

45

3]

( words, brackets ay ta
(1) th | 10 1016 OT s 10-8७९(४८७ तक et
be omitted; १ ६४)" shall
in) ior the word “three-fourther |
े stituted: rr the word “twosne an
pall be subsututed; thirds
sha
for sub-section (4A),

the follow;
win 2 sub- के |
namely: — 8 sub section shal]

apstitutet Pe
§

, fawalli who 1

“ (4A) \ mu ० 1S aggrieved by an

1007 any of the clauses (c) to (1) of sub-section (1

vithin one ™ onth from the date of the rece ‘
adel, appeal against the order to the Tribunal
shu Tribunal on such appeal shall be final.”

passed

। may,
19६ by him of the

and the decision of

e) after sub-section (4A),

a the following sub-sections shall he
ते, names) 7
150९0:

i

«(4B) Where any inquiry under sub-sectio
or commenced, against any mutawalli, the Boa
opinion that 1t 15 necessary so to do in the int
py an order suspend such mutawallj until th
‘nquiry:

ale provided that no suspension for a period exceedin

shall be made except after giving the mutawalli a

opportunity of being hearq against the proposed actio

n (4) is proposed,
rd may, if it is of
erests of the wakf,
e conclusion of the

g ten days
reasonable
n.

(4C) Where any appeal is filed by the mutawalli to the Tri.
punal under sub-section (4A), the Wakf Commissioner may
make an application to the Tribunal for the appointment of a
receiver to manage the wakf pending the decision of the appeal,
and where such an application is made, the Tribunal shall, not-
withstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, appoint a suitable person as receiver to manage the wakf
and direct the receiver so appointed to ensure that the customary
or religious rights of the mutawalli and of the wakf are safe-
euarded.”;

(f) in sub-section (9), the words, brackets and figure “or sub-
cection (2)” shal! be omitted.

42, For section 48A of the principal Act, the following section shall be

; substituted, namely: —

“434. (1) Where no suitable person is available for appointment
as a mutawalli of a wakf, or where the Board is satisfied, for reasons
to be recorded by it in writing, that the filling up of the vacancy in
the office of a mutawalli is prejudicial to the interests of
the wakf, the Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
assume direct management of the wakf for such period or periods,

not exceeding five years in the aggregate, as may be specified in the
notification.

(2) The State Government may, on its own motion or on

the application of any person interested in the wakf, call for the
records of any case for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correct-

Substi-
tution of
section
433.

Assump-
tion of
direct
manage-
ment of
certain
wakfs by
the
Board,


Inser-
tion of
new
sections
43B to
437,

Powers
of ap
point-
ment
and
removal
of muta-
walli
when

to be
exer-
cised

by the
State
Govern-
ment,

Super-
vision

and supat=

session
of Com-
nittee

if Man-

gement,

32

ety of the notification issued },
and pass such orders as it tiny 5 he
State Governmen * thin

t shall be fin k ॥|

ness, legality oF propri
ction (7)

under sub-se

the orders 50 made by the Gove
be published in the manner specified In sub-section (1) lia an,
; thay
(3) As soon as possible after the close of every ¢
the Board shall send to the State Government, a deur
| . = . ’ ] ५ :
regard to every wakf under 165 direct management as ene
’ ० १ g th MY :
j 1110 | ) , Hh ७४
(a) the details of the income of the wakf fo, rej,
mediately preceding the vear under report; he Yen
ह ; ॥
(0) 116 steps taken to improve the management |
and |
In
COM,

of the wakf; ह

(c) the period during which the wakf has bee In
direct management of the Board and explaining nh Under
to why it has not been possible to entrust the mana i re

wakf to the mutawalli or any committee of man Sement 6
agement he
the veal, and during
Is
J

as may be prescribed

the

(d) such other matters

(4) The State Government shall examine the repo
‘ 4 r
to it under sub-section (3) and, after such examination

18

SUE such

ictions to the Board as it may think fit
and th
@ 24

directions or instr
Board shall comply with such instructions on receipt the
reof.” |

Submitteg

43. After section 43A of the principal Act, the following
Sections gh
all

inserted, namely:—

“43B. Whenever a deed of wakf or any decree
court or any scheme of management of any wakf aia Order of ४
or any authority other than a Board may appoint or r es that a court
walli or settle or modify such scheme of manageme 6 38 4 muta
exercise superintendence over the wakf, then sabia i otherwise
thing contained in such deed of wakf, decree, order standing any-
powers aforesaid shall be exercisable by the State — the
ent.

_~_
a

30

43C. (1) Whenever the supervision
seated te बह sig: or management of a wakt |
ing anything eontah my appointed by the wakf, then, कि न
Scume, Gaile ained in this Act, such committee shall litle $
wach seem t is superseded by the Board or until the expi
as may be specified’ by the wakf, whichever is ne
Provided that | a)
cated and seen committee shall function under the direction
and abide by such ihe of the Board and of the Wakf Commissioner,
Se sed: Carnes Ace irections as the Board or, as the case may b the
sioner may issue from time to time: _


»)
5

—-
हा .

47

a

| sjmuli

33

ded further that if the Wax

for the management of a ware Satisfied thot
any provision of this Act , Y 8 COMMittes

, $c
५ ith १
87 1 फटी ot ane | of any rul
' बा e Tr !
«iste? (he directions of the Wakif, he ma 3 sia thereunde
ih y, at any time mod f r
न Ty the

f ७1४४ ५ manner as m न
\ n such ay be Necessary to bring it
! 1

‘ ("
prov! [ oMmissioney is

3 incon.

0 Cc 1 > ‘
m ९ rec ५ (5 |
cher with the directions of the wakf op of the In eon.

form nd ihe rules made thereunder. Provisions of thy.
pct
9) Notwithstanding anything contained In this Act
» tf इक ४ C
¢ wakl, the Board may, if it is satisfied, for reason
ec tin writing, that a committee referred to jn "toh |
ord” not funclionng Properly and satisfactor ily or that the जा
(1) ismanaged and that in the 111७९ vant lg

Sts of its proper
' Management
eing ary 50 10 do, by an order superse . ’
b ecess?’. » SU] de such Committee and,

it is कर § ypersession, any direction of the wakif, in so fay as it re

on 5 [0 the constitution of the committee, shall cease to have any
५

jate

gree

and in the
to be re-

vided that the Board shall, before makin
pro committee, issue a notice setting forth {

ag any | । |

ng “0860 action and calling upon the committee to show cause
(1९ नम euch time, not being less than one month, as may be specified
with tice, a8 to why such action shall not be taken,
., the

9

8 any-order supersed-
herein the reasons for

every order made by the Board under sub-section (2) shall
6 in the prescribed manner and on such publication shall

ishe
ubli the mutawalli and all persons having any interest in

Fading on
ihe wakt.
(4) Any order made by the Board under sub-section (2) shall be
qnal: |
नंत९0 that any person aggrieved by the order made under sub-
ia हे may, Within sixty days from the date of the order, make

section ion to the Tribunal for the adjudication of the matter:
an aPP

rther that the Tribunal shall have no power to

ided fu
Ere ation of the order made by the Board pending- such

«spend the oper
adjudication: हा Te ae
The Board shall, whenever it , supersedes uny committee
(2), constitute a new committee of management

aneously with the order made by it under sub-section (2).

(0) .
“under sub-secuion

(6) Notwithstanding snvthing contained in the foregoing sub-
ove the Board may, instead of superseding any committee under
ee , (2), remove any member thereof if it is satisfied that such
sub-se pene his position as such member or had knowingly
ee “ maemiée prejudicial to the interests of the wakf, and every
eit for the removal of any member shall be served Upon him
suc

py registered post:
Provided that no order for the removal of the member shali be
ade unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing
m ९ ।

cause against the proposed action;



‘

Matters
which

an order
for
removal
of muta
walli or
commit-
(९९ shall
contain.

Duty ०:
muta-
walli or
commit-
tee to
deliver
posses-
sion of
records,
etc.

prefer an appeal @ bi) |
ea 6 opportunity to the a ri
g a reasona PP y to the appellant buna

34

provided further that any member aggrieved by any
his removal from the membership of the committee, ma ०५७ |
is 10110, ५. days front the date of service of Y, win,
p ¢ thirty days ron ९ of the order “tl
eriod 0 7 to the Tr er gn 1३
nst such order 0 the Tribunal, and ¢}, . hin
© Tr
may, after giving 8
Board of being heat
the Board and the order made

be final.

d, confirm, modify or reverse the or
by the Tribunal-in np ie
pe

43D, Whenever any order is made in accordance with +
visions of this Act for the removal of a mutawalli op t *
such order shall direct the removed mutawalli or tp ‘
committee, as the case may be, to hand over charge, ‘aa tema
possession of the records, accounts and all properties of Clive,
(including cash) to the successor mutawalli or the suc the Waly
mittee, as the case may be, and shall also specify et ne
on or before which such charge shall be handed दस bia

possession shall be made. and suo ‘

delivery of

437, (1) Where any mutawalli or committee of
has been removed by the Board in accordance with th ma
of this Act, or of any scheme made by the Board the
or the committee, as the case may be, who or which ‘
removed from office (hereinafter in this section bo been me
the removed mutawalli or removed committee, as the ¢ ९1९0 to as
shall hand over charge and deliver possession of the May be
accounts and all properties of the wakf (including aa records,
successor mutawalli or the successor committee, as th ) to the ‘.
be, within one month from the date specified in the site C8S¢ may +
the removed mutawalli or removed committee has b er Whereby
to hand over charge and to deliver possession of Bo direc
and all properties of the wakf (including cash), to न » Ccounts
mutawalli or successor committee, as the case m om be © successor 30

agement

PrOVisions

Mutawa)}; ,
0

(2) Where any removed mutawalli or rem

to deliver charge or deliver possession of the ieee fails

properties (including cash) to the successor mutaw «Spee and

committee within the time specified in sub-section (1) or successor

7 obstructs such mutawalli or committee, from Bish prevents 35

pam after the expiry of the period aforesaid, the + oa
11 or any member of the successor commit sn no

an application, accompanied by— ce may make

(a) certified cop
हा y of the order appointin
mutawalli or successor committee, and है न मी धर

(9) a certificate issu
si ed by the W 8 iss
ng such failure, or ssettion, —————— पहल

10 any Magistrate of the firs
jurisdiction any st class within the local limits of w
the Magistrate a oo wak¢ property is situate, कक oo अनसा के
Sa ssa amerika ha er giving notice to the removed mutawali
the delivery of chare oved committee, make an order directi

y of charge and also delivery of possession of such ecards


oof

Cun

35

i propere (including Cash) of the —

oe हि प0/#एथां। or the successor committee, as the to — the
८९४ 4 (70 as may be specified in the order ©ase may be,
‘ |

ere the removed mutawalli or any
mmittee, omits or fails to deliver ch

the records, accounts and properti

‘on ० |! . es (incl

ssiOP “ime specified by the Magistrate under _ wding cash)

| afin aved mutawalli or every member of such mer (2),
शा) " fed cOm-

कि as the ae 1 के be, shall be punishable with im riso

111९०! q term which may extend to six months or with ae alae

pent sien to two thousand rupees, or with both. a

7
a)

member of the

९0 arge or to deliver

whenever any Temoved mutawalli or any member of the
(4) sommittee omits or fails to comply with the orders made
veo ove sist rate under sub-section (3), the Magistrate May autho-
8 or 10008507 eng of successor committee, as the case
ise to | ake over charge and also Hn take possession of such
nay ! ecounts or properties (including cash) and may autho-
6०07 person 1० take such police assistance as may be necessary

sis 810 urpose- :

the P

४) No order of appointment of the successor mutawalli or
( iit mumittee, and no certificate granted by the Wakf Com-
gyccesS" der sub-section (2), shall be called in question in the

__ione
is dines pefore the Magistrate under this section.
roe

(0 Nothing contained in this section shall bar the institution
suit in 8 competent civil court by any person aggrieved
of any order made under this section, to establish that he has
by or ie and interest in the properties specified in the order
net ny the Magistrate under sub-section (2),
mem न |
487, (7) Whenever the Wakf Commissioner is satisfied, whether
nis OWN motion or on the application of not less than five per-
4 int erested in any wakf, that it is necessary or desirable to
aoe cheme for the proper administration of the wakf, he may
{ter consultation In the prescribed manner with the mutawalli
af the wakf; and where any application is made to him, with the
applicants, by an order, frame such scheme for the administra-
tion of the wake.

(2) A scheme framed under sub-section (1) may provide for
the removal of the mutawalli of the wakf holding office as_ such
immediately before the date on which the scheme comes into force:

Provided that where any such scheme provides for the removal
of any hereditary mutawalli, the scheme shall also provide for
the appointment of the person next in hereditary succession to
the mutawalli so removed, as one of the members of the committee
appointed for the proper administration of the wakf,

(3) Every order made under sub-section (2) shall be published
in the prescribed manner, and, on such publication, shall be final
and binding on the mutawalli and all persons interested in the
wakf: '


36

Provided that any person aggrieved by an order Mad
e

sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may, within "sixty dave 700५
. 's

the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunay ie
the Tribunal may confirm ang om

hearing such appeal, Feve
modify the order: ” or
Tribunal shall have no Pow

९

Provided further that the 5
on of the order made Wide Make
r
Sy

any order staying the operati
section (1) or sub-section (2).

(4) The Wakf Commissioner May, at any time by
whether made before or after the scheme has come inte order
cancel or modify the 8९
section.

(5) Pending
stration of the wa
person to perform al
thereof and to exercise
mutawalli.”.

heme which has been fra or
Med unde» ms, 4

his
the framing of the scheme for the prope
kf. the Wakf Commissioner may appoint ० adm;

inj.
al] or any of the functions of the ३ Suitabj,

the powers, and perform the 0४४ MUtawa)}i

I:

ction 44 of the principal Act,—

Amend: 44. In se
ment ”
ob ean (i) for the word “Board”, at both the places where jt on
tion 44 words “Wakf Commissioner” shall be substituted; CUTS, the
(ii) for the words “it shall take such action thereon ag it ‘ta “a
ft”. the words “he shall take such action thereon as he iin
shall be substituted. | fit”
Amend- 45. In section 45 of the principal Act— :
ment 7 हे
of sec- (a) in sub-section (1),—
tices (i) for the word “Board”, the words “Wakf Cornmisgig कि
_ shall be substituted; my
ues 1 (ii) for the words “its own motion”, the words “his
sot > jgmotion” shall be substituted; own
mt cmon (iii) for the words “as it thinks fit”, the words “as he thinks
ae ft” shall be substituted; jo
Sots. =..(byin sub-section (2), for the words “the Board or any person
Piss authorised by it”, the words “the Wakf Commissioner or any in
‘ authorised by him” shall be substituted; ह
(c) after sub-section (2). the following sub-section shall pe ..'
inserted, namely:—~ — a हैक
|. ध(3) The Wakf Commissioner holding any inquiry’ unde,
sub-section (1), shall be deemed to be a person acting judj-
.cially within the meaning of the Judicial Officers Protection
Act, 1850.”. yo ttn
Amend. 46. In section 46 of the principal Act,—
ment
af sec- (a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be

tion 46. substituted, namely: —

‘(1) The mutawalli of every wakf, the net annual income
of which is not less than 77० thousand rupees, shall pay ,.
)


रत

i"

a9

30

{0

37

annually, out of the net annual income deri
such contribution, not exceeding six per ९ a ee
81) en

income, as may be prescribed to the an . —
’ 0

rendered by such Board to the wakf r the services

ExpeRewn I.—For the purposes of this Act, “
income shall mean the gross income of the » Net annual
sources, including nazars and offerings which Phi dine
to contributions to the corpus of the wak{s ° not amount
deducting thereirom, the following, vende in a year after

(1) the land revenues pai :
| paid by it to the Govern
including cesses paid to local authorities: ment,

(it) in rates, taxes and licence fees, if any, paid by it
to the Government or any local authority;

(iii) expenditure incurred for all or an
ing purposes, namely:— y of the follow-

| (a) maintenance of, or repairs to, irrigation works,
which shal) not include the capital cost of irrigation;

(b) seeds of seedlings;

(c) manure;

(d) purchase, and maintenance, of agricultural
implements; ‘\

(e) purchase, and maintenance, of cattle for
cultivation;

(f) wages for ploughing, watering, sowing, trans-
planting, harvesting, threshing and other agricultural’
operations:

Provided that the total deduction in: respect of
an expenditure incurred under this clause. shall not
exceed ten per cent. of the income derived from the
lands belonging to the wakf;

(iv) expenditure on sundry repairs to ‘rented  build-
ings, not exceeding five per cent. of the annual rent derived
therefrom, or the actual expenditure, whichever is less;

\
(v) sale proceeds of immovable properties or rights
relating to, or arising out of, immovable properties, if
such proceeds are re-invested to earn income-for the wake:

Provided that the following items of receipts shall
not be deemed to be income for the purposes of this
section, namely: —

(a) advances end deposits recovered and loans

taken or recovered:

(b) deposits made as security .by employees,

lessees, or contractors and other deposits, if any;

(९0) withdrawals from banks or of investments;


38

(d) amounts recovered towards costs

aWard

courts, ed b
(e) sale proceeds of Teligious books ang

such sales are undertaken ag publica.

tions where
enterprise with a view to

munerallve Propa -
religion; Sating
थे
; cash or kind or offerings ih
bution to the corpus of the ade },
Wakf:

Provided that the interest on income, jg
g from such donations or offerings EB. 7

(j) donations
the donors as conti

accruin
taken into account 1n calculating the  grogs be 14
jncome, annual
(09) voluntary contributions received in
kind for a specific service to be performed by ६ = or
and expended on such service; € wakf
हि,

(0) audit recoveries.

—In determining the net annual inco

the purposes of this section, only the net profit derived by for

wakf from its remunerative undertakings, if any, shall be ta an

as income, and in respect of its non-remunerative un tenia

guch as, schools, colleges, hospitals, poor homes, orphana 85, 20

any other similar institutions, the grants given by the = or

ment or any local authority or donations received ain

public or fees collected from the pupils of educational ee

tions shall not be taken as income.’; itu-
35

Explanation IL.

(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “any particular wakf”
words “any mosque or orphanage or any particular wak{” te

substituted;

(c) after sub-section (5), the following sub-secti
inserted, namely: — eee Ee पे
30

“(6) Where, after the commencement of the Wakf (Am
ment) Act, 1984, the mutawalli of a wakf fails t Hk
return of the net annua] income of the wakf niin Me नई .
janes poate or submits a return which, in the opinion of
=e - 2 peer is incorrect or false in any material
ira . be W = does not comply with the provisions of .
presi oO ks e or order made thereunder, the Wakf Com-
— राम लक a । तन the net annual income of the wakf to
sae ft Hh fs wi’ or revise the net annual income as
नल पुललीननन eturn submitted by the mutawalli and the net
as so assessed or revised shall be deemed to pe -

लक me of the wakf for the purposes of this

Provide
revision of a a a anc ta aa 2 इन
mitted by mutawalli shall be made except 45


39

४९४1 lice to the m ;
fter giving 8 no Ulawa))
“a - Tae within the time speci flea calling Upon

; in the to
| notice
uch assessment Or revision of the return shal] not b * why
५ yery such assessment or revision ७), ९ made and
e

. all be
dering the reply, if any, given by tho motewattt मु after consi.
, tawalli who is aggrice
7) Any mu aggrieved bee
vision made by the Wakf Commissioner ei
6) may prefer an appeal to the State
te of the receipt .
from the da Pt of the 4Ssessment ,
porte n and the State Government may, after Pigeons
pellant and the Wakf Commissioner a reasonable sohaee
re of being heard, confirm, reverse or modify the assess.
ent or revision of the return and the decision of the State
Government shall be final.

ra a58€Ssment or
. T sub-sectj
overnment within thirty

(8) If, for any reason, the contribution op
f leviable under this section has escaped
ear, whether before or after the

(Amendment) Act, 1984, the Wakf Commissioner may

“nin five years from the last date of the year to whic

ew qd assessment relates, 5९1४९ upon the mutawalli कूल
esc ssing him with the contribution oy portion thereof which
nay escaped assessment, and demanding payment thereof
within thirty days from the date of service of such notice, and

the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder,

as far as may be, apply as if the assessments were made
a this Act in the first instance,”.
un

section 46 of the principal Act, the following sections
41. After namely: —_

any portion
assessment in

pall be in .

५५6४. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
the time being in force, the Wakf Commissioner, if he is
law for that it is necessary and expedient so to do, make an order
satisfie d pank in which, or any person with whom, any money
directing pl a wakf is deposited, to pay the contribution, Jeviable
eine on 46, out of such money, as may be standing to the
wncer मा the wakf in such bank or may be deposited with such
vane i out of the monies which may, from time to time, be
7 i“ such bank or other person for or on behalf of the
कार os of deposit, and on receipt of such orders, the bank
W

Inser-
tion of
new
sections
46A and

Power
of Wakf
Commis-
sioner
to direct

etc., to
make
payment.

the other person, as the case may be, shall, when no appeal ©
or ’

ection (3), comply with such orders,
een preferred under sub-section (3),

= कु appeal has been preferred under sub-section (3), shall

ता with the orders made by the Tribunal on such appeal,

(2) Every payment made by a bank or other person in pur-
gsuance of any order made under sub-section (1) shall operate as a
tull discharge of the liability of such bank or other person in rela-
tion to the sum so paid.

है

(3) Any bank or other person who is ordered under sub-
section (1) to make any payment may, within thirty days from


Deduc-
tion of
contri-
pution

perpe-
tual
annuity
payable
to the
wakf,

Inser-
tion of
new

418.
Muta-

not to
lend or
borrow
moneys
without
sanction

हि q

prefer an appeal against such

than sn the decision of the Tribunal on such appeal ‘ ४६
$

L be

final.
E ffi the bank or other person wh ail
4) Every ouicer of of |
an me excuse, to comply with the order made wrth
मे as the case may be, under sub-section (3) ep Suh,
‘4 imprisonment for a term which may > shalj b ५
r with fine which may extend to. two “eng :
0

q

f the order,

six months 0
rupees, OF with both.

, (1) Every authority empowered to disburse ap
alk न मर to a wakf under his “ relating (६0 Perpetua हे
tion of zamindaries 07 jagirs, or laying down land ceiling. ao
on reeeipt of a certificate from the Wakf Commissioner पे vt ः
the amount of contribution payable by “ wakf under Sectigy ve
which remains unpaid, deduct before making payment है n 4g
perpetual annuity to the wa

kf, the amount specified in g
ficate, and remit the amount 30

Uch core 1३
deducted to the Wakf Commiggi at
Ner,

(2) Every amount remitted under sub-section (1) tg

baat chall be deemed to be a payment made ७ हल Wak

Commissioner । vi

and shall, to the extent of the amount so remitted, opera te Wakf

full discharge of the liability of such authority with fie हा ३ २७
to

the payment of the perpetual annuity.”.

43. After section 47 of the principal Act, the following section <
ह $

be inserted, namely :— '

५५१8, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in a 6
wakf, no mutawalli, Executive Officer or other person in ¢ a of 23
the administration of a wakf shall 1000 any money belongin 786 of
wakf or any wakf property or borrow any money for the 8 to the
of the wakf except with the previous sanction of the Wak? es
missioner. Com-

30

(2) The Wakf Commissioner may, while according  sanet
specify and terms and conditions subject to which the person = ion,
to in sub-section: (1) is authorised by him to lend or borr a
money or lend any other wakf property. | OW any

(3) Where any money is lent or borrowed, or oth

e हे
perty is lent in contravention of the provisions of this ली ‘
shall be lawful for the Wakf Commissioner— im

(a) to recover an amount e
qual to the amount which
as
oN ” lent, or borrowed, together with interest due nikon
om the personal funds of the person by whom .
5
was lent or borrowed; हे - nla

(b) ar काली the possession of the wakf property lent in
ee of the provisions of this Act, from the person
whom it was lent, or from persons who claim title to such —

property thro
ha y through the person to whom such property was 4;


877

10

रे

५

4]

on 49 of the principa) Act shal
n €

"*numbered
p-sections shall be inserted, namely. 85
su -_

43 sub
50 Tenumberey *?-
’

receipt of the budget for.
« (2) —; the state Government shall ere bo
ectio” such alterations, Corrections, oy modi
"106° P it may think fit and forwarg दि
हा i its consideration.
ard

fications i
Such SUB gestions

bi receipt of the suggestions
q may make written represe
oat alterati

B vegard to the नह हु. Modifications

fi 4 by that Government, ang the State Gover =
goes” sidering such representations,

fet का three weeks from the dat
3 “iod दा qnal decision in relation to

a ard sate Government shall be fina)

he नहा
of * on receipt of the decision of the State

| (3), the Board shall incorporate in
sect corrections, modifications final)

3) ftom the State G

Government under
its budget all the
» suggested b .

ant and the budget as so altered » the State

: » Corrected or modj Sed,
the budget which shall be passeg by the Board”,
be

tion (2) of section 91 of the princi
50 [In आओ all, among other things, Specify”
égudito namely ——

Pal Act, after the
, the following words
inserted,

the accounts of every wakf under the
“whe te ne Board have been kept separately an
ment of have been audited annually by the St
mn and shall also specify”,

direct manage-
d whether such
ate Examiner of
acco
pocal F -_
‘on 55 of the principal Act, the
For section &
51.

following section shall be
ly:— |
0, namely

The State Government shall, by notification in the
«55. (1) constitute as many Tribunals as it may think fit for
cial Guzette, of any dispute, question or other matter relating
determination property which such Tribunal is, or may be, re-
wakf or wa ine under this Act or any rule or order made
to aoe by the same or subsequent notification in
thereunder, a ette 48656 the local limits of the are See ae
the a en Teal appointed by it shall exercise jurisdiction
(0 whic
under want alli wakf person interested in a wakf or
(2) Any came pone 7 Ae ne: ad = a this Act ~
any other per made thereunder, may make an application with-
any rule OF see in this Act or where no such time has —
in the Se ie such time as may be prescribed, to the iar
adage aag  oar of any dispute, question or other ma
for
lating fo Se ena plication made under ren हे (1) ae
0 a paca ‘whieh falls within the territorial limits ०
lo any

the
to 4

et

Amend-
ment

Of sec.
tion 51,

Substitu-
tion

Of sec.
tion 55,

Appoint-
ment,
powers
and
juris-
diction
of Tribu-
nals,


42

(wo or more Tribunals, such ony);
aj within the local limits oj 21०७
66 any one of the mutawallis of 7 ej tg
and yoluntarily resides, carries oD business or person ray "he
gain, and, 6 any such application is made to ally ey
aforesaid, the other Tribunal or Tribunals having sea ६ |
not entertain any application for the determination ae le हे
atter: Such

question or other 77
provided jhat the State Government may, if j; ;
that it is expedient ‘n the interests of the wakf o; sth of
re 10: wakt or the wakf property Y Othe, ? Mio,
interested 10 6 - ‘tp perty, to tr Dene
application 1० any other Tt! unal having jurisdiction fo suet "Soy
dispute, question 07 other matter in: the a ty
property, transfer such application (o we ley,
risdiction, and, on such transfer Othe,
so transferred shal] hee trip Ty

application from the stage which was reached hefore th with the '
from which the application has been so transferred, ९ © Tip , हे !
the Tribunal is of opinion that it is necessary in the Xcept Whe
justice to deal with the application afresh. Meret.

to which the application is

(4) Every yribunal shall consist of one person, who
member of the State Judicial Service holding a rank shall २७
that of a District and Sessions Judge or of a Ciyj] का NOt hey ie
and the appointment of every such person may he ma qa
name or 09 designation. © Cithe;
(5) The Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil coy,

’ ers as may be exercised, b ivil t and 25

have the same pow y Y a civil cour Shalj
Un

the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. while trying a suit
a decree 07 order,

(6) Notwithstand
procedure, 1908, the
be prescribed:

Provided that

by.

So: ®X€cuting

ing anything contained in the Cotle of ar
Tribunal shall follow such procedure ag a 30
oe

where any procedure, different from th
cribed procedure, is specified by this Act, the Tribunal sh शा pres-
the procedure specified by this Act. ४11 follow
cision of the Tribunal shall be final and bindi

{he application and it shall have the fica upon
8 civil court. न of a

(7) The de
the parties to
decree made by

(8) Execution
the civil court to
accordance with the pro
(9) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order wh 5०1
interim or otherwise, given or made by the Tribunal: ether

» Provided that a High Court may, on its own i

application of the Board or any person aggrieved, whiten a

| mine the records relating to any dispute, question or other ie

5 which has been determined by the Tribunal for the purp ore

satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or scmiiels okt r

- determination and may confirm, reverse or modify such determin

tien or pass such other order as it may think fit.” है
50

of any decision of the Tribunal shall 5
which such decision is sent for MRE: by
visions of the Code of Civil Procedure te 40


20

10! 1908,

30

35

4०

pe 77

43

52, After section 55 of the princi

Pal Act F
satel namely:— » the followin

8 sections shall

“558. Whenever an application js made to a Tribunal ¢

determination of any dispute, question or other matter “dae the
3 wakf or wakf property it shall hold its proceedings as axcedtion be
as possible and shall, as soon as practicable, on th Mend

ae € conclusion of the
hearing of such matter, give its decision in writing under its signa-
ture and furnish a copy of such decision to each of the Parties who

were present before it at the time of the decision and, where any

party was not present at the time aforesaid, send a copy of such
decision to such party by registered post.

55B. Clerical or arithmetica] mistakes in any decision or order
of a Tribunal or any error arising therein from any accidental slip
or omission may at any time be Corrected by the Tribunal by which
such decision was given or order was made, either on its own motion
or on the application of any of the parties to the proceeding, and,
whenever any such correction is made, a copy of the decision or order,
as so corrected, shall be furnished to each of the parties who were
present before the Tribunal at the time of making such correction,

and, where any party was not so present, shall be sent to such party
by registered post.

98९. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie in any civil court
in respect of any dispute, question or other matter relating to any
wakf, wakf property or other matter which is required by, or under,
this Act to be determined by a Tribunal.

950. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, or in any other law for the time being in force,
where any suit or other legal proceeding is instituted or commenc-
ed—

१
(a) by or on behalf of a Board—

(i) to set aside the sale of any immovable property,
which is wakf property, in execution of a decree or order of
a civil court;

(ti) to set aside the transfer of any immovable property,
which is wakf property, made by the mutawalli thereof,
whether for valuable consideration or not, without, or other-

wise than in accordance with, the sanction of the Board;

(४४) to recover possession of the property preferred to

in clause (a) or clause (b) or to restore possession of such
property to the mutawalli of the concerned wakf; or

(b) by a mutawalli to recover possession of immovable pro-
perty, which is tvakf property, which has been transferred by a

Inser.
tion of
new
sections
55A to
55F.

Tribunal
to hold
proceed.
ings
expedi-
tiously
and to
furnish
to the
parties
copies
of its
decision,
Amend-
ment

of deci.
sions.

Bar of
jurisdic.
tion of
civi]
courts
in res-
pect of
matters
deter-
mined
by Tribu-
79).

Appoint.
ment of
a recei-
ver in
certain
cases,


44 प्‌

whether for valuable consideratioy,
or

previous mutawalll, | |
without or otherwise than in accordance with, the . bee
of the Board, and which is in the possession of the detec .
on the application of the plaintiff, appoint a | ant,
nd direct suc ce;

| the income 0

h receiver to pay from time to Ver
tim

the court may,
f the property, s
Pp p y uch amount

of such property 4

~?

to the plaintiff, out 0
the court may consider to be necessary for further prosecution कि :
suit. (14
Bar to the 5512, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any othe
enforce- ४ a e. no suit, appeal or other legal 7 law
saaitit for the time being 17 force, 0 00४17 of Gal proceedin
of right for the enforcement of any right on ne of any wakf which hae Mb
on behalf not been registered in accordance with t कु provisions of this Act han
of unre- be instituted oF commenced or heard, tried or decided by any coy
gistered after the commencement of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1984 :
wakfs, where any such suit, appeal or other legal proceeding had bie a
tituted or commenced before such commencement, no such suit. an 3)
peal or other legal proceeding shall be continued, heard, tried
decided by any court after such commencement unless such wake
has been registered, after such commencement, in accordance with
the provisions of this Act.

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply, as far as पक 29
be, to the claim for set-off or any other claim made on behalf of
any wakf which has not been registered 11 accordance with the
provisions of this Act.

ve 557, Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no 9;
Se wie notification or order or decision made, proceeding or action taken, py J
of the the Central Government or the State Government under this Act
validity or any rule made thereunder shall be questioned in any civil
of any court.”
notifica-
gaat 53. In sub-section (1) of section 57 of the principal Act,—
ering (a) for the words “title to wakf property”, the words “title to, .
of sec- or possession of, wakf property” shall be substituted;
tion 57. (b) for the words “or the right of @ mutawalli, the court”,
the words “or the right of 8 mutawalli or beneficiary, the court or
Tribunal” shall be substituted. कि
54. In section 58 of the principal Act— ~
d-
were.” (a) in sub-section (1),—
sec- (i) after the words and figures “Land Acquisition Act, 1894", 10181
tion 58. the words “or under any other law for the time being in force

relating to the acquisition of land or other property” shall be 40

inserted;

(ii) the following Eplanation shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
he reference to Collector in the fore-

“Explanation.—T
going provisions of t
other law referred to therein,

his sub-section shall, in relation to any 4;
be construed, if the Collector
is not the competent authority under such other law to make
an award of the compensation or other amount payable for
acquisition of land or other property thereunder, as a refer-
ence to the authority under such other law competent to 5°

make such award.”;



=

45
(b) in sub-section (3), after

the words and figures “Land
Acquisition Act, 1894”, the words, brackets and figure “or under
1804 the corresponding provisions of the other law referred to in sub-
sf section (1)" shall be inserted:
(०) in sub-section (4), after the Wotds and figures “Land
हि Acquisition Act, 1894", the words, brackets and figure “or under
. es ; isions the other la referred to b
ot 189 the corresponding provisions of the r law In sub-
| section (1)” shall be inserted. :
55. In section 59 of the principal Act, for the word “Board”, the
1० words “Wakf Commissioner” shall be substituted.
56, In section 61 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1) — है
() for the words “the Board may apply’ . the words “the
Wakf Commissioner may apply” shall be substituted;
15 (ti) for the words “to pay to the Board or to any person
: authorised by the Board”, the words “to pay to the Wakf Com-
missioner or to any person authorised by the Wakf Commis-
sioner” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word “Board”, the words
20 “Wakf Commissioner” shall be substituted.
57. In Chapter VII of the principal Act, after section 61, the following
Section shall be inserted, namely: —
“61A. Where, under this Act any period has been specified
for the filing of any appeal, the a
25

ppellate authority may, if it is
revented by sufficient cause from

period so specified, entertain the
d period.”

Satisfied that the appellant was p
preferring the appeal within the
appeal after the expiry of the sai

58. For section 62 of the

principal Act, the following section shal}
be substituted, namely:—

१० “62. (1) For the purpose of regulating the secular activities of
wakfs, the Central Government shall have the following powers
and functions, namely; —

(०) to lay down Beneral principles and policies of wakf
administration in so far as they relate to the

35 of the wakfs:

secular activities

(b) to co-ordinate the functions of the
Council, the Wakf Commissioners and {
- they relate

Central
to their secular functions:

Wakf
he Board,

in so far as

Amend-
ment

of sec-
tion 59
Amend-
ment of
section 61

Inser-
tion of
new
section
61A,

Power

of appel-
late autho.
rity to
enter-
tain app-
eal after
the
expiry

of the
speci-
fied
period.

Substitu-
tion of
section
62,

Powers
of Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment
to regu-
late the .
secular
activi-
tes of
wakfs.


>

46

५ review administration of the Secular 4,
(c) to review ca gyest improvements, if any

tivity
wakts generally and “at

०० its POW nd functions unde;
५ Tn exercising its powers ° + एल ०७३७
ae: ital po may call for any peTlodic ०० othe.
(1), the Cen of Wakf Commissioner and may |

reports from any sjssioner such directions as it to
rakf Commussic r ma thing 3

the Board or \\ rformance of their functions, heal Board xh

fit and in the pe shall comply with such directions,*, the

Wakf Commissioners

५३ After section 62 of the principal Act, the following Section,

shall be inserted, namely: — to

“ERA. soon as may be after the close of a financia)
the State आपकी shall cause 8 —— annual repor om ah
working and administration of the State Wakf Boarg and the

dministration of wakfs in the State during that yeay ६७ be
"हे and laid before each House of the State Legislature where
की ts of two Houses, or where such Legislature 3
a before that House, and every such report shal] ६९

such form and shall contain such matters as may be prescribag in

638. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the State Go.
vernment may either on its own motion oF on an application mage ;
to it by 2 mutawalli or any other person interested in the ०
call for and examine the record of the Board or Wak Commis.
sioner, as the case may be, in respect of any proceeding (not being
a proceeding relating to a matter in respect of Which a suit has
been instituted, appeal has been filed or application has been made 25
to a court or any proceeding arising out of an application made to
the Tribunal or an appeal to the State Government as provided by
this Act), to satisfy itself as to the regularity of such proceedings
or the correctness, legality or propriety of any decision
or order passed in such proceedings, and, if in any case, it appears 30
to the State Government that any such decision or order should
be modified, annulled, reversed or remitted to the Boarg for
reconsideration, the State Government may pass orders accord-

ingly:

Provided that no such order shall be made except after giving 35
to the person who is likely to be prejudicially affected thereby a
reasonable opportunity of making his representations against the
proposed action.

(2) No application shall be entertained under sub-section (1)
in respect of any matter unless an application in relation to the 40
said matter had already been made to the Board and had been dis-
posed of by the Board or, where the application relates to any
matter in respect of which the Wakf Commissioner is empowered by
or under this Act to exercise any power, unless an application had

a made to the Wakf Commissioner and has been disposed of by 45


is of 4860.

45 of 1860.

37 of 1956.

)
wo

G0. In sub-section (1) of section 64 of the princi
rds 01 has exceeded or abused its powers”

47

(3) Every application referred to =
made within a period of three months from the aa (1) shall be
order made in the proceeding to which the ap “Meats Pinal
communicated to the applicant.”, puication relates, was

pal Act, after the
, the words and figures “or

ad wilfully and without sufficient cause failed to comply with any di
tion issued by the Central Government under section 62 or the State Gov.
ernment under section 63, or if the State Government is satisfied on है

10 consideration of any report submitted after annual inspection, that
the Board’s continuance is likely to be injurious to the interests of the
wakfs in the State” shall be inserted.

61. In section 65 of the principal Act, for the words “the Commis-

sioner”, the words “the Wakf Commissioner or the Survey Commis-
15 sioner” shall be substituted.

62. For section 66 of the principal Act, the following section shall

be substituted, namely: —

20

40

“6G. (1) The Wakf Commissioner, Survey Commissioner, mem-
bers of the Board, every auditor, every officer and servant of the
Board and every other person duly appointed to discharge any
duties imposed on him by this Act or eny rule or order made there-
under, shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning
of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

(2) Every mutawalli. of a wakf, every member of managing
committee, whether constituted by the Board or under any deed
of wakf, the Executive Officers and every person holding any office
in a wakf shall also be deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.”.

63. In section 66A of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—

(i) for the words and figures “under the States Reorganisa-
tion Act, 1956”, the words “under any law providing for re-
organisation of States” shall be substituted;

(ii) for the words, letters and figures “Ist day of Novem-
ber, 1956”, the words “the date of such reorganisation” shall be
substituted;

(iii) for the words “it should be reconstituted or reorga-
nised as an intra-State Board”, the words “it should be reconsti-
tuted as an intra-State Board” shall be substituted;

(iv) for the words “such reconstitution and reorganisation,
as the case may be”, the words “such reconstitunion” shall be
substituted;

Amend.
ment

Of Sec.
tion 64,

Amend.-
ment of
section 65,

Substitu-
tion of
section
66,

Wakf
Commis-
sioner,
members
of Board,
etc.,

to be
deemed
to be
public
servants,

ment of

66A.


Insertion of
new sec-
tions 66D
to 66F,

Powers of
Board and
Waki

sioner to
require
copies of

ments, —
etc., to be
furnished

Institution
of suit or

Powers of
Central
Govern.
ment to
Constitute
common
Boards,

(b) in sub-section (3) ,—

s T
for the words ‘reconstitution and

(i) in clause (०), “reconstitution” shall be substitutes,

organisation”, the words
, d figures “subjec
), for the words an ie ta
(0) in (हम 11 of the States Reorganisation Ke
provisions wath “subject to the provisions of law ou
“ag seen of the concerned State” shall be substitute’ nity
the reor

In sub-section (1) of section 668 of the principal Act, f
64. In su

Act, 1956, thi A lin

isation Act, न 45 Act js

“the States Sat aaa ११ “i » as Ki
hi Me ae November, 1956, applicable”, the words “any law to
om

. this Act is, as from th
eorganisation of any State, © date
ee see aoe into force, applicable” shall be substituteg,
on whic

63. After section 66C of the principal Act, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely: —

“66D. Notwithstanding anything contained in any Jaw for 15
the time being in force, it shall be lawful for the Board, or the
Wakf Commissioner to require any person having ह the custody of

any record, register, report or other document relating to a wakf
or any immovable property which is wakf property, to furnish,
subject to the payment of necessary costs, copies of, or extracts 20
from, any such record, register, report or doucument and every
person to whom such a requisition is made, shall furnish, as soon
as may be practicable, to the Board or Wakf Commissioner copies

or extracts from the required record, register, report or other
document. 25

668, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, no suit or other legal proceeding in
respect of the administration or management of a wakf, or “any
other matter or dispute for the determination or decision of which
Provisions have been made in this Act, shall be instituted in any 30

court or Tribunal except under, and in accordance with, the pro-
vision of this Act.

66F. (1) Where the Cen

tral Government is satisfied that by
reason of— :

(i) the smallness of the Muslim population in two or more 35
States,

(ii) the slender resources of the wakf in such States, and
the (i) the disproportion between the number and income of
wakfs and the Muslim population in such States,


o >> अवा  तत

it is expecien’ in the interests of the
the aae population of such States in the States and
separate oards for ach of such a to have. instead of
may: after Romain With the Go ली cCOmmon Board, jt
concerned States, establish, by not; fament of €ach of the
। Gazette. a een Board for such States as || शक
mays “y pe a aid subsequent notificatin, deem it and
180० at Which the principa) office ict ०0, Specify the
shall be located. common Board

common Board establj
2) Every common established und
5 far as practicable, consist of the salad ee (1)
In sub-

pall, @
10 tio (1), of, as the case may be, sub-section (2) of section 19

(8) Wheneves sy Common Board is established under gyb.
su

(a) all powers vested in the State Government
मु deed of wakt or any provision of law for the tin
1 force relating to wakfs, shall become iwanateired 40

jn, the Central Government and, thereupon ,

under any
e being in
and vested

30 Provided that while establishing a common Board for two
or more States, the Central Government shall ensure that at

Jeast one representative of each of the concerned States is in-
cluded as a member of the Board;

(b) references in this Act to a State shall be construed as
references to each of the States for which the common Board has

25
peen established;

(c) the Central Government may, without prejudice to any
rule applicable to a Board in a State, make, by notification in
the Official Gazette, rules regulating the conduct of business by,

40 and affairs of, the common Board.

(4) The common Board shalj be a body corporate, with
objects not confined to one State, having perpetual succession and
a common seal with power to acquire ang hold property and to

transfer any such property, subject to such conditions and restric-
$5 tions as May be specified by the Central Government, and shall by

the said name sue or be sued.”,

66, In sub-section (2) of section 67 of the principal Act,— —_
ment ०
(i) clause (d) shall be omitted; section 67.

(ii) for clause (n), the following clauses shall be substituted,

40
namely :—
“(n) the manner of election of members of the Board by
means of a single transferable vote to be prescribed under
section 10;
45 (0) the scale of pay, allowances and other conditions of

service of officers and other employees appointed by the Wakf
Commissioner under section 21B;


50 y

(p) the conditions and restrictions subject to which ,
Commissione! and any authorised officer of the Boarg fa aks
lay ;

ister or other document 1
pect any Feet ert पा 4 9५0॥९ ७ Y ing,
pursuance of the provisions of section 22B; Alice

nditions subject to which an Executiye

(q) the .©° a
| under section 26A and salaries and alloy Ce,
an

appointes

Executive Officer;

may be
of such

(r) the manner in which an inquiry may be helq ;
Wakf Commissioner under section 268 with regard ७ Y the

have ceased to exist or in relation to buil

which appeat to 88
or other places which were being used for religious Purposes 8, ty

instruction or for charity, which have ceased to be useq ies
t

purpose,

(s), the mann
notice to the mutaw

{t) the form in which, and the time within which &
rate budget for wakfs under the direct management of the = i
shall be prepared as required by section 314; oard

(u) the intervals at which accounts of wakfs may be aug;
f the provisions of sub-section (1) £4 Ri
; 20

er in which the Wakf Commissioner ma

alli under sub-section (2) of section 31
’ 15

in pursuance 0

w) the time within which the sale of any property js to
confirmed under the first proviso to sub-section (2) of wh hg
36A,.and the manner in which the approval given under ne
section (3) of that section shall be published;

(w) the manner of service of notice issued under sub-section 25
(1) of section 96D and the manner in Which any inquiry is to be
made under sub-section (3) of that section;

(७) the other matters which may be specified in the report
submitted under sub-section (3) of section 43A;

(y) manner of publication of order made under sub-section 30
(2) of section 43C;

(z) the manner in which consultation may be made with a
mutawalli under sub-section (1) of section 43F;

(za) manner of publication of order made under sub-see-

tion (2) of section 48371 35

(29) the rate at which contribution is to be made by 4
mutawalli under section 46;

(zc) time within ‘which application is to be made to the
Tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 55 for the determina-
tion of any dispute, question or other matter relating to 4
or wakf property;

(zd) the procedure which a Tribunal shall follow under sub-
section (6) of section 55;


(ze) the form in which an annual report is to be submitted

under section 63A and the matte |
tales 78 which such report shall con-

(zf) rules regulating the conduct of busi
ness
of, the common Board under clause (c) of eae op
section 66F; (3) of

2g) any other matter which is re

prescribed.” ee Pia may’ be,

67. After section 68 of the principal Act, the following section shal

. be inserted, namely: —
10

5 of 1908.

“68A. Every rule made by the Central Government under soc-
tion 66F shall be laid, as soon as may be after jt is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more suc-
cessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately

"9 following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.”

20

68. In section 69 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause
(3), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —

“(3A) On and from the commencement of the Wakf (Amend-
25 ment) Act, 1984, sections 92 and 93 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908;”,

Insertion
of new
section
088

Rules
made
by the
Central
Govern.
ment to
be laid
before
Parlia-
ment,

Amend- .
ment

of sec-
tion 69.



RAJYA SABHA

BILL
further to amend the Wakf Act, 1954,

(As passed by the Rajya Sabha) ’