THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 39 of the Constitution, after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(g) that there is equality in status, income, facilities and opportunities in
employment whether of  religious or secular nature of Valmiki community .”
Explanation— The Valmiki community refers to a caste amongst Indian Hindus
who were traditionally treated as untouchables and were historically restricted to three
occupations of cleaning latrines, sweeping and scavenging.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill NO. XII of 2012
Amendment of
article 39.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MAY, 2012
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Valmiki is the only community within the Hindu caste structure to clean toilets and
carry night soil due to historical and traditional practices. Every other community, even
amongst the Scheduled Castes, regard them as untouchables and in large parts they do not
eat or inter marry with them. They are the 'untouchables' amongst 'untouchables'. It is the
most discriminated caste in India, Nepal, Bangladesh and Pakistan. They could not be
assimilated in the main stream of Hindu society to a large extent as the caste identity based
discriminations are still very strong.
In 1970s the State of Karnataka passed a law to ban manual scavenging. The
Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act,
1993 punishes the employment of scavengers or the construction of dry (non-flush) latrines
with imprisonment for up to one year and/or a fine of Rs. 2,000. Though, the Central
Government proposes to table in the monsoon Session (2012) of Parliament, the Prohibition
of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Bill, still more need to be
done as even after 63 years of independence, the human beings in our country are forced to
do such demeaning, soul searing work. It is high time that urgent steps be taken by the State
to wipe out the social tag and the shameful practices, inequalities in status, income, facilities
and opportunities of the employment. Thus the proposed amendment is necessary for bringing
the V almikis in the main stream which also seeks to ensure their employment as priests in
Hindu temples after gaining appropriate and satisfactory training and knowledge from
prescribed authorities, so that they do not face perpetual marginalisation, social fixation of
their vocation, subjugation and isolation in the otherwise upper caste dominated society.
Hence, this Bill.
TARUN VIJAY
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Tarun Vijay, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1029RS—(S3)—11.05.2012.