1
Bill No. XII of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JULY, 2017
Short title,
and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“21B. The State shall provide affordable adequate housing to all citizens in such
manner as the State may, by law, determine”.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to
housing.
5

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Housing is a basic human need. It is considered to be vital for human survival and
essential for socio-economic development. India with a population of over 1.21 billion people,
is the second most populous nation in the world. According to UN-HABITAT, India is home
to sixty three per cent of all slum dwellers in South Asia. This amounts to 170 million people,
seventeen per cent of the world’s slum dwellers. India’s per capita income although rising,
ranks 124th in the world. Approximately thirty five per cent of India’s population still earns
rupees sixty or less per day. Census 2011 reported 1.77 million homeless people across India
or 0.15 per cent of the country’s total population.
The right to housing is the right to live in adequate shelter in security, peace and
dignity. It is not merely having a roof over one’s head, rather it requires an accessible
habitable space that fulfills the basic human needs to personal space, security, adequate
lighting and ventilation, safe structure, protection from weather besides its location, all at
reasonable cost. Therefore it is the duty of the State to provide affordable adequate housing
for all citizens.
In order to achieve the task, it is felt necessary that a provision should be made in the
Constitution as part of the fundamental rights for the purpose. The Bill seeks to achieve the
above objectives.
Hence, this Bill.
K.K. RAGESH

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to make affordable adequate housing to all citizens a
fundamental right. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. However, at this stage it will be difficult to make an estimate of such expenditure, both
recurring and no-recurring. The exact amount can be worked out only when the provisions of
the Bill are implemented.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri K.K. Ragesh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1314RS(S3)—21-07-2017.