THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Contempt of Courts (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, in section 2, for clause (f) the following shall be
substituted namely:—
(b) ‘‘civil contempt’’  means wilful disobedience to any judgment, decree, direction,
order, writ or other process of a court including non-filing of counter or reply affidavits
or proceedings within the time granted by the Court or wilful breach of an undertaking
given to a Court;
Explanation I.—For the purpose of this clause, the non-filing of counter or
reply affidavits or proceedings by the official respondents within the time granted by
the any Court of law, shall amount to a Civil Contempt.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2 of
Act 70 of
1971.
Bill No. XII of 2018
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 20TH JULY, 2018

2
Explanation II.—The term “official respondents” in the above
Explanation I shall include all the officials representing the Union or State Governments
or any authority or body or institution of self Government established or constituted
by or under the Constitution; or by any other law made by the Parliament or a State
Legislature; or by notification issued or order made by the Central Government or a
State Government; bodies owned, controlled or substantially financed by the Central
Government or a State Government and non-Government organisations substantially
financed by the Central Government or a State Government, who were arrayed as
respondents in the legal proceedings before any court of law.
Explanation III.—If the “official respondent” is having a legal officer or a
Government pleader or a standing counsel or an advocate on record or any law officer
to represent it before the appropriate Court of Law, the responsibility of filing the
Counter affidavit or reply proceedings shall lie equally between the official respondent
and legal officer representing it and they shall jointly and severally face the contempt
proceedings, if any, initiated against any of them for this purpose.”
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 was enacted to uphold the dignity and autority of
the courts, ensure compliance with the directions of court, preserve an effective and impartial
system of justice and to maintain public confidence in the administration of justice. The Act
defines two types of contempt. One is civil contempt and other is criminal contempt. The civil
contempt is defined as wilful disobedience to any judgement, decree, direction, order, writ or
other process of a court or wilful breach of an undertaking given to a court.
2. There are large numbers of pending cases before various courts where the government
is a litigant and reports indicate that large number of cases are pending because of non-filing
of counter or reply affidavits by the various government authorities in spite of specific
directions from the concerned courts. The non-filing of counter/reply affidavits is causing a
lot of inconvenience to the courts in the administration of justice. This is also creating delay
in doing justice to the people approaching the courts. Often, Courts are taking  a serious
view of delay in filing counter/reply affidavits and impose heavy costs to be recovered from
the offices concerend.
3. The Government is sensiting its officers from time to time to file counter affidavits
reply within the time granted by the courts. The Government also appoints Law Officers/
Government Pleaders/ Standing Counsels/Advocate on Record/Solicitors to represent various
Government departments in various courts. However, the law officers are not taking the
responsibility of filing counters and they simply inform the respondent officials about the
case and keep silent until a reply comes from them. Similarly, officials are also not choosing
to file the counters until and unless court takes a serious view. Lack of proper coordination
between government officials and law officers is one of the reasons for not filing the counter
affidavits within time. Therefore, the responsibility of filing counter should be the equal
responsibility of the official respondent and law officer representing him in the court and
they should be jointly and severally responsible for non-filing within the time granted by
courts.
4. Though, non-filing of counter affidavits within the time granted by court can be
interpreted as disobedience of the order of the Court, contempt proceedings are not initiated
in this aspect till now. Therefore, it is necessary to explicitly bring the non-filing of counter
affidavits within time granted by courts as a contempt of court and as such an amendment is
proposed to the parent Act to this effect. The proposed amendment ensures in-time filing of
counter affidavit and thus helps the court to deliver judgments at the earliest so that the
justice is not delayed. The proposed Bill addresses the above concerns to a certain extent.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  K.V . P.  RAMACHANDRA  RAO

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS ACT, 1971
(70 OF 1971)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) * * * * *
(b) ‘civil contempt’ means wilful disobedience to any judgement, decree, direction,
order, writ or other process of a court or wilful breach of an undertaking given to a
court;
* * * * *
Definitions.
4

MGIPMRND—903RS(S3)—23-07-2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
————
(Dr.  K.V.P . Ramachandra Rao,  M.P.)