AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024 
Bill No. XII of 2024 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
      BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows: — 
5 
1. (1)This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act,
2024. 
(2)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement. 
10 
2. In article 15 of the Constitution, for clause 4, the following new
clause shall be substituted:—
      “(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of Article 29 shall 
prevent the State from making any special provision for the 
advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens proportionate to their caste census or for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.” 
Amendment 
of article15. 

2 
3. In
 article 16 of the Constitution, for clause 4, the following new
clause shall be substituted:—
      “(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from 
making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts 
in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of 
State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State 
proportionate to their caste census.”  
5 
Amendment 
of article 16. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
1. The Indian Constitution is the supreme law of this country which
guarantees equality of status and opportunity. However, unequal cannot
be treated equally and therefore the Indian Constitution allows for
positive discrimination to foster equality. The origins of the reservation
system may be traced back to India’s old discriminatory caste system.
With the object of making Indian society a democratic and egalitarian
society, the framers of our Constitution framed the policy of reservation
so that the oppressed and depressed classes can be joined in the
mainstream. The reservations, therefore, were the exception to the general
rule. Reservations in education and public employment are granted to
elevate those regarded socially and educationally backward in the State’s
perspective or when a class of citizens is not properly represented in the
services supplied by the State. Reservation is being offered to the
SC/ST/OBC class of citizens in India, who have been disadvantaged and
exploited socially and educationally for generations.
2. The Mandal Commission Report published in the year 1980 was the first
to define reservations for Other Backward Classes of citizens in India.
Before the Mandal Commission, caste discrimination existed on social,
economic, and political levels. The living standards of the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Backward Class families were deemed
much poorer than the mainstream population, including Hindu forward
castes and other religious groups. Therefore, the Mandal Commission
recommended to grant 27% reservations to Other Backward Class
citizens.
3. Over the years, there has been unrest amongst the citizens belonging to
the socially and educationally backward classes for not being treated
fairly and equally and that there is no level playing field when compared
to the socially and educationally forward citizens. The concept of
reservations introduced to uplift the socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens for the injustice being done to them generation after
generation did not achieve any greater results due to disparity in the
quantum of reservations compared to their population. The fact remains
that the reservation at 27% offered to the Other Backward Classes of
citizens on the basis of the 1931 census over a period of time is not
sufficient that too for a community, which is the largest in population in
this country. The accumulation of the deficit in honoring their due
representations and reservations for socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens each year, again brings out inequality in the society.
4. Constitution being a organic document should stretch itself to take care of
the demand and needs of the society. The founding fathers of our
Constitution have designedly couched Articles 14, 15 and 16 in
comprehensive phraseology so that the frail and emaciated section of the
people living in poverty, rearing in obscurity, possessing no wealth or
influence, having no education, much less higher education and suffering
from social repression and oppression should not be denied of equality
before law and equal protection of the laws and equal opportunity in the
matters of public employment or subjected to any prohibition  or
discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
For achieving these objects, provisions were inserted under Articles 15
and 16 for providing reservations to the SC, ST and Socially and
Educationally Backward Classes of citizens.

4 
5. The Mandal Commission while determining the criteria for defining the
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens identified that the
Other Backward Classes (OBCs) constituted nearly 52% of the Indian
population on the basis of the 1931 census. That after considering all facts
and circumstances, the Commission initially recommended for reserving
52% of all posts under the Central Government and in educational
institutions both under the Central and State Governments, for the
backward classes of citizens. It was due to the legal constraint of 50% cap
on all reservations that initially the quantum of Other Backward Class
reservation was fixed at 27%, in order to arrive at a figure which when
added to the 22.5% reservation for SCs and STs remains below 50%.  The
reservation of 27% in education was introduced after the 93 rd
Constitutional amendment with effect from 20.1.2006. The eighteen years
of implementation of reservation in education has not enabled the entire
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens to realise the
benefits of the reservation and disparity still prevails in the society and
there is no achievement of level playing field. Moreover, the reservation
in appointments introduced in the year 1981 also did not enable the Other
Backward Classes of citizens to get their rightful share in employment
and still there is inadequate representation in employment including in the
promotional posts. Considering the fact that there exists no mathematical
limit of 50% in aggregate for reservations, therefore it is essential that
reservations for the backward classes of citizens be increased in
proportion to the increase in their population over the years and shall be
made proportionate to the Caste Census.
6. Therefore, to achieve substantive equality, it is imperative that Articles 15
and 16 of the Constitution should be amended to increase the quantum of
reservations of Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of citizens
proportionate to their Caste Census.
 
Hence, this Bill. 
P. WILSON

5 
A
NNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
 * *  * *  * * 
15. * * * * * * 
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article
29 shall prevent the State from making any special 
provision for the advancement of any socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 
Prohibition of 
discrimination on 
grounds of 
religion, race, 
caste, sex or place 
of birth. 
 * *  * *  * * 
16. * * * * * *
 
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State
from making any provision for the reservation of 
appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of 
citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not 
adequately represented in the services under the State. 
Equality of 
opportunity in 
matters of public 
employment. 
* *  * * * * 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
_______ 
(Shri P. Wilson, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—058—06.02.2024. 