1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill  No.  XII of 2008
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- nineth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) The Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act,  2008.
(2) It shall come into force, at once.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in “List-II-State List” after entry 18, the
following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“18-A. Restrictions on transfer of land and other immoveable properties in favour
of persons and other legal entities on grounds of duration of residential requirement in
the State, social and economic needs of the State, environment and public interest as
may be specified by the State by law.”
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH FEBRUARY, 2009
Amendment
of the Seventh
schedule to the
Constitution.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Land is becoming a scarce commodity more particularly in small States. Land mafia
from foreign countries are landing in States like Goa with tons of money, buying huge areas
and creating social and economic chaos. Some of the parties have potential enough to buy
a whole village in a smaller State like Goa.
Persons in real estate in the country too are resorting to similar purchases disturbing
the social fabric in the State.
Rights existing under the constitution should not be so unfettered so as to change
economic scenario of a smaller State much to the disadvantage of the State and its people.
Anti-social elements which become a part of such uncontrolled transactions are proving
disastrous for a State like Goa.
Therefore, States have to be empowered to enact appropriate legislations to bring in
restrictions on transfer of land and other immoveable properties in favour of persons and
other legal entities on grounds of duration of residential requirement in the State, social and
economic needs of the State, environment and public interest, as may be specified by the
law.
Hence the Bill.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK
2

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—657RS(S-5)—13-02-2009.