THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force immediately on the date it receives the assent of the President
of India.
2. In article 200 of the Constitution of India,—
(i) after the words “Governor shall”, the words “within a period of two months”
shall be inserted;
(ii) in the first proviso, for the words “as soon as possible”, the words “within a
period of one month” shall be substituted; and
(iii) in the second proviso, after the words “for the consideration of the President”,
the words “within a period of one month from the date of receipt of the Bill” shall be
inserted.
Bill No. XII  of  2022
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST APRIL, 2022
Short title and
commencement.
5
Amendment
of article
200.
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution of India is dynamic in nature, with the ability to adapt itself to the
changing needs of the nation. Democracy and Federalism are the essential features of the
Constitution and part of its basic structure.
2. The Governor is established as the de jure head of the State and all executive acts are
done in his name. However, the Governor is bound by the aid and advise of the elected State
Government under article 163 of the Constitution. It cannot be gainsaid that the Governor,
who is a ceremonial head of the State, cannot impede the lawful and constitutional functioning
of the State Government.
3. Article 200 of the Constitution bestows on the Governor the power to provide assent
to the Bills passed by the State Legislature. The Governor can also return the Bill to the
Legislature for reconsideration or suggest amendments. However, if the Bill is once again
passed by the Legislature, the Governor is bound to give his assent. The Governor is further
entrusted with an additional power to reserve a Bill for the consideration of the President.
However, the Constitution does not prescribe a time limit for the Governor to assent, withhold
assent or reserve the Bill for the consideration of the President.
4. As the Constitutional Head of the State, the Governor owes a responsibility to the
people of the State. It is trite in law that any constitutional authority must perform its duties
within a reasonable time frame. However, in the recent past, we have seen several instances
of Governors holding Bills passed by the State Legislatures for inordinate amount of time,
without deciding one way or the other. In some cases, even when ex-facie the Bill has to be
reserved for the consideration of the President, the Governors have taken a long time to do
so. This defeats the will of the people since the State Legislature represents the mandate of
the people. All Bills passed by the State Legislature are for the welfare of the people of the
State. The State Government’s functioning cannot indirectly be curtailed and rendered inutile
by the actions of the Governor, a Union Government appointee. That infringes the balance of
power between the Union and States established by the Constitution.
5. The absence of a time-limit in article 200 gives the Governor unbridled power to
delay the fate of a Bill. Thus, non-prescription of a time-limit is an impediment to the welfare
of the people. Thus, the provision must be amended to balance the interest of the people and
also provide sufficient time to the Governor to take an informed decision.
6. It is therefore, proposed to amend article 200 of the Constitution to prescribe a time
limit to the Governor for providing or withholding his assent to the Bill or reservation of such
Bill for the consideration of the President of India.
Hence, this Bill.
P. WILSON
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the case
of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the Legislature
of the State, it shall be presented to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that
he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the
consideration of the President:
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation to him of
the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting
that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in
particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may
recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall
reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses with
or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not
withhold assent therefrom:
Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for the
consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if it
became law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position
which that Court is by this Constitution designed to fill.
* * * * *
3
Assent to
Bills.

MGIPMRND—34RS(S3)—04.04.2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P. Wilson, M.P.)