THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY IN PRIVATE SECTOR BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to establish bribery as a criminal offence and to promote effective practices to prevent
bribery in private sector and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Prevention of Bribery in Private Sector Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bribe" means and includes facilitation payments, directly or through third
parties, gift, hospitality and expenses whenever they could or perceived to affect the
outcome of business transactions, which are not reasonable and bonafide:
Explanation.—The term 'bribe' shall become extortion when the demand of bribe is
accompanied by threats that endanger the personal integrity or the life of the person involved,
or forced payment of bribe to protect legitimate right or the speed money, for expediting
approvals and for providing or not withholding services;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill NO. XIII of 2012
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH APRIL, 2012
5
10

2
(b) "commercial entity" means—
(i) a body incorporated under the laws of India which carries on business
in India or elsewhere; or
(ii) any other body corporate, wherever incorporated, which carries on
business, or part of a business, in India; or
(iii) a partnership formed under the law in India which carries on business
in India or elsewhere; or
(iv) any other partnership, wherever formed, which carries on business, or
part of a business, in India:
Explanation .—The term 'business' includes any trade, profession, commerce or
manufacture.
(c) 'confiscation', means the permanent deprivation of property by order of a
court or other competent authority and also includes forfeiture;
(d) 'foreign public official' means any person holding a legislative, executive,
administrative or judicial office of a foreign country, whether appointed or elected as
permanent or temporary, paid or unpaid or any person performing a public function or
a public service for a foreign country;
(e) 'Non-Governmental Organisation' means a body incorporated under the laws
in India or any other body corporate, wherever incorporated which carries on its
charitable or religious activities in India, any society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860; a trust registered under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or association
of persons which carries on its charitable or religious activities in India and includes
community based organisations;
Explanation.—The term 'charitable or religious activities' means activities as defined
in sub-section (15) of section 2 of the Income Tax Act, 1961:
(f) 'person' shall be construed to mean and include—
(i) an individual
(ii) a company
(iii) a firm
(iv) a society
(v) a trust
(vi) a Hindu Undivided Family (HUF)
(vii) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not
(viii) limited liability partnership
(ix) every artificial juridical person not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses; and
(x) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by such person.
(g) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) 'proceeds of crime' means any property derived or obtained, directly or
indirectly through the commission of offence under this Act;
(i) 'property' means assets of every kind, whether corporeal or incorporeal,
movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, and legal documents or instruments
evidencing title to or interest in such assets.
21 of 1860.
43 of 1961.
2 of 1982.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
3. (1) A person shall be guilty of an offence of giving bribe, when committed
intentionally in the course of economic, financial or commercial activities when it is
established that there is a promise, offering or giving, directly or indirectly, of an undue
advantage to any person who directs or works, in any capacity, for a commercial entity, for
the person himself or for another person, in order that he in breach of his duties, acts or
refrains from acting in certain matters.
(2) A person shall be guilty of an offence of receiving bribe, when committed
intentionally in the course of economic, financial or commercial activities when it is
established that there is solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage
by any person who directs or works, in any capacity, for a commercial entity, for the person
himself or for another person, in order that he in breach of his duties, acts or refrains from
acting in certain matters.
4. A person shall be guilty of an offence of bribery of foreign public officials, when
committed intentionally in the conduct of international business, when it is established that
there is an offer, promise or giving any undue pecuniary or other advantage, whether directly
or through an intermediary, to a foreign public official, for that official or for a third party, in
order that the official acts or refrains from acting in relation to the performance of official
duties, in order to obtain or retain business or other improper advantage:
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, offence of bribery of foreign public
officials shall also include complicity, incitement, aiding, abetting and authorization of an
act of bribery of a foreign public official or an attempt and conspiracy to bribe a foreign
public official.
5. (1) Any person who participates in any capacity such as an accomplice, aid or
instigator in any offence under sections 3 or 4 shall be considered as guilty of offence under
that section.
(2) Any person who makes an attempt to commit an offence under section 3 or 4 shall
be considered as guilty of offence under that section.
6. A commercial entity shall be guilty of an offence under this section if a person
associated with it, bribes another person intending—
(i) to obtain or retain business for the commercial entity, or
(ii) to obtain or retain an advantage in the conduct of business for the commercial
entity:
Provided that the commercial entity may in defence prove that it has in place adequate
procedures, as may be prescribed, designed to prevent persons associated with it from
undertaking such conduct.
7. A Non-Governmental Organisation shall be guilty of an offence under this section if
a person associated with it, bribes another person intending—
(i) to obtain or retain assets, grants for the non-governmental organization; or
(ii) to obtain or retain an advantage in the conduct of its charitable activities:
Provided that the commercial entity may in defence prove that it has in place adequate
procedures, as may be prescribed, designed to prevent persons associated with it from
undertaking such conduct.
8. (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any provisions of the Act, or of
any rule is a company, every person who, at the time when contravention was committed,
was in charge of or was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the
company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of offence and to be punished
accordingly:
Bribery in the
private sector.
Offence of
Bribery of
foreign public
officials.
Participation or
attempt to
participate in
act of bribery.
Failure of
commercial
entity to
prevent bribery.
Failure of non
governmental
organisation to
prevent bribery.
Contravention
by companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable
to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that
he exercised due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any contravention
has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of committing contravention and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) 'company' means any body corporate and includes a firm, society, trust, limited
liability partnership or other association of persons; and
(ii) 'director' in relation to a firm means a partner of the firm and in relation to a
trust means trustee of the trust.
9. (1) An individual guilty of an offence under section 3 or 4 shall be liable on the first
offence, for imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding
rupees two lakh or both and for second or subsequent contravention, for imprisonment for a
term not exceeding fourteen years or to a fine not less than rupees five lakh or both.
(2) any other person guilty of an offence under sections 3 or 4 shall be liable on the
first offence, to a fine not exceeding rupees one lakh and for second or subsequent
contravention, to a fine not less than rupees five lakh.
(3) A person guilty of an offence under section 5 is liable on conviction to a fine not
more than rupees two lakh.
10. (1) On conviction of a person the proceeds of crime derived from or involved in
offences under sections 3 or 4, or the property the value of which corresponds to that of such
proceeds shall be confiscated.
(2) If proceeds of crime have been transformed or converted, by the person in part or
in full, into other property, such property shall be liable to be confiscated.
(3) If proceeds of crime have been intermingled by the person with property acquired
from legitimate sources, such property shall be liable to confiscated up to the assessed value
of the intermingled proceeds.
(4) Income or other benefits derived by any person from such proceeds of crime, from
property into which such proceeds of crime have been transformed or converted or from
property with which such proceeds of crime have been intermingled shall also be liable to be
confiscated in the same manner and to the same extent as proceeds of crime.
(5) For the purpose of this section, notwithstanding any rights or privilege provided
through any other Act or by an agreement between the parties, the adjudicating authority
shall have authority to order any bank, financial institution, financial intermediary or
commercial entity to provide information, seize or produce records, freeze accounts and
remit the proceeds of crime to the designated account.
(6) The proceeds of crime confiscated under this Act shall vest in the Central
Government.
11. (1) The Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
as many Special Judges as may be necessary to try the offences punishable under this Act.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Special Judge under this Act
unless he is or has been a Sessions Judge or an Additional Session Judge under the Code of
Criminal Procedures, 1973.
Penalties.
Confiscation of
proceeds of
crime.
Power to
appoint Special
Judges.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(3) A Special Judge shall follow the procedure prescribed by the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 for the trial.
(4) A Special Judge, while trying an offence punishable under this Act shall exercise
all the powers and functions exercisable by a District Judge under the Criminal Law
Amendment Ordinance, 1944.
12. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the High Court may exercise, so far as
applicable, all the powers of appeal and revision conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 on a High Court as if the Court of Special Judge was a Court of Session trying cases
within the local limits of the High Court.
13. (1) The Central Government shall take appropriate steps to provide effective
protection from potential retaliation or intimidation to witnesses, reporting persons and experts
who give testimony concerning offences established under the Act and to their relatives.
(2) The Central Government shall establish procedures for the physical protection of
such witnesses and reporting persons and for non-disclosure or limitations on the disclosure
of information concerning the identity and whereabouts of such persons.
(3) The provisions of the sub-sections (1) and (2) shall also apply to victims in so far
as they are witnesses.
(4) In cases of extortionist bribe, if the bribe giver files a complaint, he shall be protected
under this clause as a whistle blower:
Provided that this protection shall not be made available in case of speed money.
14. (1) The commercial entities shall make adequate procedures, as may be prescribed,
designed to prevent persons associated with it from undertaking bribery.
(2) The procedures shall provide for commercial entities to establish and ensure the
effectiveness of internal controls, ethics and compliance measures for preventing and detecting
bribery and shall inter alia, include,—
(i) a clearly articulated and visible policy prohibiting bribery;
(ii) instructions for strict compliance with the policy at all levels of the entity;
(iii) appropriate disciplinary procedures to address violation of the procedures
at all levels of the entity;
(iv) setting up independent monitoring body;
(v) oversight of ethics and compliance measures and reporting to the independent
monitoring body;
(vi) ensuring applicability of the policy and procedures to third parties such as
agents, intermediaries, consultants, representatives, distributors, partners, contractors,
advisors, suppliers, associates, subsidiaries and joint venture partners and seeking
commitment from such third parties to adhere to policy prohibiting bribery;
(vii) measures for periodic communication and training at all levels of the entity
of laws against bribery and entity's policy against bribery; and
(viii) putting in place an appropriate whistle blower mechanism including rewards
for reporting and protection of the whistle blowers.
15. (1) The banks, financial institutions and other financial intermediaries shall be
required to take reasonable steps to determine the identity of beneficial owners of funds
deposited into the accounts of such customers in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The banks, financial institutions and other financial intermediaries shall be required
to maintain record of beneficial owners under sub-section (1) and shall provide such
information as and when required by the adjudication authorities.
Appeal and
revision.
Protection of
witnesses and
reporting
persons.
Prevention of
bribery by
commercial
entity.
Prevention and
detection of
proceeds of
crime.
Ord. 38 of
1944.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
17. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Corruption and black money have many dimensions. It is highly noticeable that the
vices of the market tend to seek advantage of the weaknesses of the competitive democratic
set up like ours.The situation has reached to alarming levels and more so in the wake of lack
of effective legal mechanism to deal with the menace. The traditional anti-corruption laws
are losing their teeth against the new threat from private sector. The United Nations Convention
Against Corruption (UNCAC) has also identified certain gaps in our present anti-corruption
mechanism. We don't have any act dealing with prevention of bribery in the private sector
and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs). Our provisions also lack with regards to
mispricing and valuation of contract and licenses etc., gratification and bribery through
third party, lobbying and influencing through public policy debate, rules, regulation and
guidelines to be implemented by private sector to check and control bribery and the bribing
by foreign nationals. To tackle these issues effectively, specific legal provisions in the form
of  a Bill, namely, 'the Prevention of Bribery in private sector Bill, 2012' clearly defining all
these terms and issues is being moved.
Hence, this Bill.
PRAKASH JAV ADEKAR
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill.
Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislation power
is of a normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish bribery as a criminal offence and to promote effective practices to prevent
bribery in private sector and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Prakash Javadekar, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—443RS—(S3)—27.04.2012.