1
THE UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE AND HEALTHCARE
COVERAGE BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for universal health insurance and healthcare coverage to all citizens and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Universal Health Insurance and Healthcare Coverage
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XIII of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD AUGUST, 2018
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means, in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government.
(b)  ‘Fund’ means the Universal Healthcare Fund constituted under section 6;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made uder this Act;
3. The Central Government shall ensure universal access to healthcare services for
every citizen through health insurance in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that citizens who are covered under any health insurance scheme or such
other healthcare services as may be notified, shall be excluded from the purview of this Act:
Provided further that no citizen shall be excluded from the purview of this Act only on
the ground that he has any pre-existing disease.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall pay an annual health insurance premium in
respect of all citizens covered under this Act, which shall entitle them to access universal
healthcare services.
(2) Central Government shall cause the annual health premium to be collected in such
manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification constitute a Committee to decide
on the health insurance premium to be paid in respect of citizens covered under this Act for
availing the universal healthcare services.
(2) The Committee shall consist of,—
(a) the Secretary in the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Chairman
ex-offcio; and
(b) the Principal Secretaries in-charge of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare in the State Governments or such other officer as may be nominated by the
State Government—ex officio Members; and
(c) such number of professional membes to be appointed in such manner as may
be prescribed, having experience in the field of insurance, actuarial science and
medicine.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Members of the committee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) In determining the amount of annual health insurance premium for any class of
citizens, the Committee shall give due regard to the annual income of such class of citizens.
6. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this
Act, a Fund to be called as the Universal Health Insurance and Healthcare Fund.
(2) The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government and there shall be
credited thereto—
(a) any sums of money paid as annual health insurance premium under
section 4;
(b) any sums provided by the Central Government to carry out the purposes of
this Act; and
(c) such other sums as may be specified from time to time.
(3) The Fund shall be utilised by the Central Governments,—
(a) provide universal healthcare services as provided under this Act;
(b) augment medical infrastructure in areas where such infrastructure is
inadequate;
Definitions.
Central
Government to
provide
Universal
Health
Insurance and
Healthcare
Services.
Annual Health
Insurance
premium.
Universal
Health
Insurance and
Healthcare
Fund.
Committee to
decide health
insurance
premium.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) take any steps to promote maternal health and child health;
(d) create awareness regarding any disease afflicting any area; and
(e)  carry out such other activities as may be specified.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament,
provide requisite funds for the purposes of this Act, from time to time.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Removel the
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
 A major constituent of United Nations Human Development Indiex (HDI) is a long
and health life. Despite being among world’s  leading economies, India has just managed
only recently to enter the club of mid-ranked countries in terms of HDI. This, to a large
extent, is attributable to the lack of universal health services.
The widespread disparities of income and wealth in India account for a largely skewed
distribution of healthcare facilities. On one hand, we have world class healthcare system led
primarily by private corporate hospitals which cater to not just domestic patients, but attract
patients from world over, in what has flourised as medical tourism in India. On the other
hand, large sections of population have little or no access to even primary and secondary
healthcare services. The stark differences in access to healthcare are clearly evident by the
differences in healthcare indicators in vital statistics. For example, according to 2013 statistics,
the Infant Mortality Rate in urban areas was 27. The corresponding figure for rural areas
was 44, which is , by any yardstick, substantially higher (almost 63%) than the urban areas.
The Central Government, alive to this fact, came out with the National Health
Policy, 2017 with the object to provide access to healthcare with focus on the equity aspect
so that the poorest in the country get affordable healthcare facilities. The prime target of the
Policy is the vulnerable section of society, including the poor and the tribals, who are not
able to utilise healthcare facilities either because such facilities are not available at their
place or, if these are available, the costs of healthcare services makes them beyond  their
reach.
With the broad object to achieve universalisation of access to affordable healthcare,
the Bill seeks to—
(i) provide that the Central Government shall ensure universal access to healthcare
services for every citizen through health insurance;
(ii)  provide for payment of annual health insurance priemium in respect of
citizens covered under this Bill by the appropriate Government; and
(iii) establish Universal Health Insurance and Healthare Fund to achieve universal
access to health insurance and healthcare and to promote healthcare services.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NARAYAN LAL PANCHARIYA

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall pay annual health
insurance premium for all citizens wherein burden in respect of UTs will fall on Central
Govt. Clause 5 provides for salaries and allowance payable to and other terms and conditions
of service of the members of the Committee. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government
shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament, provide requisite funds for the
purposes of this Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. The recurring and non-recurring expenditure on this count cannot be estimated at
this stage, but has to be worked out by the Central Government while implementing the
provisions of the Bill.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to frame rules by
notification in the Official Gazette, to carry out the provision of the Bill. The rules to be
framed by the Government pertain to matters of administrative detail, which cannot be laid
down in the Bill itself. The delegation is, therefore, normal in character.

MGIPMRND—1445RS(S3)—06-08-2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for universal health insurance and healthcare coverage to all citizens and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Narayan Lal Panchariya, M.P.)