Bill No. XIII of  2022
Short title and
commencement.
THE INDIAN CONTRACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Contract Act,1872.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Contract  (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In section 15 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act) for the words "forbidden by the Indian Penal Code", the words "when the
committing, or threatening to commit such act is punishable by any law for the time being in
force" be substiuted.
(2) In the Explanation to section 15 of the principal Act, for the words "the Indian
Penal Code" the words "the law violated" be substituted.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST  APRIL, 2022
Amendment
of section 15.
9 of 1872.
45  of 1860.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The definition of 'Coercion' provided for in the Indian Contract Act is not exhaustive.
It does not apply to situations in modern times where coercion can be induced through
numerous ways. The 13
th Report of the Law Commission of India which was chaired by
Shri M.C. Setalvad also suggested amending the current definition under section 15 to make
it comprehensive.
2. Currently, the definition focuses on the words "any act forbidden by the Indian
Penal Code". The purpose of the Indian Penal Code is to create offences and not merely
forbid them. There are laws other than the Indian Penal Code performing the same function.
So far it has been up to the courts to interpret the meaning of the phrase in question and
differentiate between "forbidden by the Indian Penal Code" and "punishable by the Indian
Penal Code". This kind of interpretation varies from court to court thereby creating
discrepancies.
3. The current definition is problematic as firstly, the Indian Penal Code only declares
offences "punishable" and not "forbidden" and secondly, in the present context, the  Indian
Penal Code is not the only law that defines and punishes offences in India. The present
definition must be replaced with a wider expression covering all the offences forbidden by
law in India.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. SASMIT PATRA
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872
(9 OF 1872)
* * * * * * *
15. "Coercion" is the committing, or threatening to commit, any act forbidden by the
Indian Penal Code or the unlawful detaining, or threatening to  detain, any property, to the
prejudice of any person whatever, with the intention of causing any person to enter into an
agreement.
Explanation.—It is immaterial whether the Indian Penal Code is or is not in force in the
place where the coercion is employed.
* * * * * * *
3
"Coercion"
defined.45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—36RS(S3)—04-04-2022.