TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES AND THE
GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY
OF DELHI (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 and the
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territories and the Government
of National Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) Section 2 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of March, 2005.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XIII of 2006
5

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES ACT, 1963
2.  After section 43E of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, the following
section shall be inserted, namely: —
“43F. Notwithstanding the publication of orders under sub-section (1) of section
10 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 or anything contained in sub-section ( 2) or sub-
section (4) of the said section, any readjustment in the division of Union territory into
territorial constituencies by the Delimitation Commission under the said Act, on the
basis of 2001 census shall take effect from such date as the Central Government may,
by order, published in the Official Gazette, specify and until such readjustment takes
effect, any election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the
territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment.”.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI ACT, 1991
3. In section 3 of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991, in sub-
section (3), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that any readjustment in the division of the Capital into territorial
constituencies by the Delimitation Commission under the Delimitation Act, 2002 on
the basis of 2001 census shall take effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, specify and until such readjustment
takes effect, any election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the
territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment.”.
Insertion of
new section
43F.
20 of 1963.
Special
provision as
to
readjustment
of territorial
constituencies
on the basis
of 2001
census.
33 of 2002.
Amendment of
section 3.
1 of 1992.
33 of 2002.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 81 read with article 82 of the Constitution, inter alia, provides that the allocation
of seats in the House of the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial
constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may
by law determine. Further, such readjustment of territorial constituencies is required to be
done on the basis of 2001 census figures. The second proviso to article 82 of the Constitution
provides that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President may by
order specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the House of the
People may be held on the basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such
readjustment. Article 170 contains similar provisions in respect of readjustment of each State
into territorial constituencies in respect of representation in State Legislative Assemblies.
However, there is no such enabling provision either in the Constitution or in the Government
of  Union Territories Act, 1963 or in the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act,
1991 in respect of the Union territory of Pondicherry and the National Capital Territory of
Delhi empowering the President or the Central Government to issue an order by means of
which the coming into force of the readjustment of territorial constituencies in respect of the
Union territory of Pondicherry and the National Capital Territory of Delhi could be specified.
In other words, the delimitation orders issued by the Delimitation Commission constituted
under the Delimitation Act, 2002 in respect of the aforesaid Union territories would be operative
from the date of such order.
2. The second proviso to article 82 and the second proviso to clause (3) of article 170 of
the Constitution provide that the readjustment after the delimitation exercise is over will take
effect only from such date as the President may, by order, specify and until such readjustment
takes effect, any election to the House of the People or to the State Legislative Assemblies
shall be held on the basis of territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment.  In
other words, they would be on the basis of the 1971 census figures.  This constitutional
provision is also carried over to the Delimitation Act, 2002 by sub-sections (2) and (4) of
section 10 thereof.
3. The delimitation exercise in respect of Union territory of Pondicherry and certain
States are over but in case of the majority of States and the National Capital Territory of
Delhi, the exercise is not over.  Hence, an anomalous situation whereby elections may have
to be conducted on the basis of two different census figures in respect of the Union territory
of Pondicherry vis a vis the rest of the country would arise unless necessary provision is
made in the aforesaid Acts.
4. To rectify the aforesaid anomalous situation arising out of lack of a suitable enabling
provision in the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 and the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991, a provision similar to the corresponding provisions
under the second proviso to article 82 and the second proviso to clause (3) of article 170 of
the Constitution is proposed to be made by amending the Government of Union Territories
Act, 1963 with retrospective effect, i.e., from 31st March, 2005 and the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 from the date of assent of the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI;  SHIVRAJ V . PA TIL.
The 16th February, 2006.
3

Legislative
Assembly and
its composi-
tion.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI
ACT, 1991
(1 OF 1992)
******
PART II
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
3. (1) *****
(3) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes in athe Legislative Assembly, and
the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the
total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the
Capital bears to the total population of the Capital and the provisions of article 334 shall
apply to such reservation.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression "population" means the population as
ascertained in the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation  to the last preceding census of which
the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census
taken after the year 2026 have  been published, be construed as a reference to the 2001
census.
*****
4

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 and the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.
————
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)
MGIPMRND—5374RS—17.02.2006.