THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second  Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 24 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“24. Every citizen shall have the right to corruption—free service in all offices,
organisations, public enterprises, cooperative societies and bodies under the
State.".
Short title and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XIII of  2011
Insertion of
new article
24A.
Right to
corruption
free service.
5

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Corruption in India is a major concern. Today corruption is not only in Government
department but is prevalent in public life. The economy of India is under the socialist
inspired policies and subjected to extensive regulation, protectionism and public ownership,
leading to persuasive corruption and slow growth. An estimated sum of rupees 26,768 crore
are extracted from our citizens every year by means of corruption. Lower strata with lower
earnings are hit harder due to corruption. A study conducted by Transparency International
in India found that more than 75 per cent of the  people had first hand experience of paying
bribe or pedding influence to get a job done in a public office. During 2010, India was ranked
87th in 178 countries in Transparency International Corruption Perception Index. Another
study on the illicit flight of money from India concludes that India has been drained of $ 462
billion (over rupees 20 lakh crore) between 1948 to 2008. The amount is nearly 40 per cent of
India's Gross Domestic Product.
Many avenues of corruption cannot be dealt with under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988. The corruption has down graded our image to such an extent that all our efforts
have been nullified and resulted into poor governance characterised by lack of both
transparency and accountability. It lowers investment and hinders economic growth and
human development by limiting access to basic social services as well as the cost of their
delivery. It also increases poverty, subverts the financial system and undermines the
legitimacy of the States. The cost of corruption to a nation is very high. The spate of
corruption scandals that has hit India in the recent past were 2G Telecom Licence Scam,
Loan Bribery scam in grant of corporate loans, alleged tender manipulations in infrastructure
and inflating bills for equipment in Commonwealth Games, 2010 and Mumbai's Adarsh
Housing Scam.
Corruption cannot go unchecked. It will kill initiatives, industriousness and skill. It
will develop a lack of sensibility and irresponsibility. When we are talking about transparency
in administration and freedom of information, augmentation of use of Information Technology
to enable quick and easy access to information and enacting law to protect whistle blower,
etc then, it would be much appropriate to talk about prevention of corruption which all go
together.  With this view, it is proposed to amend the Constitution to make corruption free
service as a fundamental right.
Hence  this Bill.
R. C. SINGH

GMGIPMRND—964RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri R. C. Singh, M.P.)