THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860 for section 304A, the following section shall be
substituted namely:—
"304A. Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent
act causing death by negligence not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years or
with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees or with both:
Provided that by doing any rash or negligent driving if any person causes injury
to another person and rushes that person so injured to a nearby hospital or assists the
person in getting immediate medical attention but, the person so injured subsequently
dies, the punishment shall be reduced and shall be decided on case to case basis.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section, the term “motor vehicle” shall have the
same meaning as assigned in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988".
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section
304A.
Bill No. XIII of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE  24TH APRIL, 2015
45 of 1860.
59 of 1988.
5
10
15

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country over a lakh people die every year as a result of road accidents. This
problem has compounded in the metropolitan cities where violation of traffic rules are blatant.
Rash driving is a regular nuisance and is responsible for fatal accidents which take place
daily. It is sometimes seen that many people especially, young boys drive vehicles without
caring for their own or anybody else's life. Not a single day passes when we do not hear of
some accident on road. After accident of a vehicle, it is a routine feature where the driver of
a vehicle speeds away in such a manner  that nobody can even take note of the number of the
vehicle, leaving the injured unattended or to die on the road. The Govt. is carrying out
awareness campagains that if the injured  be shifted to Hospital but, impact if the driver who
shifted the injured to the hospital is given some relief, then the life of so many people could
be saved if timely medical assistance in nearby hospital is provided to the injured by the
driver or the owner of the vehicle, his life could be saved. There is considerable anger in
public about the rising number of casualties in road accidents. Presently such offences are
tried as general crime under Indian Penal Code and punishment provide for such act is not
proportionate to the gravity of the offence committed. In the absence of any stringent legal
framework, the persons responsible for rash and negligent driving are let off easily. Therefore,
it is proposed that section 304A may be amended suitably so that drivers be given some relief
in punishment for shifting. The injured to the hospital besides preventing cases of rash and
negligent driving.
Hence, this Bill.
A VINASH RAI KHANNA

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE  INDIAN  PENAL  CODE, 1860
* * * * *
304A. Causing death by negligence—Whoever causes the death of any person by
doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
* * * * *
3

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
————
(Shri Avinash Rai Khanna, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—563RS(S3)—27-04-2015.