1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment), Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (7), the following new clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(8) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Government shall provide
for reservation in appointments of Judges in the Supreme Court in favour of Socially
and Educationally Backward Classes.”.
Bill No. XIII of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON  8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 124.
5

2
3. In article 217 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following new clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Government shall provide
for reservation in appointments of Judges in all High Courts within the territory of
India in favour of Socially and Educationally Backward Classes.”.
Amendment
of article 217.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The debate on the lack of social diversity within the judiciary is not new. Time and
again, concerns have been raised regarding the high concentration of persons belonging to
upper castes in the higher judiciary, which has subsequently resulted in low representation
of minority communities including Socially and Educationally Backward Classes (SEBCs).
In the first 30 years of its functioning, that is, from 1950 until 1980, the Supreme Court
had not seen any representation from the SEBCs. The present situation is no better out of the
total sitting Judges in the Supreme Court currently, only 1 Judge belongs to the SEBC
community. This is despite the fact that SEBCs constitute roughly 50% of the population in
the country. Recently, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice also highlighted the need for social diversity in judicial
appointments, noting that only 11% of High Court Judges belong to SEBCs.
The Government has often defended its stance of not providing reservation in
appointments to the higher judiciary by citing lack of explicit provisions under articles 124
and 217 of the Constitution, which pertain to the appointment and conditions of the office of
a Judge of the Supreme Court and High Courts respectively. Since the Constitution is silent
on reservation in judicial appointments in favour of backward classes, social diversity within
the higher judiciary has remained and continues to remain grossly inadequate. Resultantly,
the benches of the higher judiciary fall short of reflecting the social realities of the country.
Various judicial institutions across the world are making efforts to constitute a diversified
judicial system that is representative of their respective population. For instance, the Canadian
judicial system mandates awareness and understanding of differences arising from
inter alia race and ethnic background. These guidelines were fundamental in establishing
that the Canadian Government must strive for a gender-balanced and socially diverse pool of
candidates representing all jurisdictions within their judiciary. The United Kingdom is yet
another country that has made efforts to recognise under represented groups within its
judiciary by implementing the Judicial Diversity and Inclusion Strategy.
There is an urgent need to make the Indian judiciary as inclusive and socially diverse
as possible. Active measures must be taken to ensure the representation of SEBCs within the
higher judiciary of the country. To this end, this Bill seeks to amend articles 124 and 217 of the
Constitution to provide for reservation in judicial appointments in the Supreme Court and
High Courts in favour of SEBCs. Such affirmative action will serve to instil public confidence
among all classes of people and strengthen the delivery of justice in the country.
Hence, this Bill.
V . VIJAYASAI  REDDY
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
124. * * * * * * *
( 7 ) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall plead or act
in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.
* * * * * * *
217. * * * * * * *
(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge of a High Court, the question shall be
decided by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the decision
of the President shall be final.
* * * * * * *
Establishment
and
constitution
of Supreme
Court.
Appointment
and conditions
of the office
of a Judge of a
High Court.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri V . Vijayasai Reddy, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—053—0 8-12-2023.