ASS INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

THE PREVENTION OF HOARDING AND PROFITEERING BILL, 2001

A
BILL

to provide for the prevention of hoarding and profiteering in essential commodities of

daily use of citizens particularly of commonman in the country and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows :—

2001.

1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Hoarding and Profiteering Act,

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "dealer" means any person partnership or firm carrying on the business of
purchasing and selling any of the articles specified in the Schedule to this Act and
includes a producer, importer, wholesaler or retailer of such article;

(b) "hoarding" means accumulating essential goods or stocks intended for sale
to consumers with a view to coornering such goods so as to create their artificial
scarcity and to raise their selling prices thereafter; .

(c) "importer" means any person who brings in any of the scheduled articles
into the State where he carries on his business from any other place outside the State
for sale purposes in the State;

(थी "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.

Definitions,


Prohibition of
hoarding and
profiteering of
scheduled arti-
cles,

Centra! Gov-
emment to fix
maximum
prices for sale
of scheduled
articles.

Penalty for
hoarding and
profiteering.

Penalty for
refusal to sell
and purchase
scheduled
articles at fixed
price

Power to
search and
seize of
scheduled
articles,

2

(९) "profiteering" with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions
means the sale by a dealer of any scheduled article at a price or rate higher than the
rates fixed under section 4 of this Act;

(१ "retailer" means a person who sells any scheduled article to a consumer not
being a dealer;

(g) "scheduled article" means any of the articles specified in the Schedule to
this Act;

(0) "wholesaler" means a person, partnership or firm who sells any scheduled
article to-any dealer and includes a broker, commission agent or any other agent
having authority to sell any scheduled article belonging to his principal.

3. Hoarding of and profiteering in the shceduled articles is hearby prohibited.

A, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government आगे), by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the maximum
rates or prices in respect of the scheduled articles which may be charged by a dealer or
retailer in respect of such articles from the consumers:

Provided that different prices may be fixed for different zones or States in the Country.

5. (1) Whoever profiteers in any scheduled article shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment which may extend to seven years or with fine amounting to not less than
twenty five thousand rupees or with both.

(2) The scheduled article or articles in respect of which the offence has been
committed or any part thereof, as the court may deem fit, shall be forfeited to the
Government. \

(3) Any person found deliberately hoarding any scheduled article or any other
commodity generally required for daily consumption of commonman, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to seven years or with fine amounting to
not less than twenty five thousand rupees or with both and the articles so hoarded by such
person shall also be confiscated by the Government.

6. (2) Any dealer, retailer or wholesaler, who without reasonable excuse,—
(@) refuses to sell any scheduled article; or

(9) refuses to seli any scheduled article at the price fixed in respect thereot
under section 4,

shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to five years or
with fine amounting to not less than ten thousand rupees or with both.

(2) Any purchaser or consumer who puchases any scheduled article at a price more
than the maximum prive fixed thereof under section 4 shail be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine amounting 10 not less than two
thousand rupees or with both. °

7. When any police officer not below the rank of Inspector has reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, such
officer may, after recording in writing the grounds of his belief, at all reasonable hours,
enter and search, without any warrant, any place where a dealer, retailer or wholesaler
keeps, or is for the time being keeping, any scheduled article, accounts, registers or any
thing, such officer may deem fit and, if necessary, inspect, seize or retain all or any of
them for so long as they may be reqiired for further investigation into any offence under
this Act.

)०

4०

as

3o

35°

yo

us


20f 1974,

to

10 of 1955.

3

8. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973,
all offences punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.

(2) Any Police officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector may arrost without warrant
any person against whom a reasonable cemplaint has been made or credible information has
been received of his having been concerned in any of the offences punishable under this
Act.

9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to the
Schedule any other article of daily use, and thereupon the schedule shall be deemed to
have been amended accordingly and the article so added shall be deemed to be the scheduled
article within the meaning of this Act.

10. If any order controlling the price of any essential commodity within the meaning
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, has been made before or after the commencement
of this Act and if such essential commodity is also a scheduled article within the meaning
of this Act, that order shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith

15 contained in this Act, or any order made thereunder.

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Cognizance of
offence and
arrest without
warrant,

Power to add
any other
article to the
Schedule.

Effect of
‘Orders
inconsistent
with the
provisions of
the Essential
Commodities
Act, 1955 or
orders made
‘there under.

Power to make
tules.


THE SCHEDULE
(See Sections 2 () and 9)
1. Wheat and Wheat products.
2. Rice and Rice in the husk.
3. Pulses.
4, Spices.
5. Edible oils including Vanaspati.
6. Sugar.
7. Baby Food.
8. Paper and paper products.
9. Drugs and Medicines.
10. Skimmed Milk Powder.
11. Kerosene oil.
12. Janta Cloth.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

These days the commonman is in the grip of steep rise in the prices of essential
commodities required for his daily use. The prices are rising so menacingly that it has
become impossible for the commonman to have two time meals. The worst sufferers are
daily wages workers, rickshaw pullers, hawkers domestic workers and others doing petty
jobs. For the common housewives managing of their monthly budget is becoming next to
impossible. The situation is further aggravated when the essential commodities are not
available in the market despite good harvests in the country. This is because some
unscrupulous traders, brokers and middlemen resort to hoarding of essential commodities
to create artificial scarcity and thereafter indulge in profiteering in these items for their
own vested interests. As a result hoarding and profiteering in foodgrains, medicines and
several other commodities which are essential to the daily life of the citizens have become
common these days which is adversely affecting the commonman and the country as a
whole. But in the absence of deterrent punishment under a specified Act tor these offences,
these cases are increasing. Therefore, w curb this meuace it is felt that severe deterrent
punishment should be prescribed for these offences.

This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

SURESH PACHOURI


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

.

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. It will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the prevention of hoarding and profiteering in essential commodities of
daily use of citizens particularly of commonman in the country and for matters
connected therewith.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6415RS—15.02,2001