AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. XIII of 2025 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR FISHERMEN (WELFARE AND SUPPORT) 
BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for the Welfare and 
Support of Fishermen and for the promotion and development of the  
Fisheries industry, ensuring the welfare of  fishermen and the 
 fish cultivators, workers etc. engaged in the industry 
 and encouraging exports associated with it, 
 and for matters connected therewith 
 or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows : — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Fishermen
(Welfare and Support) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
10 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “Commission” means the National Commission for the
Welfare and Support of Fishermen constituted under section 3; 
Definitions. 

2 
(b) “fish cultivators” means persons engaged in the  commercial
breeding including controlled cultivation and harvesting of fish, 
crustaceans, molluscs and so on, most often for food, in natural or 
psuedo-natural environments such as fish ponds, fish tanks etc.; 
(c) “fisheries industry” means any industry or activity which is
involved in the management, catching, processing and marketing of 
fish or fish products;  
(d) "fishermen" means persons who traditionally earns their
livelihood by catching fish from the ocean/sea or rivers, ponds etc. 
and whose only source of income is the money they earn from 
selling such fish. 
(e) “Fund” means the Fisheries Promotion and Devel opment
Fund constituted under section 11; and 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
 
5 
10 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE WELFARE AND SUPPORT OF 
FISHERMEN 
 
15 
The National 
Commission 
for the 
Welfare and 
Support of 
Fishermen.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Commission, to b e
kno
wn as the National Commission for the Welfare and Support of
Fishermen.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract and shall by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The Commission shall consist of the following :─
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall b e
el
ected by the House of the People and one by the Co uncil of 
States;  
(c) one member each from the Union Ministry of
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries); the Union Ministry of Commerce and Industry; 
and the Union Ministry of Finance, to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(d) one member from each of the major fish producing
States, as may be determined by the Central Government; 
(e) one member each to represent the fishermen, fish
cultivators, workers and exporters in the fisheries indus try 
from each of the major fish producing States, to be 
nominated by the respective State Governments, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; and 
(f) five members to represent such institutes or authorities
specialising in research in the fisheries industry,  aquaculture, 
foreign trade and export, packaging and food safety, to be 
nominated in such manner as may  be prescribed. 
(4) The qualifications and experience for appointment as th e
Chairperson and members of the Commission, the manner of filling
of vacancies, shall be such as may be prescribed.
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 

3 
(5) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure.
 
5 
10 
4. (1) The term of office of, salaries, remuneration and other allowances
payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson, other members, and officers and staff of the 
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed and enshrined in a 
governing framework to be made within a period not exceeding six 
months from the date of constitution of the Commission.  
(2) Any officer of the Central Government when deputed by tha t
Government to the Commission shall have the right to attend the meetings 
of the Commission and take part in the proceedings thereof but shall not 
be entitled to vote. 
Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of the 
Chairperson, 
and other 
members and 
officers and 
staff. 
 
15 
5. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason
of :─
(
a) any vacancy in the Commission, as long as fifty per cent.  of
the prescribed membership is filled; or 
(b) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not
affecting the merits of the case. 
Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
the proceedings 
of the 
Commission. 
 
20 
 
25 
6. (1) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Commission,
and without prejudice to any provision of this Act, exercise and discharge
such other powers and functions of the Commission as may be prescribed.
(2) In the absence of the Chairperson in a meeting, the meeting of the
Commission may be chaired by a Deputy Chairperson, who shall be
elected   by a majority of votes of the members of the Commission present
and voting.
Chairperson to 
preside over the 
meetings. 
 
30 
7. (1) The Commission may constitute such Advisory Committees or
Executive Committees, with such composition, as may be prescribed, 
and appoint such number of officers and staff, as it deems necessary, 
for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act, 
in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The method of recruitment and qualifications and experien ce
required for the officers and staff of the Commission, shall be such as
may be prescribed and specified in the governance framework
mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 4.
Advisory 
Committee, 
Executive 
Committee and 
officers and 
staff of the 
Commission. 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
8. (1)  It shall be the duty of the Commission to take all measures necessary
to promote and develop the fisheries industry in the country. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section (1), the powers an d
f
unctions of the Commission shall include: ─
(a) taking such steps, as it deems necessary, in order to
achieve its objectives enlisted under section 10 of this Act; 
(b) monitoring exports, imports, prices of fish and allied
products and propagating data and other information regarding 
the demand for a nd marketability of fish in both domestic and 
foreign markets; 
(c) supplying scientific and technical advice aimed at
improving the production, manufacture, supply, and 
distribution of fish and allied products; 
(d) undertaking, assisting or encouraging sci entific,
technological and economic research; 
General powers 
and functions. 

4 
 
(e) collecting statistics from such stakeholders in the 
fisheries industry; 
(f) planning and implementation of human resource 
training and skill development in line with the needs of the 
fisheries industry; 
(g) taking steps either by itself or through accredited 
agencies to maintain quality standards for fish or allied products 
produced in the country; 
(h) collaborating and cooperating with national and 
international scientific and economic bodies for the benefit of the 
fisheries industry; 
(i) collaborating and cooperating with departments of the 
Central Government or State Government s on all matters relating to 
the promotion and development of the fisheries industry; 
(j) advising the Central Government on all matters relating to 
the promotion and development of the fisheries industry and its 
workers, including but not limited to the import and export of fish or 
allied products and the safety of fishermen; 
(k) advising the Central Government with regard to 
participation in any international conference or scheme relating to 
the fisheries industry; 
(l) providing advisory services on matters including but not 
limited to research, testing and training to such other persons 
upon the payment of such fee or other charges as may be 
specified;  
(m) ensuring the development, progress and welfare of poor 
fishermen and enabling them to diversify the ir income and 
secure a stable income through fishing and related activities; 
(n) studying the effects of climate change on the fisheries 
industry and advising the Central Government on how to cope 
up and mitigate such changes and protect the interests of t he 
stakeholders in the fisheries industry and ensure a stable and 
flourishing industry;  
(o) preparing and maintain ing safety standards for 
fishermen who might be handling dangerous products which 
could affect their health; and 
(p) any other measures in th e interest of the fisheries 
industry and its workers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
   CHAPTER III 
PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
40 
 
Objectives.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. The Central Government and the Commission, as the case may be, while 
exercising its powers, discharging its functions, or undertaking any other 
activity, as specified under this Act shall be guided by the following 
objectives, namely: — 
(a) optimising the production, sale and consumption of fish or 
allied products, which may include: 
(i) promoting the export of fish or allied products; 
(ii) promoting the sale and consumption of fish or allied 
products, including through e-commerce platforms; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
(iii) promoting the quality of fish or allied products   
being cultivated and consumed in the country and 
exported;  
(iv)  promoting branding, product diversification, value 
addition, packaging and furthering the interests of 
stakeholders involved in the fisheries industry; 
(v)  promoting the sustainable cultivation of fish or allied 
products for increasing production and productivity; 
(vi) providing support and encouragement to small 
growers, including in using and implementing new 
technologies; 
(vii) encouraging fair and remunerative prices for 
fishermen and fish cultivators; 
(viii)  safeguarding the interests of fishermen; and 
(ix)  increasing awareness amongst the general public 
about the fisheries industry; 
(b) promoting economic, scientific and technical research in 
the fisheries industry, which may include:─ 
(i)   collecting, analysing, and disseminating economic, 
scientific and techni cal data, information, statistics, and 
studies related to the fisheries industry; 
(ii) encouraging the adoption of best available 
technologies and minimizing the adverse impact of climate 
change; 
(iii)  promoting an understanding of the oceanic and 
water ecosystem in India; and 
(iv)    aligning the practices in the fisheries industry in 
India with global best practices; 
(c) ensuring the development and welfare of fishermen, which 
may include: — 
(i)  conducting a survey of fishermen once in every two 
years, for collecting basic data including but not limited to 
their numbers, annual income, livelihood security, modes of 
alternate income, if any, etc. to gauge their socio -economic 
circumstances, progr ess, in such manner as may be 
prescribed;   
(ii) make recommendations to the Central Government 
regarding schemes on the basis of these findings and ensure 
the upliftment of those who work in the fisheries industry; 
and 
(iii) make recommendations to the Ce ntral 
Government taking into account the different 
circumstances, earnings, living conditions and commercial 
opportunities available to fishermen on the eastern and 
western coast of India respectively. 
  
 
 
 
 
10. (1) To achieve the objectives enlisted in section 9, and in exercise of its 
general powers and functions under section 8, the Commission may issue 
directions or advisories to stakeholders, and such persons in the fisheries 
industry, or any class thereof, as it may deem fit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Issuance of 
direction and 
advisories by 
the 
Commission. 

6 
 
(2)  Every direction issued by the Commission shall be binding on the 
person to whom such direction has been issued. 
(3)  The recommendations of the Commission shall be implemented by 
the Central Government or the concerned State Governments as far as 
possible after due consultations with the Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
    
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
  
Fisheries 
Promotion and 
Development 
Fund. 
 11. (1)  There shall be established, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
a fund to be called the Fisheries Promotion and Development Fund 
for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this Act. 
(2)  The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Gove rnment 
and there shall be credited thereto:─ 
(a) all sums transferred to, or vested in the Commission; 
(b) any grants and loans made to the Commission by the 
Central Government; 
(c) all fees levied and collected in respect of certificates of 
registration issued and any other fees or charges collected under 
this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder; and 
(d) all sums received by the Commission from such other 
sources as may be decided upon by the Central Government. 
(3) The Fund shall be used to:─ 
(a) meet the salary, pension, remuneration, and other 
allowances of the members, officers, and staff of the Commission 
as applicable; 
(b) meet the expenses relating to such measure s as the 
Commission may undertake under this Act from time to time in 
order to achieve the objectives enlisted in section 9, and in 
exercise of its general powers and functions under section 8; 
(c) meet the other administrative expenses of the Commission 
and any other expenses authorised by or under this Act; 
(d)  repay loans; and 
(e)  settle any liabilities arising out of legal proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
Power to 
borrow.  12. The Commission may, from time to time, with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government and under such conditions as may be prescribed, 
borrow any sum required for any of the purposes for which it is authorised 
to expend under this Act, from:─ 
(a) any bank or other financial institution by taking loan; or 
(b) the public by issue of bonds or debentures or any such 
instrument in the form and manner approved by the Central 
Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
Budget.  13. The Commission shall prepare in such form and manner, at such time, and 
such intervals, as may be prescribed, its budget, showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure of the Commission and forward the same to the 
Central Government. 
  
Accounts and 
audit.  14. The accounts of the Commission shall be maintained and audited in such 
manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India, be prescribed and the Commission shall furnish to the Central 
 
 
45  

7 
 
Government before such date, as may be pr escribed, the audited copy of 
its accounts together with the Auditors' report thereon. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
15. (1) The Commission shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such 
time of each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving 
a full account of its activities during the previous financial year, and 
submit a copy thereof to the Central Government. 
(2) The annual report prepared under sub-section (1) shall contain: - 
(a) a description of all the activities of the Commission during 
the previous financial year; 
(b) the plan of the Commission for the upcoming financial year; 
and 
(c) any such other details as may be provided under any law for 
the time being in force. 
 Annual report. 
  
 
 
 
15 
16. The Central Government shall cause the Annual Accounts of the 
Commission along with the Auditor’s report under section 14 and its 
Annual Report under section 15 to be laid, as soon as may be after they 
are received, before each House of Parliament. 
 Auditor’s report 
and annual 
report to be laid 
before 
Parliament. 
   CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
  
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
17. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion: ─ 
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Commission is 
unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act; or 
(b) that the Commission has persistently made default in 
complying with any direction issued by the Central Government 
under this Act, in achieving the objectives, or in exercising its 
general powers and functions, and as a result of such default the 
financial position of the Commission or the administration of the 
Commission has deteriorated; or 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the 
public interest so to do, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
supersede the Commission for such period, not exceeding six months, as 
may be specified in the notification.  
 Power of the 
Central 
Government to 
supersede the 
Commission. 
 
 
 
35 18. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable and functions performed by it under this 
Act may be exercised and performed in such cases and subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, by such officer 
or authority as may be specified therein. 
 Power to 
delegate. 
 
 
 
40 19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central 
Government, the Commission, or any officer, member, or employee 
thereof for anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith 
under this Act or the rules or regulations made, or standards notified 
thereunder. 
 Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 
 
45 20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make 
rules. 

8 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 
5 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
21. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act.
(2)  Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may b e
af
ter it is made, before each House of Parliament.
 
10 
 
15 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect.
22. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anythin g
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force.

9 
 
                        STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India has a coastline of over 8,000 km and an Exclusive Economic 
Zone (EEZ) of over 2 million square kilometres. With extensive marine 
and freshwater resources, our fisheries industry plays a vital role  in the 
economic development of the nation and play an integral part in ensuring 
our food security.  
As per the 2011 census, there are 3,288 marine fishing villages and 
1,511 marine fish landing centres spread across the country. This leaves a 
substantial potential in the area of fisheries unutilized. Additionally, 
approximately 61 per cent.  of fishermen live Below Poverty Line as per 
the same census.  
At a time when India is emerging as a forerunner for development 
in the world, and our growth story is be ing acknowledged globally as a 
model of success to reach five trillion USD economy, the efficient 
development of our fisheries can help us reach our goals in a more holistic 
manner. Presently, we are at number two position globally in the area of 
production of fish or its allied products. With more pointed policy 
imperatives, and a central body such as the National Commission for the 
Welfare and Support of Fishermen to  take affirmative steps to promote 
the fisheries sector, India could  become number one globally, not just in 
the area of production but also exports.  
Similarly, any development of the fisheries industry must take into 
account those who are involved in its catch, cultivation, production, 
processing and export. Providing equitable benefits to each and every 
section of society is the bedrock of our nation, and the creation of this 
Commission is a step towards achieving that goal. 
In order to keep development in line with the principles of 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat and Make in India, the creation of th is Commission 
is necessary.  
Hence, this Bill.  
 
MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA 
 
  
  

10 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National 
Commission for the Welfare and Support of Fishermen and appointment 
of the Chairperson and Members therein.  Clause 4 provides for the term 
of office of, salaries, remuneration or other allowances payable to, and the 
other conditions of service of, the Chairperson, other members and 
officers and staff of the Commission. Clause 7 provides for the 
constitution of Advisory Committees and Executive Committees and 
appointment of officers and staff to assist the Commission. Clause 8 of the 
Bill provides for the functions and powers of the Commission including 
inter alia
, promotion and development of the fisheries industry in India. 
Clause 9 of the Bill outlines the objectives of the Commission. 
The aforementioned provisions of the Bill involve expenditure 
towards payment of salaries, allowances, etc. of the members, officers, 
and staff of the Commission and meeting other administrative expenses of 
the Commission including expenses for discharging its functions. 
Clause 11 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a fund called 
the Fisheries Promotion and Development Fund for the purpose of 
implementing the provisions of this Act . The Fund will, inter alia 
comprise of the grants and loans given by the Central Government, fees 
collected by the Commission and other sums received by the Commission. 
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve certain amount of 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not 
possible at this stage to  estimate the exact quantum of recurring and non -
recurring expenditure that would be involved. 

11 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  
Clause 21 empowers the Central Government to issue orders 
expedient to remove any difficulties which may arise in giving effect to 
the provisions of this Act.  
The matters in respect of which rules, regulations or orders may be 
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for the Welfare and 
 Support of Fishermen and for the promotion and development of the  
fisheries industry, ensuring the welfare of fishermen and the  
fish cultivators, workers etc. engaged in the industry  
and encouraging exports associated with it, 
 and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
(Shri M
asthan Rao Yadav Beedha, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—043―10.02.2026. 