THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2. In section 14 of Representation of the People Act, 1950, for clause (b), the following
clause be substituted, namely,—
"(b) "qualifying date" in relation to preparation or revision of every electoral roll
under this part, means 1st day of January of the year in which it is so prepared or
revised:
Provided that the "qualifying date" shall be the actual date of birth in respect of
the citizens whose names are included for the first time in the electoral roll on completion
of eighteen years of age."
Bill No. XIII of 2016
Short title.
Amendment
of Section 14
of Act 43 of
1950.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MARCH,  2016

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 326 of the Constitution of India stipulates that elections to the Lok Sabha and
State Assemblies will be on the basis of adult suffrage i.e. every person who is a citizen of
India and who is not less than eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed in that
behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate legislature, shall be entitled to be
registered as a voter.
Clause (G) of section 14 of the Representation of the People Act 1950 has stipulated
that the "qualifying date" in relation to the preparation or revision of every electoral roll
means the 1st day of January of the year in which it is so prepared or revised.
A combined reading of the above two provisions leads to a situation wherein, barring
those who were born on 1st January, the rest of the youth have to wait till the 1st January of
the year following the year in which he or she was born for getting included in the electoral
roll.
This anomaly virtually deprives a substantial proportion of the younger population of
its rights to exercise their franchise in the year in which he or she completes eighteen years
of age.
This anomaly needs a corrective to be legislated.
Hence, this Bill.
RANGASAYEE  RAMAKRISHNA

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
————
(Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5048RS(S3)—11-03-2016.