AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No.  XIII  of 2024 
THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
 to amend t
he National Food Security Act, 2013. 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of  India as 
follows: 
 5 
Short title and 
commencement. 
20 of 2013. 
 
10 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the National Food Security (Amendment) 
Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on su ch date as the Central Government  
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the National Food Security Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in  section 4, in sub-se ction (a), after the words  
"nutritional standards'', the words,  '', with specific focus 
on micronutrients required during pregnancy and lactation", shall 
be inserted.  
Amendment of 
section 4. 

2 
Amendment 
of section 5. 
5 
Amendment 
of section 6. 
 
10 
Amendment 
of section 22. 
 
15 
Amendment 
of section 24. 
 
20 
Amendment 
of section 31. 
3. In the principal Act, in section 5, 
(a) in sub-s ection (1), after the words "nutritional stand ards”, 
wherever they occur, the words “, with specific focus on req uired 
micronutrients", shall be inserted.
(b) in sub-s ection (2), after the words “anganwadi shall”, the 
words “ensure adequate stock of micronutrient-r ich food 
supplement sand shall", shall be inserted.
4. In the principal Act, in section 6, after the words "nutritional  
standards'', th e words '', with specific focus on required  
micronutrients", shall be inserted.
5. In the principal Act, in section 22, after sub-section (4), the following 
new sub-section shall be inserted, 
“(5) The Central Govern ment shall ensu re that th e foodgrains  
provided to the State Governments shall meet the nu tritional 
standards specified in Schedule II.”.
6. In the principal Act, in section 24, in sub-s ection (2), after clause (b), 
the following new clause shall be in serted,––
''(c) ensure adequ ate supp ly of micronutrient rich fo od and 
supplements to the anganwadis and schools for the Mid-D ay Meal 
Scheme, so as to meet the n utritional standards specified in  
Schedule II.".
7. In the principal Act, in section 31, after the words “Schedule III”, the  
words ''and ensure the delivery of micronutrient-r ich fo od and 
supplements, so as to  meet the nutritional standards specified in 
Schedule II, to remote, hilly and tribal areas'', shall be inserted. 
 
25 

3 
STATEMENT OF  OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The fundamental right to life enshrined in  Article 21 of the Constitution of India 
may be 
interpreted to include the right to live with human dignity, which includes the Right 
to
 Food and other basic necessities, and is therefore enforceable under Article 32.  
Thus,
 our Constitution guarantees to  all the citizens of the country, the ‘right to be free 
from 
hunger and malnourishment’ and to have physical and economic access at all times to 
adequate
 food - in  quality and quantity - that is nutritious, culturally acceptable  and 
can be procured in a s ustained and dignified manner. 
2. The National Food Security  Act, which was enacted on July 5, 2013, approached food  
security from the welfare to rights-based approach. Th e Act legally entitled u p to 75 per cent 
of the rural populatio n and 50 per cent of the u rban populatio n to receive subsidized foo d 
grains under the Targeted Public Distribution System. About two-thi rds of the population, 
therefore, is covered under the Act to receive highly subsidized food grains.
3. However, p riority o n the scientific compo nent of n utrition, which is required by the  
beneficiaries, has o ften taken a backseat in India. Instead, the inclination has been  towards  
increasing the quantity of food rather than providing good quality food. This has resu lted in 
a chronic state of micronutrient malnourishment in the coun try, which  was aggravated by  
the COVID-19 pandemic; specifically for the most vulnerable segments of society like  
women, children and tribal communities residing in inaccessible regions.
4. The National Family Health Survey-5 sug gests that the rate of anaemic children und er the 
age of five has increased from 59 per cent in the previous survey to  65 per cent. It was  
also observed that 34.7  per cent of children under the age of 5 years are wasted  (weight is 
too low for the height) and stunted.  It also suggests that 52.2 per cent pregnant women aged  
between 15 and 49 years are anaemic. The previo us National Family Health Survey report of 
2015-16, brought home the wid ely anticipated truth that, despite improvements, the  
under-nutrition amongst the Scheduled Tribes has remained  mu ch higher than that for all  
the groups taken together. As a matter of fact, malnutrition  remains statistically a 
significant issue in all 36 States and Union Territories. These worrying indicators necessitate 
increased efforts to address the problem as soon as possible.
5. Instead of the calorie-cen tric strategy applied in the parent Act, the amendment  
advocates standardized framework for inclu sion of micronutrients, which can be  
ensured through institutions like an ganwadis and Mid-Day  Meal Scheme. It is imperative 
that the goal of such policies sh ould be to emph asize on providing adequate nutrition to  its 
beneficiaries. Phy sical and mental wellbeing of these sections must be prioritized , and this is 
only possible if adeq uate and nutritious food which suits their nutritional needs is provided to 
them. This is b ecause food security needs to be defined by nutrition outcomes rather than  
merely access to food. Such an amendment is the first step in addressing this deficit which  
will also be a step towards building a healthy and inclusive India for our future generations. 
Hence, this Bill. 
 FAUZIA KHAN 

4 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRA
CTS FROM THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY ACT, 2013 
(20 OF 2013) 
*              *                *         
    *  
Nutritional 
support to 
pregnant 
women and 
lactating 
mothers. 
 
Nutritional 
support to 
children. 
 
 
Prevention 
and 
management 
of child 
malnutrition 
4. Subject to such schemes as may be framed by the Central
Government, every pregnant woman and lactating mother shall be
entitled to—
(a) meal, free of charge, during pregnancy and six months after
the childbirth, through the local anganwadi, so as to meet the nutritional 
standards specified i
n Schedule II; and  
(
b) maternity benefit of not less than rupees six thousand, in such
instalments as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that 
all pregnant women and lactating mothers in 
regular employment with the Central Government or State 
Governments or Public Sector Undertakings or those who are in 
receipt of similar benefits under any law for the time being in force 
shall not be entitled to benefits specified in clause (b). 
5. (1) Sub
ject to the provisions contained in clause (b), every child up
to the age of fourteen years shall have the following entitlements for
his nutritional needs, namely: —
(a) in the case of children in the age group of six months to
six years, age appropriate meal, free of charge, through the 
local anganwadi
 so as to meet the nutritional standards 
specified in Schedule I I: 
P
rovided that for children below the age of six months, exc lusive 
breast feeding shall be promoted; 
(b) in the case of children, up to class VIII or within the age
group of six to fourteen years, whichever is applicable, one mid-day 
meal, free of charge, everyday, exception  school holidays, in al l 
schools run by local bodies, Government and Government aided 
schoo
ls, so as to meet the nutritional standards specified in Schedule 
II. 
(2) Every school, referred to in clause (b) of sub-section ( 1), and
anganwadi
 shall have facilities for cooking meals, drinking water and
s
anitation:
Provided that in urban areas facilities of centralized kitchens for 
cooking meals may be used, wherever required, as per the guidelines 
issued by the Central Government. 
6. The State Government shall, through the local anganwadi, identify
a
nd provide meals, free of charge, to children who suffer from
malnutrition, so as to meet the nutritional standards specified in
Schedule II.
 *    *
        *  * 

5 
22. * *       *  * 
(
4) Without prejudice to sub- section(1), the Central Government
shall,—
(a) procure food grains for the central pool through its ow n
ag
encies and the State Governments and their agencies; 
(b) allocate food grains to the States;
(b) provide for transportation of food grains, as per allocation,
to the depots designated by the Central Government in each State; 
(c) provide assistance to the State Government in meeting the
expenditure incurred by it towards intra-State movement, handling of 
food grains and margins paid to fair price shop dealers, in accordance 
with such norms and manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government; and 
(d) create and maintain required modern and scientific storage
facilities at various levels 
   *        *                 *               *        
Central 
Government to 
allocate 
required 
quantity of food 
grains from 
central pool to 
State 
Governments. 
24. *    *                 *            *       
(2) U
nder the Targeted Public Distribution System, it shall be the
duty of the State Government to—
(a) take delivery of food grains from the designated depots of
the Central Government in the State, at the prices specified in 
Schedule I, organise intra- State allocations for delivery of the 
allocated food grains through their authorised agencies at the 
door-step of each fair price shop; and 
(b) ensure actual delivery or supply of the food grains to the
entitled persons at the prices specified in Schedule I. 
   *   *          *   *      
Implementation 
and monitoring 
of schemes for 
ensuring food 
security. 
31. The Central Government, the State Governments and local
authorities shall, for the purpose of advancingfood and nutritional
security, strive to progressively realise the objectives specified in
Schedule III.
Steps to further 
advance food 
and nutritional 
security 

RAJY
A SABHA 
________ 
A 
BILL 
to ame
nd the National Food Security Act, 2013. 
  ______
____ 
(Dr.
 Fauzia Khan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–059–06.02.2024. 