Bill No. XILI-F of 1954
Bill No, Ain oer

THE HINDU SUCCESSION BILL, 1956

(AS PASSED By THE Houses or PARLIAMENT)


Bill No, XIU-F of 1954
THE HINDU SUCCESSION BILL, 1956

(AS PASSED BY THE HousSES: OF PARLIAMENT)

A
: BILL
to amend and codify the law relating to intestate succession
among Hindus. ‘is
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
है CHAPTER I-
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hindu’ Succession Act, 1956. short title
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 24 extent.
and Kashmir.-
2. (1) This Act applies— Application
(a) to any person, who is a Hindu by religion in any of its f Act.

forms or developments, including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a
follower of the Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj,

(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by
religion, and

(c) to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi
or Jew by religion, unless it is proved that any such person would
not have been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or
usage as part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt
with herein if this Act had not been passed.
Explanation.—The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists,

Jainas or Sikhs by religion, as the case may be:—
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose

parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion;



2

(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose
parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion and

who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group
or family to which such parent belongs or belonged;

(c) any person who is a convert or reconvert to the Hindu,
Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh religion,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the members of any
Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause (25) of article 366 of
the Constitution unless the Central Government, by notification in
the Official Gazette, otherwise directs.

(3) The expression “Hindu” in any portion of this Act shall be con-
strued as if it included a person who, though not a Hindu by religion,
is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the
provisions contained in this section.

Definitions 3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

and inter- नि न

pretation. (a) “agnate”—one person is said to be an “agnate” of
another if the two are related by blood or adoption wholly
through males;

(0) “aliyasantana law” means the system of law applicable to
persons who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been
governed by the Madras Aliyasantana Act, 1949, or by the cus-
tomary aliyasantana law with respect to the matters for which
provision is made in this Act; f

(c) “cognate’—one person .is said to be a “cognate” of
another if the two are related by blood or adoption but not
wholly through males;

(d) the expressions “custom” and “usage” signify any rule
which, having been continuously and uniformly observed for a
long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any
local area, tribe, community, group or family:

Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or
Opposed to public Policy: and

Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only
to a family it has not been discontinued by the family;

(e) “full blood”, “half blood” and “uterine blood”— >
(i) two persons are said to be related to each ther Oe
full blood when they are descended from a common 400
by the same wife, and by half blood when ae
descended from a common ancestor but by different

Madras Act
IX of I949.


Madras Act
XXII of
1933.

II of 1100,
IIT of 1100,
VI of 1101,
VIT of 1108.
VI of 1115,
XXXIII

Of 1113.
XXIX

of 1113.

Madras Act
XXI Of 19330
XVII of 3
1113.

IIT of 1106.

3
(ii) two persons are said to be related to each other by
uterine blood when they are descended from a common
ancestress but by different husbands;

Explanation—In this clause “ancestor” includes the father
and “ancestress” the mother;

(f) “heir” means any person, male or female, who is entitled
to succeed to the property of an intestate under this Act;

(9) “intestate’—a person is deemed to die intestate in respect
of property of which he or she has not made a testamentary
disposition capable of taking effect;

(0) “marumakkattayam law” means the system of law
applicable to persons—

(a) who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been
governed by the Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 1932;
the Travancore Nayar Act; the Travancore Ezhava
Act; the Travancore Nanjinad Vellala Act; the Tra-
vancore Kshatriya Act; the Travancore Krishnanvaka
Marumakkathayee Act; the Cochin Marumakkathayam Act;
or the Cochin Nayar Act with respect to the matters for
which provision is made in this Act; or

(b) who belong to any community, the members of which
are largely domiciled in the State of Travancore-Cochin or
Madras, and who, if this Act had not been passed, would have
been governed with respect to the matters for which provi-
sion is made in this Act by any system of inheritance in
which descent is traced through the female line;

but does not include the aliyasantana law;

(i) “nambudri law” means the system of law applicable to
persons who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been
governed by the Madras Nambudri Act, 1932; the Cochin Nam-
budri Act; or the Travancore Malayala Brahmin Act with respect
to the matters for which provision is made in this Act;

(j) “related” means related by legitimate kinship:

Provided that illegitimate children shall be deemed to be
related to their mother and to one another, and their legitimate
descendants shall be deemed to be related to them and to one
another; and any word expressing relationship or denoting a
relative shall be construed accordingly.



4
i ire ds
text otherwise requires, Wor
his Act, unless the con a 5
: coe te masculine gender shall not be teken to includ
impor
females.
xpressly provided in this Act,—

Over-riding 4, (1) Save as otherwise ९
or interpretation of Hindu law or any

effect of Act. text, rule
a ext, i
(a) any t of that law in force immediately before

custom or usage as par’ 1
the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with
for which provision is made in this Act;

respect to any matter
w in force immediately before the commence-

ll cease to apply to Hindus in so far as it is

(b) any other la
n this Act.

ment of this Act sha

inconsistent with any of the provisions contained i

(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing
contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions of any
law for the time being in force providing for the prevention of frag-
mentation of agricultural holdings or for the fixation of ceilings or for
the devolution of tenancy rights in respect of such holdings.

CHAPTER II
InTESTATE SUCCESSION
General

Act not to
ly tocere 3 This A
a ox is Act shall not apply to—
tuts, i
(0 any property succession to which is regulated by the

Indi i
an Succession Act, 1925, by reason of the provisions 39 of 1925-

contained in section 21 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954:

any le ile which descends to a single heir by the terms of
Indian Sen whe a entered into by the Ruler of any
of anyon ९ Government of India or b

y enactment passed before the commencement of this Act

(iii) the Valia T
Palace Fund amine hampuran Kovilagam Estate and the
Board by reason of the power. conten ce Administration

S conferred by Proclamati
amation

(IX of 1124) date
of Cochin, ) dated 29th June, 1949, Promulgated by the Maharaja

Devolutic Act,
of interest i 6. When 4 male Hind i e
du dies after the commencement of i
on of this ot,

ai 0 hayi
Wparunary 12७18 at the 4
i c 2 time है
Property, Oparcenary prone of his death an interest | .
तर perty, his interest in the rome all soe ny
rty shall devolve by

Not in ac pon the surviy;
17 accordance with this Are members of the coparcenary and
et: °

43 of 1954


5
Provided that, if the deceased had left him surviving a female
relative specified in class I of the Schedule or a male relative spe-
cified in that class who claims through such female relative, the
interest of the deceased in the Mitakshara coparcenary property
shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case
may be, under this Act and not by survivorship.

Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, the interest of a
Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to be the share in
the property that would have been allotted to him if a partition of
the property had taken place immediately before his death, irres-
pective of whether he was entitled to claim partition or not.

Explanation 2.—Nothing contained in the proviso to this section
shall be construed as enabling a person who has separated himself
from the coparcenary before the death of the deceased or any of
his heirs to claim on intestacy a share in the interest referred to
therein. |

7. (1) When a Hindu to whom the marumakkattayam or Devolution
nambudri law would have applied if this Act had not been passed the property
dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of of a tarzad,
his or her death an interest in the property of a tarwad, tavazhi fuor
or illom, as the case may be, his or her interest in the property #avaru or
shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case i=
may be, under this Act and not according to the marumakkattayam

or nambudri law.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the interest
of a Hindu in the property of a tarwad, tavazhi or illom shall be
deemed to be the share in the property of the tarwad, tavazhi or
illom, as the case may be, that would have fallen to him or her
if a partition of that property per capita had been made immediately
before his or her death among all the members of the tarwad,
tavazhi or illom, as the case may be, then living, whether he or she
was entitled to claim such partition or not under the marumakkat-
tayam or nambudri law applicable to him or her, and such share shall
be deemed to have been allotted to him or her absolutely.

(2) When a Hindu to whom the aliyasantana law would have
applied if this Act had not been passed dies after the commence-
ment of this Act, having at the time of his or her death an un-
divided interest in the property of a kutumba or kavaru, as the
case may be, his or her interest in the property shall devolve by
testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this
Act and not according to the aliyasantana law.

Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section, the interest
of a Hindu in the property of a kutumba or kavaru shall be deemed


6

are in the properly of the kutumba or kavaru, a the
hat would have fallen to him or her if a par ition
ta had been made immediately before his
among all the members of the kutumba or kavaru, as
then living, whether he or she was. entitled to
r not under the aliyasantana law, and such

been allotted to him or her

to be the sh

मर » t
case may be, ome
of that property per capi
or her death
the case may be,
artilion 0
deemed to have

i)

claim such pi
share shall be
absolutely. , (0), wh

rithstanding anything contained in sub-section , when
a Baier ales after the commencement of this Act, the sthanam
property held by him shall devolve upon the members of the
family to which the sthanamdar belonged and the heirs of the
sthanamdar as if the sthanam property had been divided per capita
immediately before the death of the sthanamdar among himself and
all the members of his family then living, and the shares falling to
the members of his family and the heirs.of the sthanamdar shall be

held by them as their separate property.

Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section, the family
of a sthanamdar shall include every branch of that family, whether
divided or undivided, the male members of which would have been
entitled by any custom or usage to succeed to the position of
sthanamdar if this Act had not been passed.

Goer]. 8 The property of a male Hindu dying intestate shall devolve
cession in according to the provisions of this Chapter: —

the ose of

males.

(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in
class I of the Schedule;

; (b) secondly, if there is no heir of class I, then upon the
heirs, being the relatives specified in class II of the Schedule;

i” (c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes,
en upon the agnates of the deceased; and

d . नि
the so dastly, if there is no agnate, then upon the cognates of

Ord 9. A i if :
sucoession shall fake आया news specified in the Schedule, those in class 1
amu) i a Ss : iret
in ७६ 51177 those in the fir: aan and to the exclusion of all other heirs;
dule. Second entry: th entry in class II shall be preferred to those in the

im the third entry; and’ eg 004 entry shall be preferred to those
Distribution Yi and so on in succession,

Of property. 10. The Property of नि .
inlet In clasg ] of the Schedule Tm steal Be clividded! sracng the nae
e é rdi ni i 7
the Sche- Rule L—The int ordance with the following rwe
: estate’s wi :
than one, all the wie’ widow, or if there are more widows

lows together, shall take one share.



7

Rule 2—The survivin
ile 2. ig sons and daughters and th
of the intestate shall each take one share. हु —

Rule 3.—The heirs in the branch of each pre-deceased son
or each pre-deceased daughter of the intestate shall take between
them one share.

3 Rule 4.—The distribution of the share referred to in Rule

(४) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased
son shall be so made that his widow (or widows together)
and the surviving sons and daughters get equal portions,
and the branch of his pre-deceased sons gets the same
portion;

(ii) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased
daughter shall be so made that the surviving sons and

daughters get equal portions.
_ AL The property of an intestate shall be divided between the Distrib
heirs specified in any one entry in class II of the Schedule so that कवि हे
11 ass 01

they share equally. the Schedule.
12, The order of succession among agnates or cognates, as the Sesto

case may be, shall. be determined in accordance with the rules of #078.

preference laid down hereunder:— ged cognates:

Rule 1—Of two heirs, the one who has fewer or no degrees
of ascent is preferred. :

Rule 2——Where the number of degrees of ascent is the

same or none, that heir is preferred who has fewer or no

degrees of descent.

her heir is entitled to be preferred to

Rule 3—Where neit!
simultaneously.

the other under Rule 1 or Rule 2 they take
f determining the order of succession of depress
relationship shall be reckoned from .
rees of ascent or degrees of

13. (1) For the purposes 0:
among agnates or cognates,
“the intestate to the heir in terms of deg
descent or both, as the case may be.

ent and degrees of descent shall be computed

(2) Degrees of asc
inclusive of the intestate.

(3) Every generation c'
descending.

i , Prope: f

14, (1) Any property possessed by 8 female Hindu, sincere Pept inde
acquired before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be 16 tobe ber
by her as full owner thereof and not as a limited owner. property.

onstitutes a degree either ascending or

Computativn


a

8
frplanation—In_ this sub-section,
movable and immovable property acquired by a female Hindu by
inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or

“property” includes both

arrears of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a
relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, or by her own skill

or exertion, of by purchase or by prescription, or in any other
manner whatsoever, and also any such property held by her as
stridhana immediately before the commencement of this Act.

(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any pro-
perty acquired by way of gift or under a will or any other

instrument or under a decree or order of a civil court or under
instrument

an award where the terms of the gift, will or other
or the decree, order or award prescribe a_ restricted estate in
such property. है

15. (1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall

General
le: suc- मु * नि
हि “de devolve according to the rules set out in section 16,—
(including the

(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters
children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) and the husband;

(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband ;

(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father ;

(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and

(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)—
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her
father or mother shall devolve, in the absence of any son or
daughter of the deceased (including the children of any pre
deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in
sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs

the case of
female
Hindus.

of the father; and

(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her
husband or from her father-in-law shall devolve, in the absence
of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children
of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs
referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but

upon the heirs of the husband,
Order of 16. The order of succession among the heirs referred to in ee
15 shall be, and the distribution of the intestate’s property a es,
the following T™

succession

and manner न

7 distribu- those heirs shall take place according to

on amo

heirs ofa namely: — =

female tion
. fied in s ion (1) of sect

Hindu, Rule 1.—Among the heirs specified in ub-cection succeeding

15, those in one entry shall be preferred to those in



9

entry, and those included in the same entry shall take | simul-

taneously.

Rule 2.—If any son or daughter of the intestate had pre-deceased
the intestate leaving his or her own children alive at the time of the
intestate’s death, the children of such son or daughter shall take
between them the share which such son or daughter would have
taken if living at the intestate’s death.

Rule 3—The devolution of the property of the intestate on the
heirs referred to in clauses (0), (d) and (e) of sub-section (1) and in
sub-section (2) of section 15 shall be in the same order and accord-
ing 00 the same rules as would have applied if the property had
been the father's or the mother’s or the husband's as the case may
be, and such person had died intestate in respect thereof immediately
after the intestate’s death.

— er secti z : , Special
17. The provisions of sections 8, 10, 15 and 23 shall have effect 90ए बिका

in relation to persons who would have been’ governed by the respecting
marumakkattayam law or aliyasantana law if this Act had not been
passed as if— marumakka-

persens
governed by

trayam and

liyasantan
(i) for sub-clauses (c) and (d) of section 8, the following had laws. aiid

been substituted, namely: —

“(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two

classes, then upon his relatives, whether agnates or
”

cognates.”;

(ii) for clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1) of section 15,
the following had been substituted, namely: —

“(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including
the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) and the
mother;

(b) secondly, upon the father and the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the mother;

(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the husband.”;

(iti) clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 15 had been
omitted;

(iv) section 23 had been omitted.


10
General provisions relating to succession
Full blood 18, Heirs related to an intestate by full blood shall be preferred

preferred t0 [0 heirs related by half blood, if the nature of the relationship is
half blood. a came in every other respect.

Mode of - 19. If two or more heirs succeed together to the property of an
eno or, intestate, they shall take the property,—

more heirs.
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, per
capita and not per stirpes; and

(b) as tenants-in-common and not as joint tenants,

Right of 20. A child who was in the womb at the time of the death of
child in an intestate and who is subsequently born alive shall have the

same right to inherit to the intestate as if he or she had been born
before the death of the intestate, and the inheritance shall be
deemed to vest in such a case with effect from the date of the
death of the intestate.

Presumption 21. Where two persons have died in circumstances rendering it
in cases of uncertain whether either of them, and if. so which, survived the
deaths. other, then, for all purposes affecting succession to property, it

shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the younger

survived the elder.

Preferential 22, (1) Where, after the commencement of this Act, an interest
खाए pro- in any immovable property of an intestate,- or in any business
perty pin oe carried on by him or her, whether solely or in conjunction with
others, devolves upon two or more heirs specified in class I of the
Schedule, and any one of such heirs proposes to transfer his or

her interest in the property or business, the other heirs shall have

a preferential right to acquire the interest proposed to be trans-
erred,

(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property
of the deceased may be transferred under this section shall, in the
absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by
the court on application being made to it in this behalf, and if any
person proposing to acquire the interest is not willing to acquire it
for the consideration 50 determined, such person shall be liable to
pay all costs of or incident to the application.


Ir
(3) If there are two or more heirs specified in class I of the
Schedule proposing to acquire any interest under this section,
that heir who offers the highest’ consideration for the transfer
shall be preferred.

Explanation.—In this section, “court” means the court within
the limits of whose jurisdiction the immovable property is situate
or the business is carried on, and includes any other court which
the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify in this behalf.

23. Where a Hindu intestate has left surviving him or her both Special pro
male and female heirs specified in class I of the Schedule and his pecing
or her property includes a dwelling-house wholly occupied by dwelling-
members of his or her family, then, notwithstanding anything 78:
contained in this Act, the right of any such female heir to claim
partition of the dwelling-house shall not arise until the male heirs
choose to divide their respective shares therein; but the female heir
shall be entitled to a right of residence therein:

Provided that where such female heir is a daughter, she shall be
entitled to a right of residence in the dwelling-house only if she is
unmarried or has been deserted by or has separated from her

husband or is a widow.

24, Any heir who is related to an intestate as the widow of a phe
pre-deceased son, the widow of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceas- recmarrving
ed son or the widow of a brother shall not be entitled to succeed may Not |

. . innerit a:
to the property of the intestate as such widow, if on the date the \idws.

succession opens, she has re-married.

25. A person who commits murder or abets the commission of Murderer |

5 ays ualified.
murder shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the tsa)
person murdered, or any other property in furtherance of the suc-

cession to which he or she committed or abetted the commission
of the murder.

a Converts
descendants

26. Where, before or after the commencement of this Act,
disqualified.

Hindu has ceased or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to another
religion, children born to him or her after such conversion and their
descendants shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of
any of their Hindu relatives, unless such children or descendants

are Hindus at the time when the succession opens-


12

27. If any person is disqualified from inheriting any property

under this Act, it shall devolve ag if such person had died before the
intestate.

28. No person shall be disqualified from succeeding to any pro-
perty on the ground of any disease, defect or deformity, or save as
provided in this Act, on any other ground whatsoever,

Escheat

29. If an intestate has left no heir qualified to succeed to-his or
her property in accordance with the provisions of this Act, such
property shall devolve on the Government; and the Government
shall take thé property subject to all the obligations and liabilities to
which an heir would have been subject.

CHAPTER III

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION

30. (1) Any Hindu may dispose of by will or other testamentary
disposition any property, which is capable of being so disposed
of by him, in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Succes- 7
sion Act, 1925, or any other law for the time being in force and 39 % 1925
applicable to Hindus.

Explanation —The interest of a male Hindu in a Mitakshara co-
parcenary property or the interest of a member of a_ tarwad,
tavazhi, illom, kutumba or kavaru in the property of the tarwad,
tavazhi, illom, kutumba or kavaru shall, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being
in force, be deemed to be property capable of being disposed of
by him or by her within the meaning of this sub-section.

(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that noth-
ing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect the right to main-


2 of 1920,
18 of 1937.

13
tenance of any heir specified in the Schedule by reason only of
the fact that under a will or other testamentary disposition made
by the deceased the heir has been deprived of a share” in the
property to which he or she would have been entitled under this
Act if the deceased had died intestate.
CHAPTER IV

REPEALS

31. The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929, and Repeals.
the Hindu Women's Rights to Property Act, 1937, are hereby repealed.

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 8)
HErrs In Crass I anp Crass II

Class I

Son; daughter; widow; mother; son of a predeceased son;

daughter of a predeceased son; son of a predeceased daughter,
daughter of a predeceased daughter; widow of a predeceased son;
son of a predeceased son of a predeceased son; daughter of a
predeceased son of a predeceased son; widow of a predeceased son of

a predeceased son.

Class II

I. Father.
II. (1) Son’s daughter’s son, (2) 8075 daughter's daughter,

(3) brother, (4) sister.

III. (1) Daughter’s son’s son, (2) daughter's son’s daughter,

(3) daughter’s daughter’s son, (4) daughter’s daughter’s daughter.

IV. (1) Brother’s son, (2) sister’s son, (3) brother’s daughter,

(4) sister’s daughter.

V. Father’s father; father’s mother.


14
VIL Father's widow; brother's widow.
VIL. Father's brother; father’s sister.
VUI. Mother's father; mother's mother.
IX. Mother's brother; mother's sister.

Explanation.—In this Schedule, references to a brother or sj
do not include references to a brother or sister by uterine blo जा
od,



RAJYA SABILA

A
BILL

to amend and codify the law relating

e to intestate succession
among Hindus, .

(AS passed by the Houses of Parliament)