1
Short title and
commencement.
THE MICRO, SMALL  AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Development (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development  Act, 2006, after
section 10, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“10A. (1) Every scheduled commercial bank shall lend to the micro, small
and medium enterprises at the rate of one per cent plus the rate of fixed deposit
of such banks.
Bill No. XIV of  2013
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH MARCH, 2013
Insertion of new
sections 10A and
10B.
Lending rate and
limit for lending
of collateral free
loans.
27 of 2006.
5
10

2
(2) Every scheduled commercial bank shall lend collateral free loans upto
the limit of rupees two crore for micro, small and medium enterprises.
10B. The Central Government shall, from time to time, notify suitable
incentives to increase the inflow of equity capital in micro, small and medium
enterprises.”
Incentives to
increase the
inflow of equity
capital.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 aims to
provide for facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the
competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises in the country. The said act,
as well as the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India in its circular dated
1st July, 2011 and the recommendations of various committees and task groups have
brought about considerable positive changes in various areas of development of
competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs).
However, the MSMEs, that contribute to eight per cent of the country's Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) forty-five per cent of the manufactured output, forty
per cent of our exports and that employs an estimated sixty million people, continue
to face serious bottlenecks in its development. Lack of access to adequate and timely
credit at a reasonable cost is the most cirticial problems faced by this sector. Hence,
there is an urgent need to make it mandatory by law for scheduled commercial banks
to provide affordable lending rates to MSMEs.
The Bill hence, aims to ensure lowest lending rates to MSMEs, fixed at one
per cent plus the rate of interest for fixed deposits of the scheduled commercial banks
in the country.This would ensure more credit flow to the MSME sector, without
hurting commercial banks, as they will continue to have freedom to fix lending rates to
other sectors or units. The Bill also aims to make it mandatory for scheduled commercial
banks to offer MSMEs, collateral free loans, up to rupees 2 crore. These two key
changes in the principal act would revive MSMEs through increased credit flow.
Hence, this Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Section 2 of the Bill provides that all scheduled commercial banks in the country
shall lend money to MSMEs, at a rate of interest fixed at one per cent plus the rate of
interests for fixed deposits of the banks. The section makes it the responsibility of
banks to ensure increased credit flow to the MSME sector. Therefore, if enacted, the
act will not incur any expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5533RS(S4)—8-03-2013.