AS INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

Bill No. XIV of 2000
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title and
commence-
(2) It shall come into force at once, ment.
2, In article 171 of the Constitution:— Amendment
of article 171.

In sub clause (c) of clause (3), for the words, “not lower in standard than that of a
secondary school, as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament,” the
words “which are recognized by the concerned State Government or the Government of
India” shall be substituted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, in the States having Legislative Councils, there is a provision for electing
teachers from the Teachers’ Constituency to the Legislative Council to represent the teach-
ing community. Even among the teachers, there is a restriction that only teachers who are
teaching not lower in standard than that of a secondary school and above are eligible to
exercise their franchise in these elections. Itmeans, only teachers whovare teaching in High
Schools and above are eligible and large number of teachers who have been teaching chil-
dren in primary and middle schools are deprived of electing their representatives in the
Legislative Council by exercising their franchise, Therefore, there is a clear discrimination
between teachers of primary and middle schools and secondary schools and above, After
all, in the Legislative Council, the representatives of teachers will have to voice the griev-
ances of all teachers irrespective of which class they are teaching. Therefore, in order to
truly represent the teaching community in the Legislative Council, itis proposed to give
voting rights to all teachers who have put in more than three years of service in any school
recognised by the State Government or the Central Government by amending Article
171(3)(c) suitably.

Hence this Bill.

हू, C. KONDAIAH


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
+e ord कक कक कक
171.3)

(c) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates consisting of per-
sons who have been for atleast three years engaged in teaching in such educational institu-
tions within the State, not lower in standard than that of a secondary school, as may be
prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament;

Compostitos
of Legislative
Council ~


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri K. C. Kondaiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND-—-3913RS—28-02-2000.