1
Bill No. XIV of  2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2)  It shall  come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In article 153 of the Constitution, the proviso shall be omitted.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 153.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST APRIL, 2022
5

2
3. For article 155 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) The Governor of State shall be elected by the members of an electoral college
consisting of;—
(a) the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State; and
(b) the elected members of the Gram Panchayats, Municipalities and Corporations
of the State.
Explanation.—(1) For the purposes of this article "State" includes the National Capital
Territory of Delhi and the Union Territory of Puducherry.
(2) The election of the Governor shall be held in accordance with the system of
proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such
election shall be by secret ballot.”
4. For article 156 of the Constitution, the following new article shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) The Governor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he
enters upon his office:
Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to
hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
(2) The Governor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker of the State
Legislative Assembly, resign his office.
(3) The Governor may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Legislative
Assembly of the State passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of
Assembly present and voting.”
Substitution of
new article for
article 156.
Election of
Governor.
Term of office
of Governor.
5
10
15
20
Substitution of
new article for
article 155.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Governor is the head of the executive of the State Government and holds immense
dignity. The stature and dignity of the office require that the person who holds such a
position enjoys the legitimate support of the people and be accountable to the people of the
State.
2. The States in India through the long decades of evolution have emerged as stable
political entities. To appoint the Head of the State Governments through executive orders is
antithetical to the spirit of democracy and federal spirit.
3. Seven decades of political evolution demands that the highest offices of the country
reflect the spirit of the age.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
DR. V .  SIVADASAN
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
153.  There shall be a Governor for each State : 3
Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent the appointment of the same person
as Governor for two or more States.
* * * * *
155. The Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his
hand and seal.
156.  (1) The Governor shall hold office during the pleasure of the President. (2) The
Governor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office.
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article, a Governor shall hold office for a term
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to
hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
* * * *
4
Governors of
States.
Appointment
of Governor.
Term of office
of Governor.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—26RS(S3)—04-04-2022.