1
THE VISUALLY IMPAIRED PERSONS (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS)
BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide rights to visually impaired persons, enabling them to avail employment,
social and financial security, civil and other services, to live with human dignity,
self respect as independent citizens  and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto .
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER  I
1. (1) This Act may be called the Visually Impaired Persons (Protection of Rights)
Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA ON
THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Bill No. XIV of  2019
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.
(a) “appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘Board’’ means the Employment Advisory Board constituted under section 6;
(c) ‘‘family’’ includes wife, husband and minor children;
(d ) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) ‘‘visually impaired person’’ means a person with decreased ability to see to a
degree or with blindness which causes difficulties in normal activities such a driving,
reading, socializing and walking.
3. The Central Government shall as soon as may be, but within six months of the
commencement of the Act, by notification in the official Gazette, frame a national policy for
protection and welfare of the rights of the visually impaired persons.
4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide employment to
unemployed visually impaired persons in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Every unemployed, underemployed, aged visually impaired persons shall be
entitled to receive such monthly unemployment allowance as may be prescribed till such
time he is gainfully employed.
(2) While fixing the rate of unemployment allowance, the Central Government shall
take into account the age, educational qualifications, technical skills, visual difficulties
and such other factors as it may deem necessary:
Provided that different rates of unemployment allowance may be prescribed for
different categories of visually impaired persons and for such persons living in different
States or parts of States.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute an Employment Advisory Board for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(a) a retired judge of the Supreme Court of India—Chairperson;
(b) two representatives of the rank of the Secretary to the Government of India
to be appointed by the Central Government—Members;
(c) one representative from Union Ministry of  Social Justice and Empowerment—
Member Secretary;
(d ) two representatives from the National Association for the Blind having
experience in providing rehabilitation to the Blind, to the appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed—Members;
(e) one representative of the rank of Joint Secretary from NITI Aayog—Member;
( f ) one woman representative having experience in the field of rehabilitation of
Blind Women and Children, to be appointed by the Central Government—Member;
(g) one representative from the National Institute for the Visually Handicapped
(NIVH) Dehradun to be appointed by the Central Government—Member.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to frame a
national
policy.
Constitution
of
Employment
Advisory
Board.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
employment
to visually
impaired
persons.
Grant of
unemployment
allowance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services
of Chairperson, members, officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. The Board shall meet at such places and times and observe such rules of procedures
in regard to transaction of business at its meetings including quorum as may be prescribed:
Provided that Board shall meet at least once in a month.
8. The powers and functions of the Board shall inter alia include to, —
(a) advise the Central Government on policy matters pertainting to the visually
impaired persons;
(b) review existing policies, rules, regulations and procedures with a view to
encompassing values, needs and aspirations of the visually impaired persons;
(c) provide intensive individualized and personalized education and free
vocational training to all employable visually impaired youth;
(d ) setting up training centres along with hostel facilities by the appropriate
Government for the adult blind to provide Light Engineering/Fitter, Steno Training,
Recaning, Book Binding, Computer Training, Hand works, weaving etc.;
(e) modernize all vocational training institutes and services for the visually
impaired persons in coordination with the appropriate Government;
( f ) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to ensure professional
rehabilitation of the visually impaired persons by specialist qualified staff;
(g) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to introduce modern
management techniques;
(h) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to substantially upgrade
standards of vocational training to the visually impaired persons;
(i) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to develop multiplicity of skills
in the visually impaired persons;
(j) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to make training for the visually
impaired persons work/employment/job oriented;
(k) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to train, and continue to up-
grade staff members training;
(l) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to instill good work habits and
work tolerance among the visually impaired persons;
(m) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to ensure full capacity
utilization;
(n) co-ordinate with the appropirate Government to use all normal community
resources fully;
(o) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to promote employment among
the visually impaired persons by all known channels, such as self-employment, rural
employment, industrial employment, co-operatives etc.;
(p) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to follow principles of selective
placement to match job demands with client's abilities   for the benefit of the visually
impaired persons;
(q) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to promote on-the-job training
programmes and multi-disciplinary assembly lines in large industrial  plants;
(r) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government to provide vocational guidance,
vocational assessment, evaluation and career-planning services to the visually impaired
persons;
Meeting of
the Board.
Powers and
functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(s) invlove high-level technicians, techno-crafts, trade unions, and employers'
organizations;
(t) conduct research with the help of international and national level research
laboratories and research & development departments of industries and eminent
scientists especially research in developing or adapting aids, appliances, equipment
or techniques;
(u) organize resource cells in all national and state level organizations which
may provide or supervise community-based services to the visually impaired persons;
(v) set up clearing houses for dissemination of information and knowledge of
latest advancements in technology for the benefit of the visually impaired persons;
(w) promote regional co-operation and spare experts for staff training for the
benefit of the visually impaired persons;
(x) launch intensive mass-media publicity for  raising public awareness towards
needs of the visually impaired persons;
(y) create community awareness through the mass-media;
(z) recommend to the appropriate Government to accept full responsibility for
meeting all the special needs of the blind and visually-impaired persons;
(aa) recommend to the appropriate Government to provide the special needs  for
employment mobility and integration of the blind and visually-impaired persons;
(ab) recommend to the appropriate Government to set up exclusive commissions
or Directorate for the rehabilitation of the disabled, with specialist representation for
each of the major disabilities including visually impaired persons;
(ac) recommend to the appropriate Government to grant tax-deductions and
other benefits to employers who employ the disabled,  including the blind and visually
impaired persons;
(ad) recommend to the appropriate Government to give top priority to the
rehabilitation of the disabled persons with multiple handicaps, disabled women and
children, the disabled persons in rural areas, and the elderly, infirm disabled; and
(ae) recommend to the appropriate Government to formulate comprehensive
social security schemes, subsidize blind people not able to earn a  living wage, provide
pension schemes for the elderly and multiple handicapped and to comprehensively
cover the disabled in all social and pension schemes.
9. (1) The Board shall prepare once every year, as may be  prescribed, an annual report
giving summary of its activities including schemes and recommendations to the appropirate
Governments during the previous year and shall   contain statement of the annual accounts
of the Board.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall lay the report before each House of the Parliament as soon as it is received.
10. The Central Government shall after due appropriation  made by the Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for the purposes of
this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained  in any other law for the  time being in force, but same as aforesaid the
provisions  of this Act, shall be in addition to and  not in derogation of any  other  law for the
time being  in force.
12. The Central Government in consultation with the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Annual report.
Central
Governemnt
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Blind people living in rural areas constitute 80%  of the blind population in developing
countries like India. They are scattered throughout millions of isolated and remote villages.
For Lack of an adequate and well organized delivery of services system, it is going to be
extremely difficult  to ensure the fundamental human rights  to the rural visually impaired
and to ensure  they all definitely receive the relevant services according to their specific
disabilities.
Unemployment is one of the biggest problems in India. Lyndon B. Johnson said: "We
must open the doors of opportunity, but we must also  equip our people to walk through
those doors."
We must aim at total rehabilitation of the visually impaired and equip them with a
multiplicity of skills, so as to enable them to face the challenges ahead in the decades to
come.
Since dame nature has denied to the blind its most precious gift-VISION-the State and
the community should go all out to ensure that they are not further denied fundamental
human rights and that they are enabled and assisted to get like other citizens-health care,
education, employment, civic  and other services to live with human dignity and as
self-respecting, independent citizens.
It is estimated  that the world's  blind population was in the order of 100 million by the
year 2020. The visually challenged form 18.6% of  India's  26.8 million disabled population of
whom 15.7 million are in the employable age of 15 to 59 years. Yet 60.4% of India's disabled
people are either without work or are marginally employed  according to 2011 census. Therefore
there is an urgent need to provide gainful employment to the visually impaired persons.
Hence, this Bill.
VIJILA  SATHYANANTH
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for grant of unemployment allowance to visually impaired
persons. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Employment Advisory Board.
Clause 10 provides that the Central Government shall  provide funds. Therefore, the Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not
possible to estimate at this stage as to the exact amount which is likely to be incurred
towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the purpose.
6

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

8
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide rights to visually impaired  persons, enabling them to avail employment, social
and financial security, civil and other services, to live with human dignity, self
respect as independent citizens and for  matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shrimati Vijila Sathyananth, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—857RS(S3)—24-06-2019.