1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 324, clause (1), of the Constitution, after the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that notwithstanding any judgement or order of any court, nothing in
clause (1) of article 324 shall authorise the Election Commission to pass any order or
issue any instruction covering a substantial area of law with respect to which Parliament
has the legislative competence.”.
Bill No. XIV  of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 25TH JULY, 2014
Short title
and
Commence-
ment.
Amendment
of article
324.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Under article 324(1) of the Constitution of India, Election Commission of India has
power of superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the electoral rolls for,
and the conduct of, all elections to Parliament and to the legislature of every State and of
elections to the offices of President and Vice-President held under this Constitution shall be
vested in a Commission.
However, at times the Commission issues instructions and orders purportedly under
the above clause, which cover substantive area of law. India has two substantive laws
relating to the subject, namely, the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the
Representation of the People Act, 1951. These legislations are exhaustive in nature and no
other legislations are needed to conduct elections in free and fair manner. The Central
Government, in fact, should constitute a Committee to examine the orders and instructions
issued by the Commission from time to time and identify such orders and instructions which
fall within the jurisdiction of Parliament of India. Even presuming that certain reforms are
needed in the two legislations referred to above, failure on the part of the Government to
carry out any reforms, by way of amendments, does not entitle Commission to step in into
the shoes of Parliament, when the two legislations cover each and every aspect related to
elections.
Hence, this Bill.
SHANTARAM NAIK
2

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
—————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1758RS(S3)—25.07.2014.