THE POPULATION CONTROL AND FAMILY WELFARE BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for measures to control the population; promotion of small family norms by
providing incentives for small family or one child norm through sterilization, by the
Central and State Governments and disincentives for those who do not opt for small
family norm and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control and Family Welfare Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into effect with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "fund" means National Population Control Fund established under section 9;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
3. The Central Government shall, through the electronic and print media, non-
governmental organizations, theatre groups and village officers, promote and popularize
one child norm to check the population growth.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. XIV of 2007
Central
Government
to promote
one child
norm.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007

2
SERVER5 \ BILLS 2007 \ 1223RS\RS\1223RS .pm5
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Representation of the People Act, 1951
or in any other law for the time being in force, a citizen shall be disqualified from contesting
the election or from being a member of either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a
State or of the local self government bodies, if he is having more than two living children:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a citizen having more
than two living children on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
any central Government Employee or an employee of a Public Sector Undertaking or body or
authority under the control of Central Government who has more than two living children,
shall not be eligible for any further increment in his salary or promotion in career:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to an employee who has
more than two living children on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
marriage shall be solemnized between a male who is less than twenty-five years of age and a
female who is less than twenty-one years of age and any marriage solemnized in contravention
of the provisions of this section shall be void.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate government shall provide to a married couple,—
(a) Who opts for one child norm by way of sterilization, the following incentives,
namely:—
(i) a dwelling unit on concessional rates, as may be prescribed;
(ii) education including technical education to the child, free of cost;
(iii) one time out of turn promotion to Government Servant and a cash
reward of rupees twenty-five thousand to others including those in private
service:
Provided that if the child is a girl child, the couple shall be given a cash
reward of not less than rupees one lakh in fixed deposits for a period of twenty
years.
(iv) employment to the child after completing education as per his ability
and qualification.
(b) Who have two children and opt for family planning by way of sterilization
thereafter shall be given the following incentives, namely:—
(i) dwelling unit at concessional rates as may be prescribed;
(ii) free education to both the children upto graduation level;
(iii) two advance increments in a grade to Government Servant and one
time cash award of rupees twenty-five thousand to others including those in
private service.
8. (1) Any married couple who procreates more than two children after the
commencement of this Act, shall,—
(a) be debarred from availing the facilities of public distribution system;
(b) not be given medical facilities available free of cost to citizens through
Government hospitals and dispensaries;
(c) not be given the facility of free education to their children under any of the
schemes of the Government;
(d) be debarred from availing such other facilities, as may be prescribed.
Disqualification
from
contesting
elections or
being a
member of
legislature.
Central
Government
employee not
to be entitled
for increment
and
promotion.
Minimum age
for marriage
for male and
female.
Disincentives
for having
more than
two children.
Incentives on
opting for
family
planning.
43 of 1951.

3
SERVER5 \ BILLS 2007 \ 1223RS\RS\1223RS .pm5
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code or any other law for
the time being in force, any married couple who procreates more than three children, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or a fine which may
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees or with both.
9. The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of the
commencement of this Act, establish a fund to be known as the Population Control Fund
consisting of:—
(a)  sums paid to the funds by the appropriate Government after due
appropriations made by law.
(b)  donations received from corporate bodies, other Bodies and general public.
10. The fund shall be utilized for:—
(a) wide publicity to the need for population control;
(b) providing funds to popularize the family welfare programmes;
(c) providing incentives under the provisions of this Act;
(d) such other purposes as may be prescribed.
11. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any other law, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of
this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in
force in any part of the country.
12. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Establishment
of Population
Control Fund.
Utilisation of
Fund.
Overriding
effect and
savings.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our population has grown and has already crossed one billion mark. Today, we are the
second highest populous country in the world after China. We have less than three per cent
of the global land but sustaining more than sixteen per cent of the world's population. The
continuous rise in population has brought the development made so far in the country to a
naught. This has resulted in many socio-economic problems like shortage of housing,
educational facilities, potable water, pathetic civic amenities, unemployment, environmental
degradation, scanty health and transport facilities, etc. The overcrowding is also resulting in
worsening of law and order situation and also widening the gap between the haves and
have-nots. In fact, there is no balance between the population growth and the infrastructure
and available opportunities.
If the present growth in the population is allowed to continue, then it will be difficult
for us to tackle these problems effectively and they will go beyond our control. We have to
go for population control for our survival. Therefore, we have to adopt some harsh measures
to control the population growth or it will be too late to react. Besides it is also necessary to
give incentives to those who opt for family planning to promote it and disincentives and
penalty to those contributing excessively to population explosion to discourage them.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for publicity by Central Government to promote one child
norm in the country. Clause 7 provides for various incentives for adopting family planning.
Clause 9 provides for the establishment of Population Control Fund. The Bill if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India and it is estimated that rupees two
thousand crores will involve as recurring expenditure per annum. A non-recurring expenditure
of rupees five hundred crores is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers is
of normal character.
6

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for measures to control the population; promotion of small family norms by
providing incentives for small family or one child norm through sterilization, by the
Central and State Governments and disincentives for those who do not opt for small
family norm and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1223RS(S-5)—16.03.2007.