AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No. XIVof 2024 
THE PREVENTION OF FRAUDULENT CALLS BILL, 
2024 
A
BILL
to amend certain enactments to prevent fraudulent calls in the country 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
    BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:– 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Fraudulent Calls Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
AMENDMENT OF THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHO RITY 
OF INDIA ACT, 1997 
24 of 1997. 
10 
2. In the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (hereinafter
referred to as the TRAI Act), after section 11, the following new section
shall be inserted, namely: —
“11A. (1) The Authority shal l, in consultation with relevant stakeholders
and service providers, prescribe necessary regulations and guidelines to
prevent and curb fraudulent calls.
Insertion of new 
section 11A. 
Measures to 
curb fraudulent 
calls. 

2
(2) The regulations shall include, but not be limited to,:-
(a) mechanisms for identifying and blocking fraudulent numbers;
(b) establishment of a robust system for the registration and
verification of telemarketers; and
(c) procedures for law enforcement agencies for effective
investigation and prosecution of person(s) or entities involved in
fraudulent call cases under the law for the time being in force; and
(d)promotion of public awareness campaigns on recognizing and
reporting fraudulent calls.
(3)The Authority shall regularly review and update the regulations to
adapt to evolving fraudulent call techniques and technologies.
Explanation. —for the purposes of this section, "fraudulent calls" means 
any form of unsolicited communication, like messages, calls, or 
electronic communication, including but not limited to voice calls, text 
messages, WhatsApp messages, e-mails, data stream, automated calls and 
videos, with the intent to defraud, deceive, or mislead the recipient.‖. 
5
10 
15 
Insertion of new 
section 25A. 
Duties of the 
Central 
Government. 
3. In the TRAI Act, after section 25, the following new section shall be
inserted, namely: —
―25A. The Central Government shall,—
(a) in consultation with the Authority and in consideration of the relevant
provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, establish a robust
mechanism for the public to report fraudulent calls defined under section
11 A and activities related thereto:
Provided that such mechanism shall provide  adequate protection to 
whistleblowers reporting fraudulent call activities; and 
20 
35 of 2019 
(b)in collaboration with the Authority and other relevant stakeholders,
conduct public awareness campaigns to educate cit izens on recognizing
and reporting fraudulent calls and activities related thereto.‖.
Amendment of 
section 36.
4. In the TRAI Act, in section 36, in sub-section (2), after clause (f), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: —
         ―(g)  matters in respect of sub-section (2) of section 11A.‖. 
AMENDMENT OF THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000 
Insertion of new 
section 66AA. 
Punishment for 
fraudulent calls 
and related 
activities. 
5. In the Information Technology Act, 2000, after section 66A, the
following new section shall be inserted, namely: —
       ―66AA.(1) Any person found guilty of engaging in fraudulent calls or 
activities related thereto, as defined  under Section 11A of the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, shall be liable for punishment as 
prescribed under section 351 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
(2)In addition to the above, the court may order the forfeiture of
equipment and assets used in the commission of the offence.‖.
21 of 2000. 
24 of 1997. 
45 of 2023. 
25
30
35
40

3 
AMENDMENT OF THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023 
45 of 2023. 
24 of 1997. 
5 
6. In the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, in sec tion 351, after sub -section
(4), the following new sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
―(5) Whoever, with intent to cause harm, harassment, or monetary loss, 
engages in fraudulent calls, as defined under section 11A of the Telecom 
Regulatory Authorit y of India Act, 1997, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or with fine not 
exceeding five lakh rupees or both.‖. 
Amendment of 
section 351. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The rise of AI -generated fake/fraudu lent voice calls in India, as 
evidenced by the McAfee report titled 'The Artificial Imposter,' is a pressing 
concern demanding legislative attention. The survey's findings, encompassing 
7,054 participants from seven countries, reveal a startling truth  that over 83 per 
cent. of Indians have fallen victim to these fraudulent calls. Disturbingly, half 
of the respondents admitted their inability to differentiate between authentic 
and AI-generated fake voice calls, resulting in substantial financial losses. 
The surge in online scams, particularly the fake voice call scam, 
underscores the need for swift legislative action. Cybercriminals exploit 
advanced technology to create deceptive calls, with 48  per cent.  of affected 
individuals reporting losses exceeding ₹50,000. The vulnerability of Indian 
adults to voice scams, reflected in the survey's 69  per cent.  uncertainty in 
identifying cloned voices, necessitates urgent legal measures. 
Therefore, the proposed legislation aims to protect citizens by 
introducing stringent measures against fake/malicious/fraudulent voice calls. It 
proposes to amend the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 and the Bharatiya Nyaya San hita, 2023 in 
order to safeguard citizens from the escalating threat, malice, financial 
exploitation caused by fraudulent voice calls. It also emphasizes public 
awareness about the prevalence of such voice scams, the importance of caller 
verification, and collaboration with service provider s for effective 
implementation. Severe penalties are proposed to deter fraudulent 
communication and fortify the legal apparatus against evolving cyber threats.  
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
FAUZIA KHAN 

5 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
OF INDIA ACT, 1997 
(24 OF 1997) 
* *  * * 
36.(1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulatio ns consistent 
with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:— 
(a) the times and places of meetings of the Authority and the
procedure to be followed at such meetings under sub -section
(1) of section 8, including quorum necessary for the transaction
of business;
(b) the transaction of business at the meetings of th e Authority
under sub-section (4) of section 8;
* * * * *
(d) matters in respect of which register is to be maintained by
the Authority under sub -clause(vii) of clause (b) of sub -section
(1) of section 11;
(e) levy of fee and lay down such other requiremen ts on
fulfilment of which a copy of registermay be obtained under
sub-clause (viii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 11;
(f) levy of fees and other charges under clause (c) of sub -
section (1) of section 11.
*                          *                             *     *
Power to make 
regulations. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023 
(45 OF 2023) 
* *  * * 
351.(1) Whoever threatens another by any means, with any injury to his 
person, reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one 
in whom that person is interested, with intent to cause alarm to that 
person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally bound 
to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, 
as the means of avoiding the execution of such threat, commits criminal 
intimidation. 
Explanation.—A threat to injure the reputat ion of any deceased 
person in whom the person threatened is interested, is within this section.  
Illustration. 
A, for the purpose of inducing B to resist from prosecuting a civil 
suit, threatens to burn B’s house. A is guilty of criminal intimidation. 
(2) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Criminal 
intimidation. 

6 
(3) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by
threatening to cause death or grievous hurt, or to cause the destruction of 
any property by fire, or to cause an offence punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to seven years, or to impute unchastity to a woman,  shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
(4) Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by an
anonymous communication, or having taken precaution to concea l the 
name or abode of the person from whom the threat comes, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, in addition to the punishment provided for the 
offence under sub-section (1). 
* *  * * 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to amend certain enactments to prevent fraudulent calls in the country and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—061—05.02.2024.