1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill  No.  XIV of  2008
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) The Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force, at once.
2. In article 145 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after sub-clause (b), the following
sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(bb) rules as to procedure for admitting and hearing Public Interest Litigations
before the court as also High Courts";
Amendment
of article 145.5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH FEBRUARY, 2009

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Supreme Court of India and the High Courts in the country have been entertaining
Public Interest Litigations (PIL) for about last 20 years. However, there is no specific provision
in the Constitution for the purpose.
A number of casual and unscrupulous litigants have taken advantage of the situation
and, the Apex court itself has come heavily on such litigants. Nevertheless, although the
recent approach of the court have deterred a few prospective applicants, yet, number of
applications are still mounting.
Practice of the courts to admit letters and news-items as Public Interest Litigations has
also led to the increase in their number.
The Supreme Court, has also issued some guidelines which say that no petition
involving individual/personal matters shall be entertained as a PIL. The Court has, however,
made certain exceptions in case of bonded labourers, neglected children, exploitation of
workers, petitions from jail, petitions against police officers refusing to register cases, petitions
regarding atrocities against women, environment and pollution matters, etc.
However to regulate the machinery of Public Interest Litigations and further, to avoid
making the instrument of PIL as a hindrance in the functioning of Executive and Legislature
as per the provisions of the Constitution, the Apex court has to frame the Rules under
article 145 rather than issuing a few guidelines to regulate such a serious area of litigation.
Besides, since such rules require the approval of the President, the Government will be in a
position to put necessary inputs in the framing of such Rules.
Hence the Bill.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
* * * * * *
145. Rules of Court, etc.—(1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament,
the Supreme Court may from time to time, with the approval of the President, make rules for
regulating generally the practice and procedure of the Court including—
(a) rules as to the persons practising before the Court;
(b) rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals and other matters pertaining to
appeals including the time within which appeals to the Court are to be entered;
* * * * * *
3

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—658RS—13.02.2009.