1
THE THIRD LANGUAGE BILL, 2020
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory third language education from primary to senior secondary
level in all the schools throughout the country, to make it imperative for each
student to study a third language other than Hindi, English or the student's  mother
tongue from one of the languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution
and for making it obligatory for the Central and State Governments to provide requisite
infrastructure for the purpose and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the The Third Language Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XIV of 2020
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 13
TH
 MARCH, 2020
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
the State, and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "language infrastructure" means requisite resources for teacher's training,
appointment of teachers, staff etc., and requisite environment as are necessary in the
school; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "school" includes a Government school, a Government aided school or a
private school which imparts education;
(e) "third language" means one of the languages mentioned in the Eighth
Schedule to the Constitution, but does not include Hindi, English and the mother
tongue.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than one year of
the commencement of the Act, formulate a national policy for providing third language
education in all schools of the country and ensure requisite language infrastructure in all
such schools.
(2) The national policy referred to in sub-section (1) shall provide for,—
(i) including third language education for all the students as part of their
syllabus from primary to senior secondary level in all the schools;
(ii) encouraging students to learn a third language, thereby introducing rich
literature, new culture and tradition among the schools students;
(iii) ensuring the availability of third language teaches in all the schools;
(iv) releasing adequate funds for infrastructure development for teaching third
language in all the schools;
(v) incorporating third language as compulsory subject in all the schools;
(vi) preparing standard and qualitative syllabus for third language as per the
class thereof;
(vii) providing scholarship and stipend to those students whose grades or marks
in third language has been outstanding;
(viii) giving weightage to marks obtained in third language for admission in
colleges, universities, and institutions of national importance;
(ix) giving preference to the outstanding students in direct recruitment under
the Central and State Government services; and
(x) such other provisions, as the Central Government may deem fit and necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national
policy formulated under section 3 of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall review the progress and quality of third language
education being imparted by the schools from time to time, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
5. Any school which violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable for withdrawal
of recognition by the appropriate Government in such manner and with such conditions, as
may be prescribed.
Definitions.
National
policy for
third language
education.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
national
policy.
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
Supplement
Other Laws.
Power to
make Rules.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a unique nation of innumerable languages, culture and traditions. Total number
of languages spoken in India is 780. These can be divided into several language families, the
major ones being Indo-Aryan languages spoken by 78.05% of Indians. The Dravidian
languages spoken by 19.64% of Indians and remaining 2.31% of the population belong to
the Austroasiatic, Sino-Tibetan, Tai-Kadai and a few other minor language families and
isolates.
2. This astounding number of languages hold the key to India's diversity. The truest
unity of our nation will depend on the future generation's understanding, appreciation,
preservation, protection and contribution to all the languages spoken in India. The nation
will thrive when a Bengali, takes up Tamil as Third language and in times to come enriches
the Tamil language, or a Punjabi writing poems in Bengali, a Marathi contributing to Telugu
Literature. This will be the finest hour of India's Unity in Diversity, after all we are a remarkable
Nation of Diversity.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
SHRIMATI  SHANTA CHHETRI
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for inclusion of third language education in all schools,
infrastructure development and grant of scholarship and stipends for outstanding students
in third language. Clause 6 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to quantify the actual expenditure at
this juncture, but it is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crores may be involved
as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two thousand crore may also be
involved for creating various assets throughout the country.
5

MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory third language education from primary to senior secondary level
in all the schools throughout the country, to make it imperative for each student to study
a third language other than Hindi, English or the student's  mother tongue from one of the
languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution and for making it
obligatory for the Central and State Governments to provide requisite  infrastructure for
the purpose and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Shanta Chhetri, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—6011RS(S3)—16-03-2020.