1
THE  SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Economic Zones (Amendment) Act 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 24 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“24A. If any “developer”, “co-developer” or “entrepreneur” misrepresents any
material fact before any authority, constituted under the Act, he shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend
to five lakhs rupees.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
28 of 2005.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 31ST JULY, 2009
Bill No. XIV of  2009.
Insertion of
new section
24A.
Penalty on
misrepresentation
of facts.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ever since, the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, and the schemes prepared under
the Act have come into force, respective state governments have recommended the cases of
various developers, co-developers and entrepreneurs for establishing Special Economic
Zones in their respective States.
Since the concept involves grant of considerable amount of land to the applicants,
with a number of facilities, concessions and tax exemptions, number of applicants seeking to
establish SEZs, is increasing, although, world-wide recession has reduced the number of
applicants to some extent, in recent times.
However, since a number of procedural formalities are involved in obtaining approvals/
permissions/licenses under the Act, there may be cases where applicants may be tempted to
misrepresent facts before the authorities under the Act.
Land is becoming a scarce commodity, and, therefore, it cannot be allowed to be
misused in the name of establishing units or projects under the Act. There has been a
criticism that many a developers intend to apply for projects in the name of Special Economic
Zones but their object tends to be, clandestinely for commercial purposes. Such applicants
exaggerate and misrepresent the requirement of land before the authorities. Some also intend
to sublet the rights over the land without the permission of the authorities, while, others give
misleading projection regarding the export potentials of their products. Some applicants also
lack basic potential to establish such projects and are expert in manipulating vital figures and
facts. In all such matters, element of misrepresentation, remains the main culprit, and, therefore,
such acts should not go unnoticed and unpunished.
Hence, this Bill.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES, 2005 (Section 24).
*** *** *** ***
24. Appeal to High Court.—Any person aggrieved, by any decision or order of the
court designated under sub-section (1) of section 23, may file an appeal to the High Court
within sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order of the courts so
designated to him on any question of fact or law arising out of such orders: Provided that the
High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing an appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding
sixty days. Explanation. — In section 23 and in this section “High Court” means the High
Court of the State in which the Special Economic Zone is situated.
*** *** *** ***
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
Bill
further to amend the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3554RS(S5)—31-07-2009.