1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 343 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (1), for the words "The official language of the Union shall be Hindi
in Devanagari script.", the words "The Official language of the Union shall be the
languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to this Constitution." shall be substituted.
(ii) in sub-clause (a) in clause (3), after the words "the English language," the
words "or the languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to this Constitution, or"
shall be inserted.
Bill No. XIV of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Short title and
Commencement.
Amendment of
article 343.
5
10

2
3. In article 344 of the Constitution, sub clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (2) shall be
omitted.
4. In article 348 of the Constitution, in clause ( 1), after the words "shall be in the
English Language.", the words "or the languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to this
Constitution. "shall be inserted.
5. In the Constitution, article 351 shall be omitted.
Amendment of
article 344.
Amendment of
article 348.
Omission of
article 151.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Constitution has provided for the development of all the regional languages in
addition to Hindi. In many countries across the world, multiple languages are recognized as
the official national languages.
Additionally, clause (3) of article 344 states that in making their recommendations
under clause (2), the Commission on Official Language shall have due regard to the industrial,
cultural and scientific advancement of India, and the just claims and the interests of persons
belonging to the non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public services.
India with a population of more than 130 crore has more than 700 languages. India, with
such diverse languages, should promote all the languages listed in the Eighth Schedule of
the Indian Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
R. GIRIRAJAN.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * *
343. (1) The Official language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script.
The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the
international form of Indian numerals.
* * *
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may be law provide for the use,
after the said period of fifteen years, of—
(a) the English language, or
(b) the devanagari form of numerals,
 for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
344. * * *
(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President as
to—
(a) the progressive use of the Hindi language for the official purposes of the
Union;
(b) restrictions on the use of the English language for all or any of the official
purposes of the Union;
(c) the language to be used for all or any of the purposes mentioned in article
348;
(d) the form of numerals to be used for any one or more specified purposes of the
Union;
(e) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President as regards the
official language of the Union and the language for communication between the Union
and a State or between one State and another and their use.
* * *
348. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until
Parliament by law otherwise provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court,
(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either
House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a State;
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State; and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State,
shall be in the English language.
* * *
Official
language of the
Union.
Commission
and
Committee
of Parliament
on official
language.
Language to be
used in the
Supreme Court
and in the High
Courts and for
Acts, Bills etc.
4

5
351. It shall be the duty of the Union to promote the spread of the Hindi language, to
develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the elements of the composite
culture of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating without interfering  with its
genius, the forms, style and expressions used in Hindustani and in the other languages of
India specified in the Eighth Schedule, and by drawing, wherever necessary or desirable, for
its vocabulary, primarily on Sanskrit and secondarily on other languages.
* * *
Directive for
development
of
the Hindi
language.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri R. Girirajan, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—089—14.12.2023