THE  TRIBAL  CHILDREN  AND  LACTATING  WOMEN  IN
MAHARASHTRA  AND OTHER  STATES  REMOV AL  OF
HUNGER, MALNUTRITION AND PREVENTION OF
STARV ATION DEATHS BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to provide for the removal of hunger and malnutrition and for the prevention of starvation
deaths of tribal children including adolescent and young girls and pregnant and
lactating women in tribal areas of the country particularly in Maharashtra
through a nodal agency at the National and State levels, by formulating
a National policy for the purpose and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tribal Children and Lactating Women in Maharashtra
and other States Removal of Hunger, Malnutrition and Prevention of Starvation Deaths
Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. XIV of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JULY, 2017
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "adolescent girl" means a female human being who has attained puberty and
is below the age of eighteen years;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of  a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(c) "girl child" means a female human being who is below the age of twelve
years;
(d) "Nodal Agency" means the Nodal Agency constituted under section 4 for
the purposes of this Act;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than one year of the
commencement of this Act, formulate and publish in the Official Gazette,  a National Policy
for the overall protection and removal of hunger, malnutrition and prevention of starvation
deaths of tribal children and pregnant and lactating tribal women particularly in the tribal
areas of Maharashtra and shall take appropriate measures for the uniform implementation of
such Policy.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
sub-section (1), the National Policy may include provision for,—
(a) conducting surveys, from time to time of the tribal children, pregnant women
and lactating mothers in the tribal areas of Maharashtra and other parts of the country
who are malnourished, anaemic and underweight and maintaining district wise data
thereof in such manner and with such particulars as may be prescribed;
(b) conducting periodic medical examination of every child including girl child
and adolescent girls, pregnant as well as lactating mothers covered under this Act and
for taking such remedial measures as may be recommended by dieticians and medical
authorities;
(c) making it mandatory for the appropriate Government to ensure as well as
provide at least two healthy meals per day, milk, seasonal fruits, folic acid and multi
vitamin tablets to every malnourished or anaemic and underweight children, girl child,
pregnant and lactating women covered under this Act;
(d) providing medical care to the children and women covered under this Act
and providing sanitary napkins and proper dresses to adolescent and grown up girls
covered under this Act by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
4.  (1)The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Nodal Agency consisting of a Chairperson such number of members representing various
fields, such number of officers and staff as may be prescribed, for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, members, officers and staff of the Nodal Agency and procedure to be
followed by the Nodal Agency in discharging its functions shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Nodal Agency shall,—
(a) classify tribal areas in each State as high, medium or low burden area with
regard to malnutrition, anaemia, hunger, starvation deaths and such other issues as
may be prescribed;
(b) set malnutrition, anaemia, hunger eradication targets and time frame for
each State in their tribal areas; and
Definitions.
National
Policy for the
removal of
hunger
malnutrition
and prevention
of starvation
deaths of tribal
children and
lactating
mothers.
Constitution of
a Nodal
Agency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) recommend to the Central Government and State Governments having tribal
areas within their territorial jurisdiction with regard to the implementation of this
Act and framing of rules and regulations as it may consider necessary.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, to the States and Union Territories
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. The provisions of this act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5
10
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our vast Nation, the second most populous in the globe after China has, unfortunately,
the highest number of malnourished and anaemic children including girl child, adolescent
girls, women including pregnant and lactating mothers. The problem is more acute in the
tribal areas of our country.
In Maharashtra alone, every monsoon over 40,000 children slip into malnutrition in
tribal dominated Nandurbar. Due to persistent hunger, amaemia amongst the girl child,
adolescent girls, pregnant women and lactating mothers is prevelant not only in Nandurbar
but also in almost all the tribal areas of the country. Starvation deaths, though generally
denied by the Government authorities, are also reported from time to time not only in tribal
areas of Maharashtra but also from other States too.
On record there are at least 15 schemes to augment the nutrition of children and
mothers in Nandurbar but on ground, due to lack of funds for these schemes, the road out of
hunger is paved with failures. Union Ministry of Women and Child Development implements
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme to control malnourishment through
Anganwadis but it hardly reaches in tribal areas.
Hence, it is high time to pay more and concerted attention for the removal of hunger,
malnutrition, anaemia amongst the children, girl child including adolescent girls, pregnant
and loctating women in tribal areas of Maharastra and other parts of the Country so as to
prevent starvation deaths in such areas.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR DHOOT

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for sitting up of a Nodal Agency for the purposes of the
Bill.
Clause 5 of the Bill makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to quantify the expenditure at this
stage but it is estimated that a sum of rupee One Lakh Crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum. A sum of rupee fifty Crore may also involve as non-recurring
expenditure for creating assets for implementation of the provisions of this Bill.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—1320RS(S3)—21.07.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the removal of hunger and malnutrition and for the prevention of starvation
deaths of tribal children including adolescent and young girls and pregnant and
lactating women in tribal areas of the country particularly in Maharashtra
through a nodal agency at the National and State levels, by formulating
a National policy for the purpose and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Rajkumar Dhoot,  M.P.)