1
THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Railways ( Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 3 of the Railways Act, 1989, after sub-section (4), the following shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section the Central
Government shall, by notification, constitute a new Zonal Railway with headquarter
at Vishakhapatnam consisting of the Waltair Railway Division of the East Coast
Railway Zone and Vijayawada, Guntur and Guntakal Railway Divisions of the South
Central Railway Zone.”.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XIV of  2018
Amendment of
section 3.
24 of 1989.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The division of the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh in the year 2014 left the residual
State of Andhra Pradesh with a number of challenges and disadvantages. To overcome such
difficulties and to make up for the loss of resources, establishment of a separate railway zone
was promised to the residual State of Andhra Pradesh under the Thirteenth Schedule as per
section 93 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
Consequent upon reorganisation of the State of Andhra Pradesh, none of the Railway
zones operating in the State of Andhra Pradesh has its headquarters within the State. This
has caused great inconvenience to the public of the State of Andhra Pradesh. The concerns
of railway commuters of the State are no longer the priority of any of the railway zones.
People from the State have to travel all the way to the neighbouring States of Odisha and
Telangana to the Zonal headquarters. A separate railway zone which caters to the special
needs of the State and for strengthening infrastructure is directly needed.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Railways Act, 1989 with a view to constitute a
new Zonal Railway headquarter at Visakhapatnam consisting of the Waltair Railway Division
of the East Coast Railway Zone and Vijayawada, Guntur and Guntakal railway divisions of
the South Central Railway Zone.
Hence this Bill.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
2

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to constitute a new Zonel Railway headquarter at
Visakhapatnam consisting of the Waltair Railway Division of the East Coast Railway Zone
and Vijayawada, Guntur and Guntakal railway divisions of the south Central Railway Zone.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MGIPMRND—809RS(S3)—25-06-2019.
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
—————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P .)