AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. XIV of 2026 
THE COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION AND ADJOINING 
AREAS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
 to amend the Commission for Air Quality Management in the National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:– 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commission for Air Quality Management in
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Amendment) Act, 2026. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
2. In section 2 of the Commission for Air Quality Management in National
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (b) for the words “member who is co- opted under sub-
section (3)”, the words “Member of Parliament nominated under sub-
section (4)” shall be substituted; 
(ii) after clause (d) , the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:— 
“(da) “Dir ectorate” mea ns the Technical and Enforcement
Directorate constituted under section 11A; 
(db) “Fund” means the Clean Air Fund constituted under 
section 16;”. 
5 
10 
29 of 2021. 
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 3. 
Constitution of 
Commission 
3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a body to be known as the Commission for Air Quality
Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas to exercise the
powers conferred upon, and to perform the func tions assigned to, that
Commission under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions
of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of propert
y, both movable and
immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Commission shall function as an autonomous statutory body in the
discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers under this Act, and shall
not be subject to the direction or control of the Central Government or any
other executive authority, except as expressly provided in this Act.
(4) The Commission shall consist of —
(a) a full-time Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence in
the field of public administration, environmental governance, air- quality
management or urban and regional planning, with at least fifteen years 
of relevant experience; 
(b) five full- time technical Members possessing expertise
respectively in the fields of— 
(i) air-quality science and environmental engineering;
(ii) public health and epidemiology;
(iii) agriculture and biomass management;
(iv) urban transport and industrial transition; and
(v) law, governance or environmental regulation;
(c) the following persons as ex officio  Members for institutional
coordination:— 
(i) one representative of the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change, not below the rank of Secretary; 
(ii) the Chairperson of the Central Pollution Control Board or
a Member nominated by that Board; 
(iii) one technical representative of the Indian Space
Research Organisation; and 
(iv) the Chief Secretaries in the National Capital Territory of
Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh; 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

3 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
(d) three independent Members, to be appointed respectively from -
(i) non-governmental or civil-society organizations, having at
least ten years’ experience in the field of air -quality or 
environmental management; 
(ii) academic or research institutions of national repute; and
(iii) industry or professional associations engaged in
sustainable development or clean technology; 
(e) a full- time Member -Secretary, possessing not less than ten
years’ experience in administration, finance or environmental 
management, who shall act as the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Commission 
and be responsible for the day-t o -day administration and 
management of its staff and funds;
(
f) two Members of Parliament, one to be nominated by the
C
hairman of the Council of States from amongs t  Members of that 
C
ouncil representing the National Capital Territory of Delhi and one to 
be
 nominated by the Speaker of the House of the People from amongst 
M
embers of that House representing any of the parliamentary 
c
onstituencies within the National Capital Territory of Delhi, to serve as 
A
ssociate Members of the Commission for a term of two years: 
Provided that such Associate Members shall be entitled to participate in 
the meetings of the Commission but shall not have the right to vote.  
(5) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi, and the Central
Government may by notification in the official Gazette, establish regional
offices in such other parts of the National Capital Region and adjoining areas
as the Commission may determine:
Provided that the notification shall come into force only with effect from 
the date of its laying in both Ho uses of Parliament, and if laid on different 
dates, from the later date when it is so laid. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
4. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:— 
“4. (1) The full -time Chairperson shall be appointed by the 
President, by warrant under his hand and seal: 
Provided that every appointment under this sub- section shall be 
made after obtaining the recommendation of a Selection Committee 
consisting of— 
(a) the Prime Minister of India—   Chairperson;
(b) the Speaker of the House of the People—Member;
(c) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People—
Memb
er; and 
(d) the Chief Justice of India—   M ember
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub -section, “the Leader of the 
Opposition in the House of the People” shall, when no such Leader has been 
so recognized, include the Leader of the single largest group in opposition of 
the Government in the House of the People. 
(2) The full -time Members, independent Members and the
Member-Secretary of the Commission shall be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner and on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The Central Government shall lay down a transparent
procedure for inviting  applications, short-listing and appointing the full -
Substitution of 
new Section for 
Section 4. 
Appointment of 
Chairperson, 
Members and 
Member-
Secretary. 

4 
time Members and independent Members on the basis of integrity, 
professional competence and relevant experience. 
(4) No serving officer of the Government shall be appointed as a
full-time Member of the Commission. 
(5) Every appointment made under this section shall be published
in the Official Gazette.” 
5 
Substitution of 
new Section for 
section 5. 
Resignation 
and removal of 
Chairperson 
and Members. 
5. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“5. (1) The Chairperson, may, by notice in writing under his hand 
addressed to the President of India, resign his office and such resignation 
shall take effect from the date on which it is accepted by the President. 
(2) The Chairperso n shall not be removed from his office except
by order of the President of India, made on the recommendation of the 
Selection Committee constituted under sub -section (1) of section 4, if 
the Chairperson :— 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an
offence which in the opinion of President involves moral turpitude; 
or 
(c) is unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of
mind or body; or 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions; or 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in
office prejudicial to the public interest: 
Provided that the Chairperson shall not be removed under 
clause (e) unless he has been informed of the charges against him 
and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(3) The President may, by order, suspend from office the
Chairperson in respect of  whom proceedings for removal have been 
initiated under this section, pending such proceedings. 
(4) The procedure for inquiry, and the terms and conditions of
suspension or removal of the Chairperson, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
(5) A Member, other than an ex officio Member, may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his 
office, and such resignation shall take effect from the date on which it is 
accepted by the Central Government. 
(6) The Central Government may remove any Member, other than
an ex officio Member, from office, in such manner as may be prescribed, 
if such Member— 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment
outside the duties of his office; or 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court; or 
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in
office prejudicial to the public interest; or 
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions; or 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

5 
5 
(f) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude: 
Provided that no such Member shall be removed under clause 
(d) unless he has been informed of  the charges against him and
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.”
10 
15 
2
0 
25 
30 
35 
6. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“10. (1) The Commission shall meet at such time and place as the 
Chairperson may think fit: 
Provided that the Commission shall meet at least once every 
month, and a special meeting shall be convened within twenty- four 
hours if any part of the National Capital Region or any adjoining area 
records air quality in the ‘Severe’ or higher category for a continuous 
period of twenty- four consecutive hours, as notified by the Central 
Pollution Control Board or the concerned State Pollution Control Board. 
(2) The quorum for a meeting of the Commission shall be one -half
of the total number of Members. 
(3) If any Member remains absent for more than two consecutive
meetings without furnishing written reasons to the satisfaction of the 
Chairperson, such absence shall be recorded in the minutes, and the 
matter may be referred by the Chairperson to the Central Government 
for such action as may be deemed appropriate. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder, the Commission shall have the power to lay do wn, by 
regulations, its own procedure. 
(5) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be
authenticated by the Member -Secretary or any other officer of the 
Commission duly authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf. 
(6) The Commission may, by general or special order, subject to
such condit ions and limitations, if any, as may be specified therein, 
delegate to the Chairperson, full-time Member, the Member-Secretary or 
any Sub- Committee constituted under section 11, such of its powers 
under this Act (except the power to make regulations under section 26) 
as it may deem necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and 
improving the quality of the air in the National Capital Region and 
adjoining areas.” 
Substitution of 
new Section for 
section 10. 
Meetings and 
procedure of the 
Commission. 
40 
45 
50 
7. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(i) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:— 
“(5A) Every Sub -Committee constituted under this section 
shall— 
(a) meet at such intervals as may be determined by the
Commission; and 
(b) place its minutes and recommendations before the
Commission at its next meeting for consideration.” 
(ii) for sub-s ections (7), (8) and (9), the following sub-s ections
shall be
 substituted, namely:—
“(7) T
he Commission shall, for the efficient discharge of 
its functions, create such number of posts in Groups ‘A’, ‘B’ 
and ‘C’, as existing under the Central Government, as it may 
consider necessary. 
Amendment of 
section 11. 

6 
(8) The regular posts so created under sub -section (7)
shall be filled on deputation basis from amongst officers of the 
Central Government, State Governments or Union territory 
Administrations possessing such qualifications and experience 
as may be prescribed. 
(9) The short-term or project-based posts may be created
and filled on contractual basis by the Commission for such 
period and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed 
in its regulations.” 
( iii) after sub -section (9), the following sub- sections shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“(10) The Commission may, for the purpose of providing 
technical, research-based or field -level inputs in specific areas 
relating to its mandate, engage field experts, consultants or 
domain specialists, including field officers  
stationed in 
different regions of the country for on -site inspections, fact -
finding and coordination with State Commissions and local 
authorities, for a period not exceeding one year, which may be 
extended for a further period on such terms and conditions  as 
may be prescribed in its regulations. 
(11) The Commission may, for the effective implementation
of its programmes and for undertaking studies, outreach, 
awareness or capacity -building activities, collaborate or enter into 
arrangements with non- governmental organisations, civil society 
groups, research institutions or professional associations working 
in the field of air quality management, environment protection, or 
sustainable development. 
(12) The officers, experts and other staff engaged or
appointed under this section shall discharge their duties and 
functions under the general superintendence and control of the 
Chairperson. 
(13) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of
the officers, experts and other staff appointed or engaged 
under this section shall be such as may be prescribed.”  
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Insertion of 
new section 
11A. 
Establishment 
of Directorate. 
8. In Chapter II, after section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“11A. (1) The Commission may, by regulations, establish a 
Technical and Enforcement Directorate and such other Directorates 
or Divisions as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its 
functions under this Act. 
(2) The Directorate shall consist of such number of officers,
technical experts, scientists and enforcement personnel as the 
Commission may determine, and may include officers on deputa tion 
from the Central Government, the Central Pollution Control Board, 
the State Pollution Control Boards, or other scientific or technical 
institutions. 
(3) The Directorate shall—
(a) undertake inspection, monitoring and verification of
compliance with directions, standards or measures issued under 
this Act; 
(b) assist the Commission in investigation and in the
collection of evidence for the imposition of penalties or 
environmental compensation; 
35 
40 
45 
50 

7 
1
4 of 1981. 
5 
1
0 
15 
(c) prepare technical and scientific assessments, emission
inventories and enforcement reports; and 
(d) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it  by
t
he Commission. 
(4) The Director -General or Head of the Directorate shall b e
appointed by the Commission in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Commission may, by general or special order, authorise
any officer of the Directorate to exercise such powers of entry, 
inspection, search, sampling or seizure as are exercisable by an officer of 
the Central Pollution Control Board under the 
Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, within the National Capital Region and 
adjoining areas, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the 
order: 
Provided that the exercise of powers under this sub- section shall be 
without prejudice to the powers and functions of the Central Pollution 
Control Board or the State Pollution Control Boards under the said Act.” 
20 
2
5 
30 
3
5 
4
0 
4
5 
50 
9. In section 12 of the principal Act,—
(i) i n sub -section (2), for clause (xi), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:— 
“(xi) issue directions in writing to any person, officer, or authority, 
and such person, officer, or authority shall be bound to comply with 
such directions within th e period specified by the Commission and to 
furnish a report of such compliance in such form as may be prescribed;” 
Explanation.— For avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
the power to issue directions under this section includes the power to 
direct—  
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry,
operation or process; or 
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water
or any other service. 
(ii) in sub-section (2), after clause (xi),  the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“(xii) where any person, body, or authority fails to comply with a 
lawful direction or order of the Commission, the Commission may, after 
giving such person, body, or authority an opportunity of being heard, 
impose such civil penalty as may be prescribed; 
(xiii) take cognizance, either suo motu or on a reference made by
the Central Government, any State Government or any statutory 
authority, private entity, social organisation or individual of matters 
involving substantial questions of environmental importance or systemic 
failures in the implementation of laws, policies or directions  relating to 
air quality management in the National Capital Region and adjoining 
areas, and take such measures or issue such directions as may be 
necessary to ensure compliance and accountability: 
Provided that for the purpose of inquiry into such matters,  the 
Commission shall have the powers of a civil court while trying a suit 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pers
on
a
nd examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document,
record or report; 
Amendment of 
section 12. 

8 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from an y
o
ffice; and 
(e) issuing such interim or final directions as may be
necessary to prevent,  control or abate air pollution or to secure 
compliance with the provisions of this Act or any order made 
thereunder. 
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that nothing in this clause shall be construed as 
empowering the Commission to entertain or adjudicate individual 
complaints or grievances until it has a larger public impact. 
(xiv) e very order or direction issued by the Commission under
clause (xiii) shall be deemed to be a decree of a civil court and shall be 
executable as such , and any wilful disobedience thereof shall be 
punishable in the manner provided under section 14 of this Act; 
(xv) maintain and publish, in such form and at such intervals as
may be specified by regulations, data and information relating to air 
quality, directions issued and the status of compliance by the concerned 
authorities, and update such information on a monthly basis; 
(xvi) prepare and notify, within such period as may be prescribed, a
five-year and ten -year Clean Air Action Target Plan for the National 
Capital Region and adjoining areas, setting time -bound quantitative 
targets for the reduction of particulate matter, PM₂.₅ and PM₁₀, and other 
key air pollutants, aligned with the National Ambient Air Quality 
Standards or such standards as may be prescribed, and specifying the 
roles, responsibilities and targets of the Governments of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi and  the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan 
and Uttar Pradesh and other concerned authorities for achieving the 
same; 
(xvii) prepare an Annual Clean Air Implementation Plan consistent
with the targets specified in the Clean Air Action Target Plans, 
identifying priority sectors and geographical areas, specific measures to 
be undertaken by each concerned authority, the estimated expenditure 
therefor, and the timelines for completion, and monitor and review its 
implementation.” 
(iii) for sub-s ection (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:— 
“(5) In discharge of its functions, the Commission shall act
independently and may, for purposes of policy coordination, consult the 
Central Government, and no executive direction inconsistent with the 
prov
isions or objectives of this Act shall be binding on the 
Commission.” 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Substitution of 
new Section for 
section 14. 
P
enalty for 
contravention 
of provisions of 
Act, rules, 
orders or 
directions. 
10. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“14. (1) Any person, body corporate or authority who contravenes 
any provision of this Act, or any rule, regulation, order or direction made 
or issued thereunder, shall be liable to— 
(a) in the case of a minor contravention, a penalty which ma y
e
xtend to fifty lakh rupees, and where such contravention is a 
continuing one, to an additional penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees for every day during which such contravention 
continues; 
(b) in the case of a major contravention likely to cause
serious deterioration of air quality, a penalty which may extend to 
45 
50 

9 
5 
10 
15 
five crore rupees, and where such contravention is a continuing 
one, to an additional penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees 
for every day during which such contravention continues, or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or both. 
(2) Where a local authority, department of Government or
statutory body fails to comply with any lawful direction or order of t he 
Commission, the Head of such authority or department shall be 
personally liable for such failure, unless he proves that the contravention 
occurred without his knowledge or that he had exercised due diligence to 
prevent such contravention. 
(3) The Commission may, by regulations, specify the classificati on
of
 violations as minor or major having regard to their nature, extent and 
impact on air quality, and may adjudicate such violations and impose 
penalties after giving the person body corporate or authorit y concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(4) The Commission shall maintain and publish, in such form an d
m
anner as may be prescribed, a record of all orders imposing penalties 
and the status of compliance thereof.” 
20 
2
5 
3
0 
3
5 
4
0 
4
5 
11. In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words “Grants by Central
Government”, the words “Funding and Financial Autonomy of the 
Commission” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub -section (2), the following sub- section shall be
substituted, namely:— 
“(2) In addition to grants made under sub- section (1), there 
shall be constituted a non- lapsable fund to be called the Clean Air 
Fund, which shall be administered by the Commission in such 
manner as may be prescribed.” 
(iii) after sub -section (2), the followin g sub -sections shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“(3) The Fund shall consist of— 
(a) sums realised by way of environmental
compensation, penalties or fees under this Act; 
(b) grants, loans, donations or contributions made b y
t
he Central Government, any State Government, or any other 
body or person; and 
(c) funds received from research institutions or public –
private partnerships, in accordance with such rules as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) The Fund shall be applied to—
(a) supporting projects, programmes and activities  fo
r
i
mprovement of air quality, including awareness, capacity-
building and research; and 
(b) providing grants or assistance to State
Governments, local bodies and other implementing agencies 
for carrying out time -bound measures for pollution- control 
and air-quality management.” 
Amendment of 
section 16. 
50 
12. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “Accounts and audit”,
the words “Accounts, audit and transparency” shall be substituted; 
(b) for sub -sections (2), (3) and (4), the following sub- sections
shall be substituted, namely:— 
Amendment of 
section 17. 

10 
“(2) The accounts of the Commission, including the Fund, 
shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as maybe specified by him. 
(3) The audit report, together with the certified accounts,
shall be forwarded to the Central  Government, which shall cause 
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
(4) The Commission shall, within six months after the close
of every financial year, publish an annual financial and 
performance report indicating the receipts, disbursemen ts and 
outcomes achieved through the utilisation of funds under this Act, 
and make such report available in the public domain.” 
5 
10 
Omission of 
section 20. 
13. Section 20 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Amendment of 
section 25. 
14. In section 25 of the principal Act, for sub -section (2), the following sub -
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) the manner of appointment of full -time Members,
independent Members and the Member- Secretary under sub -
section (2) of section 4; 
(b) the procedure for inquiry, and the terms and conditions of
suspension or removal of the Chairperson, under sub-section (4) of 
section 5; 
(c) the manner of removal of a Member under sub- section (6)
of section 5; 
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms
and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members under 
sub-section (1) of section 8; 
(e) the allow ance payable to the members, other than ex
officio members of the Sub- Committees, under sub- section (6) of 
section 11;  
(f) the appointment of officers and other staff under sub -
section (8) of section 11; 
(g) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the
officers, experts and other staff under sub- section (13) of section 
11; 
(h) the manner and terms and conditions of appointment of
the Director -General or Head of the Technical and Enforcement 
Directorate under sub-section (4) of section 11A; 
(i) the manner of taking samples under clause (a) and the
form of notice under sub- clause (i) of clause (c), of sub-section (4) 
of section 12; 
(j) the form and manner in which compliance reports shall be
furnished under clause (xi) of sub-section (2) of section 12; 
(k) civil penalty to be imposed under clause (xii)  of sub -
section (2) of section 12; 
(l) the period within which Clean Air Action Target  Plans be
prepared and notified under clause (xvi)  of sub- section (2) of 
section 12; 
(m) the form and manner of record of all orders imposing
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

11 
5 
1
0 
penalties and the status of compliance thereof under sub -section 
(4) of section 14;
(n) the rate at which, and the manner in which, the
environmental compensation shall be imposed and collected under 
section 15; 
(o) the sources of credit, administration and operation of the
Clean Air Fund, under section 16; 
(p) the form in which the annual s tatement of accounts shall
be prepared under sub-section (1) of section 17; and 
(q) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed .”
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
15. In section 26 of the principal Act, for sub -sections (1) and (2), the following
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, the Commission may, by notification in the Official Gazett e, 
make regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) I n particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:— 
(a) the procedure to be followed by the Commission under
sub-section (4) of section 10; 
(b) the conditions and limitations subject to which power
may be delegated by the Commission under sub- section (6) of 
section 10; 
(c) the members of each Sub -Committee under sub- sections
(2), (3) and (4) of section 11; 
(d) period and terms and conditions of filling up short -term
or project-based posts on contractual basis under sub -section (9) of 
section 11; 
(e) establishment of a Technical and Enforcement Directorate
and other Directorates or Divisions under sub-section (1) of section 
11A; 
(f) form of maintenance of data and information relating t
o
a
ir quality, directions issued and the status of compliance by the 
concerned authorities and intervals at which it is to be published, 
under clause (xiv) of sub-section (2) of section 12; 
(g) the for m and the manner of furnishing annual report
under section 13; 
(h) the classification of violations as minor or major under
sub-section (3) of section 14; 
(i) any other matter which has to be, or may be, specified b y
r
egulations.” 
Amendment of 
section 26. 

12 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Commission for Air Quality Management in the National Capital Region 
and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 was enacted to provide an institutional framework for 
coordinated action on air pollution in the National Capital Region (NCR). However, 
recurring episodes of severe air pollution and persistent enforcement gaps have 
demonstrated the need to strengthen the Commission’s autonomy, institutional 
capacity and powers. 
It has therefore become necessary to amend the Act to— 
(a) reconstitute the Commission as an autonomous statutory body with a
transparent and high-level selection mechanism; 
(b) include full-time domain experts, representatives of concerned States,
independent members and Members of Parliament from Delhi/NCR to improve 
institutional coordination; 
(c) establish a Technical and Enforcement Directorate with powers of
inspection, monitoring and compliance verification; 
(d) provide enhanced powers to issue binding directions and impose civi
l
pe
nalty; 
(e) mandate preparation of long- term Clean Air Action Target Plans and
annual implementation plans with measurable pollution-reduction targets; and 
(f) ensure financial autonomy through a non- lapsable Clean Air Fund and
statutory grants, along  with greater transparency in publication of data, 
compliance status and fund utilisation. 
The amendments are intended to create a more effective, accountable and 
scientifically grounded mechanism to prevent, control and abate air pollution in Delhi 
NCR a nd adjoining areas, thereby safeguarding public health and environmental 
quality. 
Hence, this Bill. 
SWATI MALIWAL. 

13 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Commission shall create such number of 
posts in Groups ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ as it may consider necessary and for the salaries, 
allowances and conditions of service of the officers, experts and other staff so 
appointed. It also provides for engagement of technical, research -based or field-level 
inputs in specific areas relating to its mandate, engage field experts, consultants or 
domain specialists, including field officers stationed in different regions of the 
country for on-site inspections, fact- finding and coordination with State 
Commissions and local authorities. Clause 8 provides for establishment of a 
Technical and Enforcement Directorate and for required number of officers, technical 
experts, scientists and enforcement personnel. Clause 11 provides for constitution of 
non-lapsable Clean Air Fund to be administered by the Commission which shall 
consist of grants, loans, donations or contributions made by the Central Government, 
any State Government, or any other body or person.  
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of recurring and 
non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is difficult, at 
this juncture, to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 

14 
ANNEXURE 
THE COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT IN NATIONAL 
CAPITAL REGION AND ADJOINING AREAS ACT, 2021 
(No. 29 of 2021) 
*    *              *       *             * 
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
body to be known as the Commission for Air Quality Management in National
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to
perform the functions assigned to, that Commission under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following Members, namely:—
(a) a full- time Chairperson having experience of not less than fifteen
years in the field of environment protection and pollution control or having
administrative experience of not less than twenty-five years; 
(b) a representative of the Secretary to the Government of India in the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, who shall be an officer 
not below the rank of Joint Secretary, ex-officio;  
(c) five ex-officio Members who are either Chief Secretaries, or
Secretaries in-charge of the department dealing with environment protection in 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh; 
(d) one full -time Member who is or has been a Joint Secretary to the
Government of India; 
(e) three full- time independent technical Members to be appointed from
amongst persons having specific knowledge and experience in matters relating 
to air pollution; 
(f) one technical Member from the Central Pollution Control Board, ex-
officio; 
(g) one technical Member to be nominated by the Indian Space Research
Organisation, ex-officio; 
(h) three Members from non -Governmental organisations having
experience in matters concerning combating of air pollution; 
(i) one representative of the National Institution for Transforming India,
not below the rank of Joint Secretary or Adviser, ex-officio; 
(j) one officer in the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to
be appointed by the Central Government as a full -time Member -Secretary of 
the Commission; 
(k) three members, being stakeholders from such sectors as agriculture,
industry, transport or construction. 
*    *            *       *             * 
Constitution 
of 
Commission. 
3. 
Appointment 
of 
Chairperson, 
Members and 
Member-
Secretary. 
4. (1) The full -time Chairperson and full -time Members, other than ex-officio
Members, of the Commission shall be appointed by the Central Government:
Provided that every appointment under this sub- section shall, subject to the 
provisions of second proviso, be made on the recommendations of a Selection 
Committee consisting of— 
(a) Minister in-c harge of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate
 Change in the Government of India— Chairperson; 
(b) Minister in-charge  of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in the
Government
 of India— member; 

15 
(c) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in
the G
overnment of India— member; 
(d) Minister
 in-c harge of the Ministry of Science and Technology  in
the G
overnment of India— member; 
(e) Cabinet Secretary–member:
Provided further that in case where the Central Government appoints a
serving officer as the Chairperson under clause ( a) of sub-section (2) of section 
3, or the full -time Member under clause ( d) thereof, then, no recommendation 
of the Selection Committee shall be required. 
(2) No appointment of the Chairperson or a Member shall be invalid merely by
reason of any vacancy of any member in the Selection Committee referred to in sub-
section (1).
(3) The appointment of the Member -Secretary of the Commission shall be made by
the Central Government in such manner, subject to such terms and conditions, as
may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Chairperson or a Member, other than an ex officio Member, may, by notice
in writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office. 
(2) The Central Government may remove the Chairperson or any Member, other
than an ex-officio Member, from his office, in such manner as may be prescribed, if
such person—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent;
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the
duties of his office; 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest; 
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions; or 
(f) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude: 
Provided that no such Member shall be so removed, unless he has been 
given an opportunity of being heard. 
Resignation 
and removal 
of 
Chairperson 
and Members. 
    *    *            *       *               * 
10. (1) The Commission shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may  think
fit.
(2) Subject
 to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the
Commission shall
 have the power to lay down by regulations its own procedure.
(3) All orders
 and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the
Member-Secretary  or any other officer o f the Commission duly authorised by the
Chairperson in this behalf.
(4) The
 Commission may, by general or special order, subject to such conditions
a
nd limitations, if any, as may be specified therein,  delegate to the Chairperson,  full-
time Member, Member-S ecretary  or any Sub -Committee  constituted under
s
ection 11, such of its powers under this Act (except the power to make r egulations
under section 25), as it may deem necessary or expedient for the purpose  of
protecting and improving the quality of the air in the National Capital R egion and
a
djoining areas.
Procedure to 
be regulated 
by 
Commission. 

16 
Sub-
Committees 
and other 
staff of 
Commission. 
11. * *             *      *               * 
(7) The Central Government,  in consultation with the Commission, shall determine
the nature
 and  the categories of officers and other staff required to assist the
Commission in the
 discharge of its function and provide the Commission with
such
 officers and employees as it may deem fit.
(8) The
 officers and other staff of the Commission shall discharge their duties and
functions
 under the general superintendence of the Chairperson.
(9) The salaries,
 allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff
appointed
 under sub-section (7) shall be such as may be prescribed.
Powers and 
functions of 
Commission. 
12. (1) * *                *       *              * 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of sub- section (1), the
Commission shall, for the purposes of sub- section (1), have the following powers to
perform its duties, including taking measures to abate air pollution and to regulate or
prohibit activities that are likely to cause or increase air pollution in the National
Capital Region and adjoining areas, namely:—
(i) co-ordination of actions by the Governments of the National
Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and 
Uttar Pradesh, officers and other authorities under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder or under any other law for the time being in force, which is relatable 
to the objects of this Act; 
(ii) planning and execution of a programme for the region for prevention,
control and abatement of air pollution; 
(iii) laying down parameters for the quality of air in its various aspects;
(iv) laying down parameters for emission or discharge of environmental
pollutants from various sources whatsoever that have implications on air quality 
in the region: 
Provided that different parameters for emission or discharge may be laid 
down under this clause from different sources having regard to the quality or 
composition of the emission or discharge of environmental pollutants from such 
sources that have implications on air quality in the region; 
(v) restriction of areas in which any industries, operations or processes or
class of industries, operations or processes, that have implications on air quality 
in the region, shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to certain 
safeguards; 
(vi) carrying out and requiring investigations and research re lating to
problems of environmental pollution that have implications on air quality in the 
region; 
(vii) inspection of any premises, plant, equipment, machinery,
manufacturing or other processes, materials or substances and giving, by order, 
of such direct ions to such authorities, officers or persons as it may consider 
necessary to take steps for the prevention, control and abatement of air 
pollution in the region; 
(viii) collection and dissemination of information in respect of matters
relating to air pollution in the region; 
(ix) preparation of manuals or codes or guidelines relating to the
prevention, control and abatement of air pollution in the region; 
(x) appoint officers, with prior approval of the Central Government, with
such designations, as it thinks fit, for the purposes of this Act and may entrust 
to them such of the powers and functions under this Act or for the purposes of 
achieving the objects of this Act, as it may deem fit; 
(xi) issue directions in writing to any person, officer or any autho rity and

17 
such person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
Explanation.—For avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to 
issue directions under this section includes the power to direct— 
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation
or process; or 
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water or
any other service. 
(3) * *              *       *             * 
(4) * *              *       *             * 
(5) In discharge of its functions and exercising of its authority, the Commission and
the Sub- Committees mentioned in section 11 shall be bound by such general or
specific directions of the Central Government, as may be issued from time to time.
(6) * *              *       *           * 
*             *     *          *         * 
14. (1) Any non -compliance or contravention of any provisions of this Act, rules made
thereunder or any order or direction issued by the Commission, shall be an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to five years or with
fine which may extend up to one crore rupees or with both:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any farmer 
for causing air pollution by stubble burning or mismanagement of agricultural 
residue. 
(2) N otwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2
of 1974), the offence under this Act shall be non- cognizable and triable by th e
Jurisdictional Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, who shall not take cognizance of
the offence except upon a complaint made by the Commission or any officer
authorised by the Commission in this behalf.
(3) W here any offence under this Act has been  committed by a company, every
person who, at the time when the offence was committed, was directly in -charge of,
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company,
as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the 
offence was committed with out his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(4) N otwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (3), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence  has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
 E xplanation .—For the purposes of sub-sections (3) and (4),— 
(a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; 
and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
(5) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any Department of the
Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Penalty for 
contravention 
of provisions 
of Act, rules, 
order or 
direction. 

18 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of 
the Department liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence t o 
prevent the commission of such offence. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in su b-section (5), where an offence under  
this Act has been committed by a Department of Government and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to  
any neglect on th e part of, any officer, other than the Head of the Department, such  
officer shall also b e deemed to be guilty of that offence an d shall be liab le to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(7) For the purpose of this section  and the procedure to be followed thereun der, the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall apply. 
    *    *            *       *               * 
Grants by 
Central 
Government. 
16. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as
the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) T he Com mission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the
functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of
the grants referred to in sub-section (1).
Accounts and 
audit. 17. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of
India.
(2) T he accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) T he Comptroller and Auditor- General of India and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall
have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India generally has in connection with the audit
of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission.
(4) T he accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with
the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to t he Central Government by
the Commission and the Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid,
as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
  *    *            *       *               * 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to issue 
direction. 
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, but
subject to the provision of this Act, the Central Government may issue in writing
such direction, as it deems fit, to the Commission or any person, officer or authority
authorised by the Commission, and the Commission, person, or authority, as the case
may be, shall be bound to comply with such direction.
  *    *            *       *               * 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules. 
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) I n particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the other Associate Members under clause (h) of sub- section (3) of
section 3; 

19 
(b) the manner of removal of Chairperson or a Member under sub -section
(2) of section 5;
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (1) of 
section 8; 
(d) the allowance payable to the members, other than ex-officio members 
of the Sub-Committees, under sub-section (6) of section 11; 
(e) the a ppointment o f of ficers a nd other s taff u nder sub -section (7) of 
section 11; 
(f) the salaries, allowances and conditions of servi ce of th e officers and 
other staff under sub-section (9) of section 11; 
(g) the manner of t aking samples unde r clause (a) and the form of notice 
under sub-clause (i) of clause (c), of sub-section (4) of section 12; 
(h) the rate a t w hich, a nd t he m anner i n w hich, t he environmental 
compensation shall be imposed and collected under section 15; 
(i) the form in which annual statement o f accounts shall be prepared under 
sub-section (1) of section 17; 
(j) a ny other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirt y
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
26. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the
Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification, make regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) I n particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) t he procedure to be followed by the Commission under sub-section
(2) of section 10;
(b) the conditions and limitations subject to which power may be
delegated by the Commission under sub-section (4) of section 10; 
(c) t he members of each Sub -Committee under sub- sections (2), (3) and
(4) of section 11;
(d) t he form and the manner of furnishing annual report under section 13;
(e) a ny other matter which has to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
(3) Every regulation made by the Commission under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made,  before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both
Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that regulation.
Power of 
Commission 
to make 
regulations. 
*    *              *       *         *

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Commission for Air Quality Management in the National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 
___________ 
(Ms. Swati Maliwal, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–071– 10.02.2026. 