AS INTRODUCED IN THE Rasy 5 छा

Bill No. XIV of 2001
—_—_——-

THE VICTIMS OF NATURAL CALAMITIES (REHABILITATION AND
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE) BILL, 2001

A
BILL

to provide for the rehabilitation and financial assistance to the victims of natural calami-
ties such as floods, droughts, cyclones, hailstorms and earthquakes and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Natural Calamities (Rehabilitation and
Financial Assistance) Act, 2001.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner appointed under Section 9;
(b) “Government” means the Central Government;

10 (c) “natural calamity” includes drought, flood, cyclone, hailstorm, landslide,
earthquake or any such eventuality caused by nature;

Short title,

extent and

commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Financial
assistance in
case of death,

Financial
relief and

medical aid in
case of injury.

Financial
assistance for
damage to
crops,
Provision of
housing in
case of
destruction of
house and
other
immovable
properties
Financial
assistance for
loss of ॥४८-
stock.

Job for the
dependent of
person killed
in natural
calamity

Commissioner
to settle
claims and
disburse
financial
assistance.

Savings

Power to
remove
difficulties,

Power to make
rules.

2
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(e) “victim” means any person who is affected bodily or whose property, live-
stock, crop, orchard, field or machine and tools have been affected or damaged by any
natural calamity.

3. Ifany person loses his life due to any natural calamity, the Government shall, on an
application made in the prescribed from by his surviving next of kin, pay a minimum sum of
rupees one lakh as financial assistance to such next of kin of the victim.

4. (1) If any person is inujured due to any natural calamity, the Government shall
give him such financial relief as may be prescribed according to the nature of injury
received by him.

(2) In addition to the financial relief referred to in sub-section (1) the victim shall
also receive adequate medical aid from the Government for such period as may be prescribed.

5, Every person whose standing crops are demaged due to any natural calamity shall,
onan application made in the prescribed form, be given adequate financial assistance by the
Government in proportion to the loss caused to the crop by the natural calamity.

6. (/) The Government shall provide to every family, whose House has been destroyed
by natural calamity, a dwelling house preferably at the same place.

(2) if damage has been caused by natural calamity to cultivable or other land of any
person the Government shall provide alternative land site to such person within a reasonable
distance from his residence.

7. Every person losing his livestock due to natural calamity shall, on an application
made on the prescribed form, be paid adequate financial assistance by the Government.

8. The Government or the Government of a State or Union Territory Administration,
in whose territorial jurisdiction any person loses his life due to a natural calamity, shall
provide a suitable job to one of the eligible dependents of the persons killed in the natural
calamity.

9. The Government shall, as soon as may be, appoint a Commissioner with such other
staff as may be necessary for settling the claims and disbursing the financial assistance to
the victims of natural calamity under this Act:

Provided that the financial assistance shall be disbursed, as soon as may be, but not
later than three months of the occurrence of the natural calamity.

10. The provisions of this Act shall be addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.

11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Govern-
ment may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of such difficulty.

12. The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carry-
ing out the purposes of this Act.

10

15

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Our country is prone to various natural calamities such as floods, droughts, storms,
hailstorms, cyclones and earthquakes resulting in extensive damage to life and property.
Floods are an annual occurrence in Assam, Bihar, U.P., Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal,
Tripura and other parts of the country. Droughts are very common and frequent throughout
the country. Cyclones cause havoc in the coastal areas whereas storms and hailstorms are
very frequent in hilly areas as well as in the nearby planes. Now the earthquakes have also
started worrying the nation. The havoc caused by the October 1991 earthquake in the hills of
U.P. is fresh in our memory. We have also not forgotten the extensive damage caused by
earthquake in the State of Bihar in the year 1988. As such the natural calamities are some of
the causes of our backwardness. It is so because extensive damage is caused by them to
standing crops, livestocks, cultivable lands, roads, bridges, houses and other property apart
from taking away precious human lives. The nation has to divert its resources towards
rescue and rehabilitation processes and on repairs and construction of the roads, bridges,
fields, buildings etc. which put a heavy burden on the exchequer. Fortunately the entire
nation rises to face such calamities but the loss caused thereby can never be recovered by
any means.

Of course, we cannot stop the occurrence of natural calamities but certainly with our
combined efforts we can minimise the miseries of the victims of such natural calamities by
providing them with timely financial relief and extending the rehabilitation programmes to
them. As usual, the Central Government has to play the main role in this process. At present
there is no law which gives automatic relief to the victims of natural calamities. The States
remain dependent on Centre for providing relief to the victims. Sometimes delay is caused in
rushing relief due to procedural wrangles. Hence it is felt that statutory provision should be
made to help the victims of natural calamities instantly. An attempt has been made in this Bill
to provide for giving instant relief to the victims of natural calamities.

Hence this Bill.

SURESH PACHOURI


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for financial assistance of one lakh to the next of kin of a
person who dies in any natural calamity. Clause 4 provides for medical aid to the victims.
Clause 5 provides for financial assistance for damage to standing crops. Similarly clauses 6
and 7 provide for dwelling units and financial assistance for loss of livestock respectively.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. As the natural calamities cannot be predicted, the recurring expenditure that would be
involved cannot be calculated, at this stage. But it is estimated that an expenditure af rupees
five hundred crores per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty lakhs would also be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As such the matter will relate to details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.


|

RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the rehabilitation and financial assistance to the victims of natural calamities
such as floods, droughts, cyclones, hailstorms and earthquakes and for matters
connected therewith.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—6413RS—15.2,2001.