1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XIX of 2009
THE WORKING WOMEN (PROTECTION, BASIC
FACILITIES AND WELFARE) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of women from discrimination, sexual exploitation and for the
basic facilities like creches, recreational facilities, maternity benefits, hostel and
transport facilities, etc. and for the welfare measures to be taken by the employers
and the State for the women employees working in government establishments, public
sector enterprises including banks and ports, educational institutions including
universities, colleges and schools, factories, mines, plantations, agricultural fields,
orchards and such other places and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Working Women (Protection, Basic Facilities and
Welfare)  Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 31ST JULY, 2009

2
Definitions. 2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “child" includes a still born child;
(c) “employer" means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the control of an
appropriate government, the person or authority appointed by the appropriate
government for the supervision and control of the employees or where no person
or authority is so appointed, the head of the establishment;
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local self-government or
authority, the person appointed by such authority or local self-government for
the supervision and control of the employees or where no person is so appointed
the Chief Executive Officer by whatever name called of the local self-
government or the authority as the case may be;
(iii) in other cases, the person who or the authority which has the ultimate
control over the affairs of the establishment;
(d) "establishment" include an office of the appropriate government, quasi
government or department including telegraph office, post office, telephone exchange
etc., a mine, a plantation, an agricultural field, a hospital or nursing home, a shop or any
business establishment, a brick kiln, construction site, any banking establishment,
any private office or house, any school, college, university or like institution,
establishment for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances and
any other such place where a woman is employed for any work whatsoever;
(e) "factory" means a factory as defined in the Factories Act, 1948;
(f) "industry" means an industry as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) "sexual harassment" includes any unwanted verbal or gestural sexual
advances, sexually explicit and derogatory statements or remarks, avoidable physical
contacts, touching or patting, suggestive remarks, sexually slanted and obscene jokes,
comments about physical appearance, compromising invitations, use or showing
pornographic material, demands for sexual favours, threats, innuendos, physical assault
and molestation of and towards working women by their male superiors, colleagues or
any one who for the time being is in a position to sexually harass the working women;
(i) "working woman" mean a woman who is employed, whether directly or through
any agency or contractor, as the case may be, for wages or similar other considerations
in any establishment, factory or industry.
3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate government to ensure that no discrimination
is done by any establishment on gender basis with its women employees particularly in the
matter of payment of wages which are paid to her male counterpart in such establishment.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every employer shall provide basic childcare and facilities essential for the children
of women workers in his establishment with provision of minimum needs like milk, tiffin,
clothes, toys and trained ayahs to look after children of women working therein.
63 of 1948.
14 of 1947.
Appropriate
government
to ensure
non-
discrimination
and equal
wages for the
working
women.
Childcare
facilities.

3
(2) The appropriate government shall ensure that every employer of an agricultural
field provides mobile childcare facilities for the working women in his establishment:
Provided that two or more of such employers may provide such childcare facilities
collectively for their establishments.
(3) The appropriate government shall open such number of creches at such places as
it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. The appropriate government shall ensure that every employer provides retiring
rooms with facilites like bathroom, latrine, drinking water at the workplace or worksite of
the working women and also provide recreational facilities like radio, television, etc. for
them and their children.
6. The appropriate government alongwith the employer shall provide adequate and
proper security measures for the safety of working women in the establishment, factory or
industry, as the case may be, as well as to and from their places of residence.
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate government to ensure reservation of beds and
proper and adequate maternity facilities for the working women in hospitals and dispensaries
having indoor patient facilities therein.
8. The appropriate government as well as an employer shall provide hostel and
residential facilities both for married and unmarried working women nearest to their
place of work and shall also provide cheap, safe and quick transport facilities for such
working women.
9. The appropriate government shall ensure protection from health hazards particularly
for the women working in factories or industries like beedi, tobacco, stone mines, cashew,
fish processing, salt, silk, construction projects and such other establishments as may be
prescribed.
10. (1) The appropriate government shall maintain a register of working women in
such manner and at such place as may be prescribed;
(2) The appropriate government may require an employer to furnish for the purposes
of this Act, such statistical and other information, in such form and within such period as
may be prescribed.
11. (1) The sexual harassment of any working woman in any manner whatsoever at her
work place is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes provisions of  sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever sexually harasses a working woman in any establishment, factory or industry shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but may
extend to seven years and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
the onus of proving innocence shall be on the accused and the sexually harassed woman
shall have the right to plead evidence in rebuttal.
14. The case of a sexually harassed woman worker at a work place shall be pleaded
either by herself or with her consent by a woman's organization or the trade union of which
she is a member, as the case may be.
15. The trial of an offence under this Act shall be held in camera if the harassed woman
so desires.
Recreational
facilities.
Security
arrangements.
Maternity
facilities.
Hostel and
transport
facilities.
Protection
from health
hazards.
Register of
working
women.
Prohibition
of sexual
harassment of
working
women.
Penalty.
Burden of
proof.
Pleading of
the case.
Trial to be
held in
camera.

4
16. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the working women.
17. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Despite the unabated female foeticides and dwindling population of girls in the country
and the conservative attitude of the society towards women, more and more women are
venturing out of their houses to work to support their families. As a result the number of
working women in government services, factories, industries, commercial establishments,
agriculture, mines, fish processing sector, silk industry and so on so forth is increasing day
by day, but their conditions of employment need amelioration. Various basic and essential
facilities which are supposed to be made available to the working women by the government
and private employers are either absent or not adequate and satisfactory. Unfortunately, in
most of the private sector including agricultural sector, the facilities are rather minimal or
negligible  and the working women are an exploited lot there. The existing labour laws also do
not provide for proper medical, educational, recreational and other facilities for the working
women and their children. As regards security, transport, accommodation and facilities for
some specific problems which are peculiar to women only are concerned, no enactment has
been made so far. In many establishments they are not given equal pay for equal work. This
discrimination has to be stopped.
Of late, cases of sexual harassment of working women are also on the rise. Cases of
sexual harassment of women at the work places occur but more often these are not reported
for fear of social ostracism, family pressure or reprisal in the form of threats and discriminatory
treatment.  Supreme Court of India in the case of Vishakha and Others Vs. State of Rajasthan
and Others has taken a very serious view on the  sexual harassment of working women at
their work places and laid down norms and guidelines to be followed by the employers but
even these guidelines are not being followed in letter and spirit.
Hence it has become necessary to provide adequate welfare measures for the working
women.
Hence this Bill.
SANTOSH  BAGRODIA

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for childcare facilities, whereas clause 5 for recreational
facilities and clause 7 for maternity facilities. Similarly  clause 8 provides for hostel and
transport facilities for the working women. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of Rs. two thousand crores may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of Rs. five thousand crores may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of women from discrimination, sexual exploitation and for the
basic facilities like creches, recreational facilities, maternity benefits, hostel and transport
facilities, etc. and for the welfare measures to be taken by the employers and the State for
the women employees working in government establishments, public sector enterprises
including banks and ports, educational institutions including universities, colleges and
schools, factories, mines, plantations, agricultural fields, orchards and such other
places and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
 ————
(Shri Santosh Bagrodia, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3560RS(S5)—31-07-2009.