AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XIX of 2025 
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:–– 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
59 of 1960. 
10 
2. In the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in section 2,––
(i) for clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely:––
"(a) “animal” means any living creature other than a human
being, including but not limited to all terrestrial, avian, and 
aquatic species;"; 
Amendment of 
section 2. 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) after clause (a), the following new clause  shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(bb) “bestiality” means any act where a human being 
voluntarily commits, attempts to commit, or abets the commission 
of any act with an animal that, by its nature or circumstances, is 
done for the purpose of sexual gratification; 
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, an act shall be deemed 
to be for the purpose of sexual gratification if, by its inherent character 
or the surrounding circumstances, a reasonable person would conclude 
that the offender sought or intended sexual pleasure a nd shall include 
any act involving: 
(i) penetration of an animal’s anus, vagina, or urethra by a 
person’s penis or any other part of the person’s body; 
(ii) penetration of an animal’s anus, vagina, or urethra by 
any object not constituting part of a person's body; and 
(iii) sexual stimulation of an animal’s anus, vagina, penis, 
or urethra by any means;”; 
(iii) after clause (c), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(cc) “community animal” means any animal born in a 
community for which no own ership has claimed ownership, 
excluding wild animals as defined under the Wild Life (Protection) 
Act, 1972;”; 
(iv) after clause (d), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(dd) “gruesome cruelty” means any act or omission that 
causes, or is  likely to cause, extreme physical suffering to an 
animal, resulting in or likely to result in severe bodily harm, 
mutilation, or permanent disability; 
Explanation: Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, 
‘gruesome cruelty’ includes— 
(i) engaging in bestiality as defined under this Act; 
(ii) causing permanent damage to any part of an animal’s 
body or committing an act of mutilation that results in 
permanent or lifelong impairment, rendering the animal 
useless; 
(iii) inflicting any injury likely to result in death or lifelong 
physical deformity to an animal; 
(iv) inciting any animal to fight or bait another animal; 
(v) organizing, keeping, using, or managing any place for 
animal fighting or baiting, or permitting or offering any place 
for such purposes, or receiving money for the admission of a ny 
person to such a place; and 
(vi) promoting or taking part in any shooting match or 
competition in which animals are released from captivity for 
the purpose of being shot;”; 
(ddd) “jurisdictional veterinarian” means a person, employed 
by the State Government within the local jurisdiction of the area, 
who holds a degree from a recognized veterinary college and is 
registered with the State Veterinary Council or the Veterinary 
Council of India; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 of 1972. 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
(dddd) “livestock farm” means any establishment where 
economically important animals are kept for the production of food 
for mankind;”; 
(v) after clause (g), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
(gg) “poultry establishments” means any premises or 
operation where poultry birds, as defined by the Wo rld 
Organization for Animal Health, are bred, hatched, reared, 
housed, or otherwise managed for any commercial purpose, 
including but not limited to meat production, egg production, or 
the supply of breeding stock;”; 
(vi) after clause (h), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(hh) “SPCA” means the Society for Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals, established in every district in the State, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 
(hhh) “State Board” means the State or Union territory 
Animal Welfar e Board constituted by the State or Union 
territory or Central Government, as the case may be, under 
section 10A.” 
  
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
3. In the principal Act, after section 3, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely,–– 
“3A. It shall be the duty of every person having care, charge, or 
custody of an animal to ensure that the animal in his or her care, charge, 
or custody is provided with the following five freedoms: 
 (a) freedom from thirst, hunger and malnutrition; 
 (b) freedom from discomfort due to the environment; 
 (c) freedom from pain, injury and disease; 
 (d) freedom to express normal behavior for its species; and 
 (e) freedom from fear and distress: 
Provided that in the case of a community animal, the local 
government, such as a municipality or a panchayat, shall be 
responsible for ensuring these freedoms in accordance with the 
guidelines or standard operating procedures issued by the State 
Government or by the Board.” 
 Insertion of 
new section 3A. 
 
Five free doms 
of animals. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
4. In the principal Act, in section 5, in sub-section (1) –– 
(i) for clause (ba), the following shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(ba) four persons to represent respectively the Ministries 
of the Central Government dealing with Home Affairs, 
Education, Urban Development and Health and Family 
Welfare, to be appointed by the Central Government;”;  
(ii) after clause (bc), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely,–– 
“(bd) one person each from the animal science division of 
the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, and the 
Veterinary Council of India, to be nominated by their 
respective organisations, in the prescribed manner;”; 
(iii)  for clause (c), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment  of 
section 5. 

4 
 
“(c) two veterinarians with diploma or degree in animal 
welfare and working in the said field, to be nominated by the 
Central Government, in the prescribed manner;”; 
(iv) in clause (d) for the words “two persons”, the words “one 
person” shall be substituted; 
(v) for clause (e), the following shall be substituted, namely:—  
“(e) three persons, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in the prescribed manner, from such State 
Boards which in the opinion of Board are actively involved in 
the work of resolving the difficulties at the local level and 
have done an extraordinary work in the field of animal 
welfare;”;  
(vi) in clause (f) for the words “one person”, the words 
“three persons” shall be substituted; and 
(vii) clause (g) shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
Amendment of 
section 7. 
 5.  In the  principal Act,  in section 7, in sub -section (2), for the words 
“Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in 
this behalf,” , the words ‘Subject to the approval of the Central 
Government,”; shall be substituted;    
  
Insertion of 
new section 7A. 
 
 
Committees of 
the Board. 
 6. In the principal Act, after section 7, the following new section shall 
be inserted, namely:—    
“7A.  (1) The Board may constitute as many Committees or 
sub-Committees including an Executive Committee, as it may 
think fit, for discharging its duties to adv ise the Board on  such 
matters as may be referred to them by the Board,  from time to 
time. 
 (2) A Committee or sub -Committee shall consist of such 
number of Members of the Board, as may be deemed necessary, 
to be nominated thereto by the Chairman of the B oard, in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the regulations. 
Provided that a sub -Committee may also co -opt other 
members, if required, in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the regulations.” 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 8. 
 7. In the principal Act, in section 8, after the word “gifts”, the words 
“processing fees, penalties, fines, levy or any other amount directly paid 
to the Board by any person”, shall be inserted. 
 
35 
 
Insertion of 
new section 8A. 
 
 
Annual Report, 
Accounts and 
Audit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. In the principal Act, after section 8, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely:—   
“8A. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and manner and 
at such time of each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual 
report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government, 
which shall cause it to be laid, as soon as may be after they are 
received, before each House of Parliament. 
(2) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the 
balance sheet, in accordance with such general directions as may be 
issued and in such  form and manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annu ally by the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any person appointed 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 

5 
5 
10 
15 
by him on this behalf and any expenditure incurred by him or any 
person so appointed in connection with such audit shall be payable 
by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the 
accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroll er and 
Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books,  accounts, connected vouchers and 
other documents and papers and to inspect the office(s) o f the 
Board. 
(5) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon, duly approved by the 
Board in its Annual General Meeting, shall be forwarded annually to 
the Central Government, who shall cause the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament.” 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
9. In the principal Act, in section 9,—
(i) for clause (h), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(h) to coordinate, cooperate, and supervise the general
working of the SPCA, State Board and local bodies established 
for the purpose of preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to 
the animals or for the protection of animals and birds”; 
(ii) in clause (k), after the words “to impart education”, the words
“and to facilitate capacity building” shall be inserted; 
(iii) after clause (l), the following new clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—  
“(m) to recognize any organization registered in India that is 
working for animal welfare in more than one State and seeking 
financial or other assistance and support from the Central 
Government after following due process as may be prescribed; 
(n) to review the records, annual reports or any other reports
and information su bmitted to the Board by organisations 
working for animal welfare and recognized by the Board under 
clause (m) to section 9, the State Animal Welfare Board and the 
SPCA ; 
(o) to work towards the expeditious implementation of the
Act, rules and regulations m ade thereunder so as to prevent the 
unnecessary pain and suffering of the animals; and 
(p) to facilitate coordination among local bodies, including
police departments and any other public or private authorities, to 
take appropriate and expeditious action for the prevention of 
cruelty to animals.” 
Amendment of 
section 9.  
45 
50 
10. In the principal Act, for section 10, the following shall be substituted.,
namely:—
“10. (1) The Board shall take up, either suo motu  or on being 
informed thereof, all issues arising out of matters related to the 
implementation of the Act, rules and regulations made thereunder, 
with the appropriate authorities, for expeditious action thereon. 
(2) The Board shall have the power of entry and inspection and,
may for the said purpose, authorize in writing in such form and 
Amendment of 
section 10. 
Powers of the 
Board. 

6 
 
manner as may be prescribed, any government official(s) or any 
other person acting on its behalf, to:–– 
(i)  inspect places or premises, when there is sufficient reason 
to believe that an offence under this Act, rules and regulations 
made thereunder has been or is being or is likely to be 
committed; 
(ii) enter at any time considered reasonable by him, such 
places or premises, where animals are kept or sheltered for any 
purpose based on reports of animal cruelty or violation of any of 
the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations framed 
thereunder; and 
(iii) require any person to produce any or all records 
maintained by them, as mandated under this Act or the rules o r 
regulations made thereunder, for inspection; 
and report to the Board their findings as a result of such entry and 
inspection. 
(3) The Board may, as and when require issue necessary 
advisories in respect of any incident of cruelty to mitigate 
unnecessary suffering of animals or where cruelty to animals is 
involved. 
(4) The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the 
Central Government make such regulations, as it may deem fit, for 
the administration of its affairs and for carrying out its functions and 
exercising the powers conferred on it under this Act.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
Insertion of New 
Chapter  IIA. 
 11. After Section 10 of the principal Act, the following new Chapter shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“CHAPTER IIA 
STATE ANIMAL WELFARE BOARD 
25  
 Establishment 
of State Board. 
  10A. (1) Every State Government and Government of a Union 
territory having Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be after 
the commencement of this Act, by notification in the official Gazette, 
establish a State Animal Welfare Board for the State or Union 
territory, as the case may be, with such name as may be specified in 
the notification of the State / Union territory Government, for the 
promotion of animal welfare generally in coordination with the 
Board and for the purpose of protecting animals from being s ubject 
to unnecessary pain or suffering, in particular:’. 
Provided that in the case of a Union territory with no 
Legislative Assembly, the Central Government shall, as soon as may 
be after the commencement of this Act, by notification in the official 
Gazette, establish a Animal Welfare Board for the Union territory 
with such name as may be specified in the notification of the Central 
Government. 
(2) Every State Board shall be a body corporate with the name specified 
by the State or Union territory or Centra l Government, as the case may 
be, in the notification under sub-section (1), having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power, subject to the provision of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property and may by its name sue and be 
sued. 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
Composition of 
the State Animal 
Welfare Board. 
 
 
 
 
 10B. (1) The State Board shall consist of the following persons, 
namely— 
(a) Minister, Animal Husbandry Department of the State or 
50 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
Union territory Government, as the case may be, who shall be 
the Chairman ex-officio; 
(b) one Member of the Legislative Assembly of the State or
Union territory, as the case may be, to be nominated by the 
Speaker of that Assembly from amongst its members – 
Member; 
(c) Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary, Animal
Husbandry Department of the State or Union territ ory 
Government, as the case may be – Member ex-officio; 
(d) Chief Wildlife Warden of the State or Union territory, as
the case may be – Member ex-officio; 
(e) Director, Animal Husbandry Department of the State or
Union territory Government, as the case ma y be, who shall be 
the Member Secretary ex-officio; 
(f) Transport Commissioner of the State or Union territory
Government, as the case may be – Member ex-officio; 
(g) Director-General or Director, Health Department of the
State or Union territory Government, as the case may be – 
Member ex-officio; 
(h) Director Panchayat Department of the State or Union
territory Government, as the case may be – Member ex-officio; 
(i) Director-General of Police of the State or Union territory,
as the case may be, or his representative, so authorized by him, 
in such manner as may be prescribed – Member ex-officio; 
(j) Director, Urban Development Department of the State or
Union territory Government, as the case may be – Member ex-
officio; 
(k) one person each from three SPCAs in the State, to be
nominated by the State Government on rotation basis, in such 
manner as may be prescribed, so as to ensure representation of 
all SPCAs in the State on the State Board – Members;  
(l) one person to represent registered Gaushalas / pinjrapoles
to be nominated by the State Government, in such manner as 
may be prescribed – Member; 
(m) one person from the Gauseva Aayog to be nominated by
the State Go vernment in such manner as may be prescribed – 
Member; 
(n) five eminent persons involved in animal welfare within
the State to be nominated by the State Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed – Member; 
(o) Registrar of the State Veterinary Council – Member ex-
officio; 
(p) one representative of the State Veterinary Doctors’
Association, to be nominated by the State Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed – Member; and 
(q) one representative of the Animal Welfare Board of India,
to be nominated by that Board in such manner as may be 
prescribed – Member. 
(2) The State Board shall be constituted or reconstituted in accordance
with sub-section (1), if already in existence, and in any case, not later

8 
 
than three months after commencement of this Act: 
Provided that any State Board functioning in any State or Union 
territory on the date of commencement of this Act shall continue to 
discharge its functions till the constitution or reconstitution of the State 
Board as per the provisions of this Act. 
(3) The members of the State Board shall serve in an honorary capacity 
and shall not draw any salary from the State Board by virtue of their 
appointment or nomination thereto: 
Provided that the State Board may provide for travel and other 
incidental expenses incurred by the Members for attending meetings of 
the State Board, in accordance with the State Government norms. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Terms of office 
and conditions of 
service of members 
of the State Board. 
  10C. (1) The term of the State Board shall be three years from the date 
of its constitution or reconstitution and the Chairman and other Members 
of the State Board shall hold office till the expiry of the term for which 
the State Board has been so constituted or reconstituted. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),–– 
(a) the term of office of an ex-officio Member shall continue so 
long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is such a Member; 
and 
(b) the term of office of a Member nominated under clause (b), 
clauses (k) to (n) and clauses (p) and (q) of section 10B to represent 
any body shall come to a n end as soon as he ceases to be a member 
of the body in respect of which he was nominated; and 
(3)  Any casual vacancy(ies) arising in the State Board shall be filled up 
as per the provisions of this Section. 
(4) A member nominated to fill up a casual vac ancy shall hold office for 
the remainder of the term of the State Board, from the date of his 
nomination.  
(5) No act done or proceeding taken by the State Board shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or 
defect in the constitution or reconstitution of, the State Board and in 
particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, 
during the period intervening between the expiry of the term for which 
the Board has been constituted or reconstituted and its f urther 
reconstitution, the ex-officio Members of the State Board shall discharge 
all the powers and functions thereof. 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
Removal of 
Member(s) from 
the State Board. 
  10D. The State Government may remove any member of the State Board 
who: 
(a) fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the State Board 
without intimation in writing to the State Board; or 
(b) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent Court; or 
(d) has been convicted and/or sentenced to imprisonment for an 
offence under this Act or any other law pertaining to cruelty to 
animals or an offence involving moral turpitude; or 
(e) has become physically or mentally incapable of performing 
the duties of a Member; or 
 (f) has submitted his or her resignation as a Member of the State 
Board; or 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 

9 
(g) has been found guilty of corruption or misconduct.
5 
10 
10E. (1) Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government 
in this behalf, the State Board may appoint such number of officers and 
other employees as may be deemed necessary for the efficient exercise 
of its powers and the discharge of its functions as assigned under this 
Act. 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions
of service of such officers and other employees shall be such as may be
prescribed by the State Board by regulations framed by it with the
previous approval of the State Government.
Secretary and 
other employees 
of the Board. 
10F. The funds of the State Board shall consist of grants made to it by 
the State Government from time to time, as well as contributions, 
donations, subscriptions, bequests, gifts, fees, levies and other similar 
payments received from any local authority or any other person. 
Fund of the 
State Board. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
10G. The State Board shall perform all or any of the following 
functions, but not limited to the following, namely:–– 
(a) ensure that the provisions of the Act and the rules and
regulations framed thereunder are given widespread publicity to 
create adequate aw areness of animal welfare amongst the general 
public and take all necessary steps for the strict implementation of 
the Act and the rules and regulations framed thereunder in the State;  
(b) provide assistance and guidance for the functioning of the
SPCAs, animal shelters, gaushalas, pinjrapoles , rescue homes, 
sanctuaries and the likes within the State, to ensure implementation 
of the provisions of the Act and the rules and regulations framed 
thereunder; 
(c) exercise such functions as may be delegated to i t by the
Government of the State or Union Territories or by the Central 
Government, as the case may be, for furthering the objectives of this 
Act; 
(d) advise the State Government or any local authority or any
other relevant entity on matters related to animal welfare; 
(e) undertake capacity -building efforts with concerned
departments, institutions and individuals, as required, to strengthen 
the enforcement of this Act and promote best practices in animal 
welfare; 
(f) extend financial assistance and suppo rt to animal welfare
organizations that have obtained recognition from the State board 
after following due process as prescribed by the State Board; and 
(g) any other function(s) as may be assigned to it by the
Government of the State or Union territory o r Central Government, 
as the case may be or by the Animal Welfare Board of India. 
Functions of the 
State Board. 
45 
50 
10H. (1) Every State Board shall prepare, in such form and manner and 
within such time as may be prescribed, an Activity Report incorporating 
therein the activities undertaken by it for the welfare of animals and the 
steps or measures taken by it to implement vari ous provisions of the Act 
and the rules and regulations made thereunder along with an annual 
statement of accounts including the balance sheet, maintained and 
prepared in accordance with such general directions as may be issued  
during the previous financia l year and submit a copy thereof to the 
Board and the State or Union territory Government or the Central 
Government, as the case may be, at the end of the first quarter of the 
next financial year. 
Activity Report 
of the State 
Board. 

10 
 
(2) The State or the Union territory Government, shall cau se the annual 
report under sub-section (1) along with the audited accounts of the State 
Board to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each 
House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or 
where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House: 
Provided that in the case of Union territories without a Legislative 
Assembly, the Central Government, shall cause the annual report along 
with the audited accounts of the State Board of that Union territory to be 
laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of 
Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Power of the 
State Board to 
make 
regulations. 
  10I. The State Board may, subject to previous approval of the State or 
Union territory or Central Government, as the case may be, make such 
regulations as it deems necessary for the financial and administrative 
affairs of the State Board and for the effective discharge of its 
functions.” 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Amendment of 
section 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. In section 11 of the principal Act,––   
(i) in sub-section (1),— 
(a) clauses (l) to (o) shall be omitted;  
(b) for the words “he shall be punishable, in the case of a 
first offence, with fine which shall not be less than ten rupees but 
which may extend to fifty rupees and in the case of a second or 
subsequent offence committed within three years of the previous 
offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees 
but which may extend to one hundred rupees or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with both”, the words “he shall be punishable, in the case of a 
first offence, with fine which shall not be less than two thousand 
rupees per animal but which may extend to five thousand rupees 
per animal and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, 
with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees per 
animal but whic h may extend to twenty thousand rupees per 
animal with imprisonment for the minimum term of six months 
which may be extended to one year, or with both” shall be 
substituted. 
(ii)  clause (b) of sub-section (3), shall be omitted. 
(iii) after sub-section (3), the following new sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“(4) The investigating officer shall report each case 
registered under this Act to the district police headquarters in 
which due records of all such cases shall be maintaine d in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that a copy of such record shall be shared with the 
State Board and the State Board shall forward such record or any 
part thereof to the Board on a request in writing in this regard.” 
(5) Any person found guilty of an offence under this section 
shall be prohibited from owning, keeping, having in possession, 
or working with animals in any capacity for a period of five 
years from the date of conviction: 
Provided that upon conviction, any animals in the 
possession of the offender, not limited to those involved in the 
specific case for which the offender was convicted, shall be 
confiscated and rehabilitated as per the procedure prescribed by 
the Board; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 

11 
5 
Provided also that in case of a second or subsequent 
offence, the prohibition under this sub -section shall extend for 
the lifetime of the offender; 
Provided further that any violation of this prohibition shall 
be punishable with fine of not less than ten thousand rupees, but 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
both.” 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
13. After Section 11 of the principal Act, the following new sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
“11A. (1)  If any person commits an act of gruesome cruelty, as 
defined under section 2, he shall be punishable in the case of  first 
offence with  fine of  fifty thousand rupees, which may extend to  
seventy-five thousand rupees, and in the case of a second or 
subsequent offence, with fine of  one lakh rupees, which may extend  
to one lakh fifty thousand rupees or an amount equivalent to the cost 
of the animal, whichever is higher, as determined by the Judicial 
Magistrate in consultation with the jurisdictional vet erinarian or 
with imprisonment for a term of one year, which may extend up to 
three years or with both: 
 Provided that in the case of first offence, the offender shall be 
prohibited from owning, keeping, or having any animal in his or her 
possession for a period of ten years from the date of conviction and 
in the case of a second or subsequent offence, the prohibition shall 
extend for the lifetime of the offender.”. 
“11B. If any individual or group of individuals or organization 
commits any act with the int ention to harm any animal resulting in 
its death or kills an animal by use of strychnine injection or  in any 
other cruel manner, such individual or group of individuals or 
organization shall be punishable, in the case of first offence, with a  
fine of seventy-five thousand which may extend  to one lakh rupees 
per animal and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, with a 
fine of one lakh fifty thousand rupees which may extend to two lakh 
rupees or an amount equivalent to three times of the cost of th e 
animal, as determined by the Judicial Magistrate in consultation 
with the jurisdictional veterinarian, whichever is higher or with 
imprisonment for a term of three years which may extend  to five 
years or with both.” 
“11C. Where an offence under this Act, has been committed by 
any poultry establishment or  livestock farm, such offence shall be 
deemed to have been committed by the owner or the person in 
charge of the  poultry establishment or livestock farm and shall be 
punishable, in the case of  first o ffence, with  fine equivalent to 
twenty-five per cent of the total market value of all birds or animals 
housed therein  and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, 
with  fine equivalent to forty per  cent of the total market of all birds 
or animals housed therein: 
Provided that the market value shall be determined by the 
Judicial Magistrate in consultation with the jurisdictional veterinary 
officer.” 
Insertion of new 
sections from 11A 
to 11C. 
Penalty for 
gruesome 
cruelty. 
Penalty for 
killing of an 
animal. 
Offence by 
poultry 
establishments 
and livestock 
farms. 
55 
14. In section 12 of the principal Act, for the words “one thousand rupees, or
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years”, the
words “seventy-five thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term of
two years for first offence and in the case of a repeat offender, with fine
of one lakh rupees or with imprisonment for a term of three years or
with both”, shall be substituted.
Amendment of 
section 12. 

12 
 
Amendment of 
section 20. 
 15. In section 20 of the principal Act, — 
(i) after the word “person”, the words “or institution”, shall be 
inserted; and  
(ii) for clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely––    
“(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by the 
Committee under that section; 
such person or institution shall be punishable in the case 
of  first offence, with  fine which shall be up to five times the 
amount of the registration fees as per the ongoing fee structure of 
the Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of 
Experiments on Animals , established under this Act and in the 
case of a repeat offender, with  fine which shall  not be less than 
five times the amount of the registration fees a s per the ongoing 
fee structure of the said  Committee  which may extend,  to ten 
times or with imprisonment for a term which may extend  to two 
years or with both”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Amendment of 
section 26. 
 16. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words “he shall be punishable 
on conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or 
with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with both”, the 
words “he shall be punishable on conviction with fine which may extend 
to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or with both.”, shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
Amendment of 
section 28. 
 
 
 
 
 
 17. In section 28 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that such killing is carried out in a licensed 
slaughterhouse which is in compliance with all applicable laws, 
including but not limited to the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006; 
the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; and the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986, and the rules and regulations made thereunder.” 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 of 2006. 
 
14 of 1981. 
6 of 1974. 
29 of 1986. 
Amendment of 
section 29. 
 18. In section 29 of the principal Act:— 
(i) sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 
(ii) in sub -section (5) for the words “one hundred rupees, or 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months”, 
the words “five thousand rupees, or wi th imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months”, shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 30. 
 19. In section 30 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that if any person is charged with an offence under 
section 11B for the killing an animal and if the body or any part thereof 
is found in their possession, then it shall be presumed that such person 
has committed the offence with which he has been charged unless 
proven otherwise, and the burden of proof shall lie on the accused. 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
Amendment of 
section 31. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20. For section 31 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“31. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023,––  
(a) an offence punishable under sections 11A, 11B and 12 of 
this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable; and 
(b) an offence punishable under clauses (c), (i), (j), and (k) of 
sub-section (1) of section 11, sections 11C and sub-section (1) of 
section 38 of this Act shall be cognizable and  
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 

13 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(2) No person accused of an offence under sections 11A, 11B 
or 12 shall be released  on bail or on their own bond except by an 
order of a Court of competent jurisdiction, and only after the 
Public Prosecutor has been heard and the Court has recorded a 
reasoned order in writing.” 
  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
21. In section 32 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “clause (l) of sub-section 
(1) of section 11 in respect of any such animal as is referred to in 
section 30”, the words “section 11B”, shall be substituted. 
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words “ phooka or doom dev or 
any other operation of the nature referred to in section 12”, the 
words “or any act of gruesome cruelty”, shall be inserted. 
(iii) after sub -section (2), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 “Provided that any animal so seized under this section shall be 
kept in the custody of the local SPCA or recognised animal welfare 
organization, as per the order of the jurisdictional Magistrate in 
accordance with the rules framed under this Act.” 
 Amendment of 
section 32. 
  
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
22. In section 34 of the principal Act,— 
(i) after the words “State Government”, the words “or the 
Animal Welfare Board of India or the State Animal Welfare Board,” 
shall be inserted. 
(ii)  the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that any animal so seized under this section shall  be 
kept in the custody of the local SPCA, as per the order of the 
jurisdictional Magistrate in accordance with the rules made under 
this Act.” 
 Amendment in 
section 34. 
  
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
23. In section 35 of the Principal Act, for sub -section (2) the following shall 
be substituted, namely:— 
“(2) The Magistrate before whom a prosecution for an offence 
against this Act has been instituted shall direct that the animal 
concerned shall be treated and cared for in an infirmary until it is fit 
to perform its usual work or is otherwise fit for discharge, or that it 
be sent to a pinjrapole, or, if the veterinary officer in charge of the 
area in which the animal is found or any other veterinary officer a s 
may be authorised in this behalf by rules made under this Act 
certifies that the animal is incurable or cannot be removed without 
causing further suffering, the Magistrate may order its humane 
euthanasia: 
Provided that a record of such euthanasia shall b e maintained 
by the infirmary which shall be produced as and when required for 
the purpose of investigation or legal proceedings.” 
 Amendment of  
section 35. 
  24. In section 36 of the principal Act, for the words, “three months”, the 
words “twelve months”, shall be substituted. 
 Amendment of 
section 36. 
 45 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
25. In section 38 of the principal Act, — 
(i) in sub-section (2), — 
 (a)  clause (aa) shall be omitted. 
 (b) after clause (i), the following new clause shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“(ia) the process of according recognition  any 
organisation working for animal welfare and seeking 
financial or other assistance and support from the Central 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 38. 

14 
Government, which shall work under the general supervision 
and guidance of the Board.” 
(ii) in sub -section (3), for the words “one hundred rupees or
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months”, 
the words “fifty thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years”, shall be substituted. 
5 
Amendment of 
section 38A. 
Rules and 
regulations to be 
laid before 
Parliament and 
State 
Legislature. 
26. For section 38A of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted,
namely: —
“38A. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government or by 
the Committee constituted under section 15 and every regulation 
made by the Board shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in t he rule 
or regulation as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, the rule or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, h owever, that any such 
modification or annulment, shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 
(2) Every regulation made by the State Board shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before ea ch House of the State 
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Insertion of new 
sections 38 AA 
and 38AAA. 
Power of Central 
Government to 
give directions. 
Power of State 
Government to 
make rules. 
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
27. After section 38A of the principal Act, the following new sections shall
be inserted namely.—
“38AA. The Central Government may, as required from time to 
time, issue general or specific directions to the Board or the State 
Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act, and the Board and 
the State Board shall, while discharging their functions under thi s 
Act, comply with such directions.  
38AAA. (1)  The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where 
such Legislature consists of one House before that House. 
38AAAA. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order 
published in the official Gazette make such provisions not consistent 
with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date of enactment. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.” 
30 
35 
40 
45 

15 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, which was enacted to 
prevent the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals, has served as 
India's primary animal welfare legislation for over six decades. While the Act 
laid the foundation for animal welfare legislation in India, its provisions have 
proven inadequate in addressing contemporary challenges, particularly due to 
nominal penalties, limited institutional framework, and absence of clearly 
defined offences and insufficient mechanisms for implementation and 
accountability. 
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Bill, 2025 seeks to 
address these deficiencies through comprehensiv e reforms aimed at creating a 
modern, robust, and enforceable animal welfare regime. The Bill's primary 
purpose is threefold: first, to provide effective deterrence against animal cruelty 
through substantially enhanced penalties; second, to create strong i nstitutional 
mechanisms for implementation and oversight; and third, to expand the scope of 
protection to address contemporary forms of cruelty while ensuring proper care 
for different categories of animals. The amendments are necessitated by the 
growing i nstances of animal cruelty, the need for institutional support at state 
levels, and the importance of aligning our animal welfare laws with evolving 
jurisprudence and international standards of animal protection. 
The Bill strengthens institutional mechanisms through significant reforms. 
It restructures the Animal Welfare Board of India through amendments to 
Section 5, expanding representation from various Ministries and including 
veterinary experts. New provisions under Section 8A establishes robust financi al 
accountability through proper accounting, auditing, and reporting mechanisms.  
The Board's powers are enhanced under Section 10, including authority for 
inspection and investigation. 
A major institutional reform is the mandatory establishment of State 
Animal Welfare Boards through insertion of a new Chapter IIA in the principal 
Act. These Boards, constituted with broad representation from relevant 
Departments of the State Government and stakeholders, are empowered with 
specific fu nctions including implementation oversight, capacity building, and 
coordination with law enforcement. The Bill provides for their proper funding, 
reporting mechanisms, and regulatory powers. 
The Bill substantially strengthens deterrence through enhanced pe nalties. 
For general acts of cruelty under sub-section (1) of Section 11, the minimum fine 
is increased from ten rupees to one thousand rupees per animal, extending up to 
two thousand five hundred rupees, with imprisonment terms increased to a 
minimum of six months. New provisions under Section 11A introduces penalties 
for gruesome cruelty, including acts of bestiality, mutilation, and animal 
fighting, with fines up to seventy -five thousand rupees and imprisonment up to 
three years. Section 11B specifically  addresses the killing of animals through 
cruel means, prescribing fines up to one lakh rupees per animal and 
imprisonment up to five years. Section 11C introduces specific provisions for 
offences by poultry facilities and livestock farms, with penalties l inked to the 
market value of animals involved. 
The Bill significantly strengthens enforcement mechanisms. It amends 
Section 31 to make several offences cognisable and introduces provisions 
regarding bail. Section 32 and Section 34 are proposed to be amended to provide 
for proper custody of seized animals. Section 35 is modified to ensure proper 
treatment and care of animals during legal proceedings. The limitation period for 
prosecution under Section 36 is extended from three months to twelve months, 
allowing adequate time for investigation and prosecution. 

16 
These comprehensive amendments are essential to modernise India's 
animal welfare law, ensure effective prevention of cruelty, strengthen 
implementation mechanisms, and align the legal framework with conte mporary 
societal values. The Bill creates a robust structure capable of addressing both 
current inadequacies and future challenges in animal welfare.
Hence this Bill. 
    SUDHA MURTY. 

17 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for enhancing the composition of the Animal 
Welfare Board of India in section 5 of the principal Act to make more broad -
based.  Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of as many Committees or 
sub-Committees including a n Executive Committee by the Animal Welfare 
Board of India with such number of Members of the Board nominated thereto by 
the Chairman of the Board and other Members co -opted thereto.  Clause 11 of 
the Bill provides for the establishment of State Animal Wel fare Boards in all 
States and Union territories of the country along with their composition and also 
providing for the travelling and other incidental charges of the Members for 
attending the meetings of the Board.  The said clause also provides that State  
Board shall undertake capacity building measures to ensure proper enforcement 
of the Act and shall extend financial assistance and support to animal welfare 
organisations which obtain recognition therefrom. 
       The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of  non-
recurring and recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.  However, it 
is not possible to estimate the exact recurring and non -recurring expenditure at 
this stage. 

18 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960 
(59 OF 1960) 
Constitution of the 
Board. 
5. 
(1) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely:―
(a) the Inspector-General of Forests, Government of India, ex officio;
(b) the Animal Husbandry Commissioner to the Government of India,
ex officio; 
(ba) two persons to represent respectively the Ministries of the 
Central Government dealing  with home affairs and education, to be 
appointed by the Central Government;  
(bb) one person to represent the Indian Board for Wild Life, to be 
appointed by the Central Government; 
(bc) three persons who, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
are or ha ve been actively engaged in animal welfare work and are 
well-known humanitarians, to be nominated by the Central 
Government; 
(c) one person to represent such association of veterinary practitioners
as in the opinion of the Central Government ought to be re presented on 
the Board, to be elected by that association in the prescribed manner;     
(d) two persons to represent practitioners of modern and indigenous
systems of medicine, to be nominated by the Central Government; 
[(e) one person to represent each of  such two municipal corporations 
as in the opinion of the Central Government ought to be represented on 
the Board, to be elected by each of the said corporations in the prescribed 
manner;] 
(f) one person to represent each of such three organisations active ly
interested in animal welfare as in the opinion of the Central Government 
ought to be represented on the Board, to be  chosen by each of the said 
organisations in the prescribed manner; 
(g) one person to represent each of such three societies dealing with
prevention of cruelty to animals as in the opinion of the Central 
Government ought to be represented on the Board, to be chosen in the 
prescribed manner;     
(h) three persons to be nominated by the Central Government;
(i) six members of Parliament, four to be elected by the House of the
People (Lok Sabha) and two by the Council of States (Rajya Sabha). 
*        *                  *       *          *  
Secretary and other 
employees of the 
Board. 
7. * *    *        *            *  
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this
behalf, the Board may appoint such number of other officers and employees as
may be necessary for the exercise of its powers and the discharge of its
functions and may determine the terms and conditions of service of such
officers and other employees by regulations made by it with the previous
approval of the Central Government
Funds of the Board. 8. The funds of the Board shall consist of grants made to it from time to time by
the Government and of contributions, donations, subscriptions, bequests, gifts
and the like made to it by any local authority or by any other person.

19 
9. The functions of the Board shall be―
(a) to keep the law in force in India for the prevention of cruelty to
animals under constant study and advise the Government on the 
amendments to be undertaken in any such law from time to time;  
(b) to advise the Central Government on the making of rules under this
Act with a view to preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to animals 
generally, and more particularly when they are being transported from one 
place to another or when they are used as performing animals or when 
they are kept in captivity or confinement;  
(c) to advise the Government or any local authority or other person on
improvements in the design of vehicles so as to lessen the burden on 
draught animals;  
(d) to take all such steps as the Board may think fit for 2 [amelioration
of animals] by encouraging, or providing for, the construction of sheds, 
water-troughs and the like and by providing for veterinary assistance to 
animals;  
(e) to advise the Government or any local authority or other person in
the design of slaughter -houses or in the maintenance of slaughter -houses 
or in connection with slaughter of animals so that unnecessary pain or 
suffering, whether physical or mental, is eliminated in the pre -slaughter 
stages as far as possible, and animals are killed, wherever necessary, in as 
humane a manner as possible; 
(f) to take all such steps as the Board may think fit to ensure that
unwanted animals are destroyed by local authorities, whenever it is 
necessary to do so, either instantaneously or after being rendered 
insensible to pain or suffering;  
(g) to encourage, by the grant of financial assistance or otherwise 1
[the formation or establishment of pinjrapoles, rescue homes, animal 
shelters, sanctuaries and the like] where animals and birds may find a 
shelter when they have become old and useless or  when they need 
protection;  
(h) to co -operate with, and co -ordinate the work of, associations or
bodies established for the purpose of preventing unnecessary pain or 
suffering to animals or for the protection of animals and birds;  
(i) to give financial a nd other assistance to animal welfare
organisations functioning in any local area or to encourage the formation 
of animal welfare organisations in any local area which shall work under 
the general supervision and guidance of the Board;  
(j) to advise the G overnment on matters relating to the medical care
and attention which may be provided in animal, hospitals and to give 
financial and other assistance to animal hospitals whenever the Board 
thinks it necessary to do so;  
(k) to impart education in relation to the humane treatment of animals
and to encourage the formation of public opinion against the infliction of 
unnecessary pain or suffering to animals and for the promotion of animal 
welfare by means of lectures, books, posters, cinematographic exhibitions  
and the like;  
(l) to advise the Government on any matter connected with animal
welfare or the prevention of infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on 
animals. 
Functions of the 
Board. 
10. The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government,
make such regulations as it may think fit for the administration of its affairs
and for carrying out its functions.
Power of Board to 
make regulations. 

20 
Treating animals 
cruelly. 
11. (1) If any person―
(a) beats, kicks, over -rides, over -drives, over -loads, tortures or
otherwise treats any animal so as to subject it to unnecessary pain or 
suffering or causes or, being the owner permits, any animal to be so 
treated; or  
(b) 2 [employs in any work or labour or for any purpose any animal
which, by reason of its age or any disease], infirmity, wound, sore or other 
cause, is unfit to be so employed or, being the owner, permits any such 
unfit animal to be so employed;  
(c) wilfully  and unreasonably administers any injurious drug or
injurious substance to any animal or wilfully and unreasonably causes or 
attempts to cause any such drug or substance to be taken by any animal; 
or 
(d) conveys or carries, whether in or upon any vehicle or not, any
animal in such a manner or position as to subject it to unnecessary pain or 
suffering; or  
(e) keeps or confines any animal in any cage or other receptacle which
does not measure sufficiently  in height, length and breadth to permit the 
animal a reasonable opportunity for movement; or  
(f) keeps for an unreasonable time any animal chained or tethered upon
an unreasonably short or unreasonably heavy chain or cord; or 
(g) being the owner, neglec ts to exercise or cause to be exercised
reasonably any dog habitually chained up or kept in close confinement; or 
(h) being the owner of 1 [any animal] fails to provide such animal with
sufficient food, drink or shelter; or 
(i) without reasonable cause, abandons any animal in circumstances
which render it likely that it will suffer pain by reason of starvation or 
thirst; or  
(j) wilfully permits any animal, of which he is the owner, to go at large
in any street while the animal is affected with contagious  or infectious 
disease or, without reasonable excuse permits any diseased or disabled 
animal, of which he is the owner, to die in any street; or  
(k) offers for sale or, without reasonable cause, has in his possession
any animal which is suffering pain by reason of mutilation, starvation, 
thirst, overcrowding or other ill-treatment; or 
[(l) mutilates any animal or kills any animal (including stray dogs) by 
using the method of strychnine injections in the heart or in any other 
unnecessarily cruel manner; or]  
[(m) solely with a view to providing entertainment— 
(i) confines or causes to be confined any animal (including tying
of an animal as a bait in  a tiger or other sanctuary) so as to make it an 
object of prey for any other animal; or 
(ii) incites any animal to fight or bait any other animal; or]
(n) *** organises, keeps, uses or acts in the management of, any place
for animal fighting or for the purpose of baiting any animal or permits or 
offers any place to be so used or receives money for the admission of any 
other person to any place kept or used for any such purposes; or 
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition
wherein animals are released from captivity for the purpose of such 
shooting; 

21 
he shall be punishable, [in the case of a first offence, with fine which 
shall not be less than ten rupees but which may extend to fifty rupees and in 
the case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three years of the 
previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than t wenty-five rupees but 
which may extend to one hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with both]. 
  *       *                    * *                       *  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to―
(a) the dehorning of cattle, or the castration or branding or nose-roping
of any animal, in the prescribed manner; or 
(b) the destruction of stray dogs in lethal chambers or 1 [by such other
methods as may be prescribed]; or 
(c) the extermination or destruction of any animal under the authority
of any law for the time being in force; or 
(d) any matter dealt with in Chapter IV; or
(e) the commission or omission of any act in the course of the
destruction or the preparation for destruction of any animal as food for 
mankind unless such destruction or preparation was accompanied by the 
infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering. 
12. If any person performs upon any cow or other milch animal the operation
called phooka or 2[doom dev or any other operation (including injection of 
any substance) to improve lactation which is injurious to the health of the 
animal] or permits such operation  being performed upon any such animal in 
his possession or under his control, he shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with both, and the animal on which the  operation 
was performed shall be forfeited to the Government. 
Penalty for practising 
phooka or doom dev. 
20. If any person―
(a) contravenes any order made by the Committee under section 19; or
(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by the Committee
under that section; 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, 
and, when the contravention or breach of condition has taken place in any 
institution, the person in ch arge of the institution shall be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be punishable accordingly. 
Penalties. 
26. If any person―
(a) not being registered under this Chapter, exhibits or trains any
performing animal; or 
(b) being registered under this Act, exhibits or trains any performing
animal with respect to which, or in a manner with respect to which, he is 
not registered; or  
(c) exhibits or trains as a performing animal, any animal which is not
to be used for the purpose by reason of a notification issued under clause 
(ii) of section 22; or
(d) obstructs or wilfully delays any person or police officer referred to
in section 25 in the exercise of powers under this Act as to entry and 
inspection; or  
(e) conceals any animal with a view to avoiding such inspection; or
(f) being a person registered under this Act, on being duly required in
pursuance of this Act to produce his certi ficate under this Act, fails 
Offences. 

22 
without reasonable excuse so to do; or    
(g) applies to be registered under this Act when not entitled to be so
registered; 
he shall be punishable on conviction with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or with impr isonment which may extend to three months, or 
with both. 
Saving as respects 
manner of killing 
prescribed by 
religion. 
28. Nothing contained in this Act shall render it an offence to kill any animal in a
manner required by the religion of any community.
Power of court to 
deprive person 
convicted of 
ownership of animal. 
29. (1) If the owner of any animal is found guilty of any offence under this Act,
the court, upon his conviction thereof, may, if it thinks fit, in addition to any
other punishment, make an order that the animal with respect to which the
offence was committed sh all be forfeited to Government and may, further,
make such order as to the disposal of the animal as it thinks fit under the
circumstances.
(2) No order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made unless it is shown by
evidence as to a previous conviction under t his Act or as to the character of
the owner or otherwise as to the treatment of the animal that the animal, it left
with the owner, is likely to be exposed to further cruelty.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section (1), the court
may also order that a person convicted of an offence under this Act shall,
either permanently or during such period as is fixed by the order, be
prohibited from having the custody of any animal of any kind whatsoever, or,
as the court thinks fit, of any a nimal of any kind or species specified in the
order.
(4) No order under sub-section (3) shall be made unless―
(a) it is shown by evidence as to a previous conviction or as to the
character of the said person or otherwise as to the treatment of the animal 
in relation to which he has been convicted that an animal in the custody of 
the said person is likely to be exposed to cruelty; 
(b) it is stated in the complaint upon which the conviction was made
that it is the intention of the complainant upon the conviction of the 
accused to request that an order be made as aforesaid; and 
(c) the offence for which the conviction wa s made was committed in
an area in which under the law for the time being in force a licence is 
necessary for the keeping of any such animal as that in respect of which 
the conviction was made. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time
being in force, any person in respect of whom an order is made under sub -
section (3) shall have no right to the custody of any animal contrary to the
provisions of the order, and if he contravenes the provisions of any order, he
shall be p unishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with both.
(6) Any court which has made an order under sub-section (3) may at any time,
either on its own motion or on applicat ion made to it in this behalf, rescind or
modify such order.
Presumption as to 
guilt in certain cases. 
30. If any person is charged with the offence of killing a goat, cow or its progeny
contrary to the provisions of clause (l) of sub-section (1) of section 11, and it
is proved that such person had in his possession, at the time the offence is
alleged to have been committed, the skin of any such animal as is referred to
in this section with any part of the skin of the head at tached thereto, it shall be
presumed until the contrary is proved that such animal was killed in a cruel
manner.

23 
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898
(5 of 1898), an offence punishable under clause (l), clause (n) or clause (o) of
sub-section (1) of section 11 or under section 12 shall be a cognizable offence
within the meaning of that Code.
Cognizability of 
offences. 
32. (1) If a po lice officer not below the rank of sub -inspector or any person
authorised by the State Government in this behalf has reason to believe that an
offence under clause (l) of sub-section (1) of section 11 in respect of any such
animal as is referred to in sect ion 30 is being, or is about to be, or has been,
committed in any place, or that any person has in his possession the skin of
any such animal with any part of the skin of the head attached thereto, he may
enter and search such place or any place in which he has reason to believe any
such skin to be, and may seize such skin or any article or thing used or
intended to be used in the commission of such offence.
(2) If a police officer not below the rank of sub -inspector, or any person
authorised by the State G overnment in this behalf, has reason to believe that
phooka or 1 [doom dev or any other operation of the nature referred to in
section 12] has just been, or is being, performed on any animal within the
limits of his jurisdiction, he may enter any place in which he has reason to
believe such animal to be, and may seize the animal and produce it for
examination by the veterinary officer in charge of the area in which the animal
is seized.
Power of search and 
seizure. 
34. Any police officer above the rank of a constable or any person authorised by
the State Government in this behalf, who has reason to believe that an offence
against this Act has been or is being, committed in respect of any animal, may,
if in his opinion the circumsta nces so require, seize the animal and produce
the same for examination by the nearest magistrate or by such veterinary
officer as may be prescribed, and such police officer or authorised person
may, when seizing the animal, require the person in charge the reof to
accompany it to the place of examination.
General power of 
seizure for 
examination. 
35. (1) The State Government may, by general or special order, appoint
infirmaries for the treatment and care of animals in respect of which offences
against this Act have been committed, and may authorise the detention therein
of any animal pending its production before a magistrate.
(2) The magistrate before whom a prosecution for an offence against this Act
has been instituted may direct that the animal concerned shall be treated and
cared for in an infirmary, until it is fit to perform its usual work or is otherwise
fit for discharge, or that it shall be sent to a pinjrapole, or, if the veterinary
officer in charge of the area in which the animal is found or such other
veterinary officer as may be authorised in this behalf by rules made under this
Act certifies that it is incurable or cannot be removed without cruelty, that it
shall be destroyed.
(3) An animal sent for care and treatment to an infirmary shall not, unless the
magistrate directs that it shall be sent to a pinjrapole or that it shall be
destroyed, be released from such place except upon a certificate of its fitness
for discharge issued by the veterinary officer in charge of the area in which
the infirmary is situated or such other veterinary officer as may be authorised
in this behalf by rules made under this Act.
(4) The cost of transporting the animal to an infirmary or pinjrapole, and of its
maintenance and treatment in an infirmary, shall be payabl e by the owner of
the animal in accordance with a scale of rates to be prescribed by the district
magistrate, or, in presidency-towns, by the commissioner of police:
Provided that when the magistrate so orders on account of the poverty of 
the owner of the animal no charge shall be payable for the treatment of the 
animal. 
Treatment and care of 
animals. 

24 
(5) Any amount, payable by an owner of an animal under sub -section (4) may
be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.
(6) If the owner refuses or neglects to remove the animal within such time as a
magistrate may specify, the magistrate may direct that the animal be sold and
that the proceeds of the sale be applied to the payment of such cost.
(7) The surplus, if any, of the proceeds of such sale shall, on applicatio n made
by the owner within two months from the date of the sale, be paid to him.
Limitation of 
prosecutions. 
36. A prosecution for an offence against this Act shall not be instituted after the
expiration of three months from the date of the commission of the offence.
Power to make rules. 38. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and
subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, the Central Government may make rules providing for all or any of the
following matters, namely:―
(a) the 1 *** conditions of service of members of the Board, the
allowances payable to them and the manner in which they may exercise 
their powers and discharge their functions;  
[(aa) the manner in which the persons to represent municipal 
corporations are to  be elected under clause (e) of sub -section (1) of 
section 5;] 
(b) the maximum load (including any load occasioned by the weight of
passengers) to be carried or drawn by any animal; 
(c) the conditions to be observed for preventing the over -crowding of
animal; 
(d) the period during which, and the hours between which, any class of
animals shall not be used for draught purposes; 
(e) prohibiting the use of any bit or harness involving cruelty to
animals; 
[(ea) the other methods of destruction of stray dogs r eferred to in 
clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 11;  
(eb) the methods by which any animal which cannot be removed 
without cruelty may be destroyed under sub-section (3) of section 13;]  
(f) requiring persons carrying on the business of a farrier to be licensed
and registered by such authority as may be prescribed and levying a fee 
for the purpose;  
(g) the precautions to be taken in the capture of animals for purposes
of sale, export or for any other purpose, and the different appliances or 
devices that may alone be used for the purpose; and the licensing of such 
capture and the levying of fees for such licences;  
(h) the precautions to be taken in the transport of animals, whether by
rail, road, inland waterway, sea or air and the manner in which and the 
cages or other receptacles in which they may be so transported.  
(i) requiring persons owning or in charge of premises in which animals
are kept or milked to register such premises, to comply with such 
conditions as may be laid down in relation to the boundary walls or 
surroundings of such premises, to permit their inspection for the purpose 
of ascertaining whether any offence under this Act is being, or has been, 
committed therein, and to expose in such premises copies of section 12 in 

25 
a language or languages commonly understood in the locality; 
(j) the form in which applications for registration under  Chapter V
may be made, the particulars to be contained therein, the fees payable for 
such registration and the authorities to whom such applications may be 
made;  
[(ja) the fees which may be charged by the Committee constituted 
under section 15 for the re gistration of persons or institutions carrying on 
experiments on animals or for any other purpose;]  
(k) the purposes to which fines realised under this Act may be applied,
including such purposes as the maintenance of infirmaries, pinjrapoles 
and veterinary hospitals;  
(l) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) If any person contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any rules made
under this section, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one
hundred rupees, or with im prisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with both.
38A. Every rule made by the Central Government or by the Committee constituted 
under section 15 and every regulation made by the Board shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, 
as the case may be, should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment, shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anythin g previously done under that rule or 
regulation. 
Rules and regulations 
to be laid before 
Parliament. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. 
____________ 
(Shrimati Sudha Murty, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—283—08.12.2025.