Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.
THE COMPULSORY IMPARTING OF MORAL EDUCATION IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory imparting of moral education in primary and secondary
level of education in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Imparting of Moral Education in
Educational Institutions, Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Advisory Council" means the Council constituted under section ( 7);
Definitions.
Bill No. XIX of 2007
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 27TH APRIL, 2007.

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means, in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Educational institution" includes any school whether nursery, K.G ., primary,
middle, secondary or senior secondary level, imparting education to child by whatever
name such institution is called;
(d) "moral education" means and includes education based on teaching of
good principles and values cherished for years, i.e. regard and repute for elders,
parents, teachers and guardians, etc. setting reasonable standards of virtues and
reinforcing discipline among students so that they can distinguish between right
and wrong;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify, moral education shall be compulsorily imparted in all educational institutions
upto secondary level.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of notification under
section 3, issue directions for compulsorily imparting of moral education in all edcuational
institutions, within its jurisdiction.
5. The appropriate Government shall derecognize such educational institution, which
does not comply with the provisions of Section (3) after giving such institution a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
6. Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
appoint such number of teachers with such qualification as may be specified for imparting
moral education to students upto secondary level.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish an Advisory Council in each district in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Council shall consist of such number of persons as may be prescribed
which shall include persons having specialized knowledge of moral principles,
values and experience of practicing morality.
(3) The council shall also frame schemes for providing:—
(a) involvement of media, non-Governmental organization and other
agencies in providing moral education in schools.
(b) incentives to the teachers imparting moral education and the students
showing keen interest in learning morality as may be specified.
(c) Coordination with the appropriate Government and school
authorities with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions
of the Act.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf provide adequate funds to the States for appointing teachers and other
infrastructure required for the purpose of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Compulsory
moral educa-
tion in educa-
tional institu-
tions.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions  for
compulsorily
imparting
moral
education.
Appointment
of teachers
for imparting
moral
education.
Derecognition
of educational
institutions.
Establishment
and functions
of Advisory
Council.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With the growing modernization, there has been a sharp decline in the values which
were cherished and practised from the time immemorial in Indian society. India has been
known for its morality and sense of respect for elders, teachers and the helpless. There was
a time when moral education used to be an essential component of the education system at
gurukuls and such other centres. As a result, pupils grew stronger both intellectually and
spiritually and influenced society as well as the state by their significant contributions.
However, with passage of time, these great values lost their place and were replaced by so
called modern values reflected by day-to-day brawls between teachers and students,
disrespect to elders and cases of abandonment of old parents by their greedy sons.
A child learns from whatever he observes around and, therefore, society, parents and
the state owe a duty to create an atmosphere in which children may have all round
development. Moral education has become need of the day as social values, which have
been prevalent, have shown rapid fall. Materialism has eclipsed spiritualism and cases of
moral degradation are on rise. Today, there is no dearth of the news items covering incidents
of rape of a daughter by her own father, molestation and eve teasing of minor girls, killing of
old parents by their own sons, threatening of teachers by their students, etc. It is commonly
said that future of a nation lies in the hands of children. So, it becomes all the more important
to instill in children a sense of respect for moral values right from the stage a child enters
school. Preparing a conducive atmosphere to learn moral values will have salutary effect
on minds of school going children and when they will grow mature they can easily
distinguish between the right  and the wrong. It is felt that voluntary action to promote
moral values will not have the desired impact unless moral education is made a statutory
requirement for all the educational institutions.
Hence this Bill.
PRAMILA  BOHIDAR
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for imparting moral education.
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for establishment of  Advisory Council, which includes persons
having specialized knowledge of moral principles, values and experience of practicing morality.
Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall provide funds for the purposes of  teachers
and infrastructure. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore
will be required for the purpose. Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five crore
will also be required.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the
purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory imparting of moral education in primary and secondary  level
of education in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Ms. Pramila Bohidar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1768RS(S-3)—27-04-2007.