THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS
RELATED LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to amend the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment
and Conditions of Service)  Act, 1996 and the Building and Other Construction
Workers' Welfare Cess Act, 1996.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Building and Other Construction Workers Related
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. XIX of 2013
5

2
Amendment
of section 2.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION  WORKERS (REGULATION OF
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1996
2. In section 2 of the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 [hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as
the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of
Service) Act], in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause (a), in sub-clause (iii), for the words “the Government of the State”,
the words “the Government of the State or Union territory, as the case may be,” shall
be substituted;
(b) in clause ( j), for the words “the total cost of such construction not being
more than rupees ten lakhs”, the words “the total cost of such construction being not
exceeding such amount as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this
behalf” shall be substituted.
3. In section 12 of the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1)  Every building worker who has completed eighteen years of age and who
has been engaged in any building or other construction work shall be eligible for
registration as a beneficiary under this Act.”.
4. In section 18 of the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of
Employment and Conditions of  Service) Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“ (1A) Until the Board is constituted in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section ( 1), the following persons shall  constitute a Board as from the date of
commencement of the  Building and Other Construction Workers Related Laws
(Amendment)  Act, 2013 and such Board shall be deemed to be the Board  established
and constituted for a period not exceeding one year from such commencement for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, namely:—
(a) the Secretary in charge of the Department dealing with the labour—
chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in charge of the Department dealing with the finance or
his nominee-— member;
(c) the Secretary in charge of the Department dealing with the planning or
his nominee—member;
(d) the Secretary in charge of the Department dealing with the social welfare
or his nominee —member.”.
5. In section 24 of the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, in sub-section ( 3), for the words “expenses
exceeding  five per cent. of  its total expenses during that financial year”, the words “expenses
exceeding such percentage of its total expenses during that financial year, as may be notified
in the Official Gazette, by the Central Government in this behalf” shall be substituted.
6. In section 42 of the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, in sub-section (1),—
 (i)  for the words “a Gazetted Officer of that Government to be the Director-
General of  Inspection who shall be responsible for”, the words “such number of
Gazetted Officers, not exceeding ten, of that Government to be Director-Generals for
such area as may be specified in the notification who shall coordinate with the Central
Government in carrying out its responsibility of” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “throughout India”, the words “in the respective area” shall be
substituted.
27 of 1996.
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 24.
Amendment
of section 42.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
CHAPTER  III
AMENDMENTS TO THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS' WELFARE CESS ACT, 1996
7. In the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess   Act, 1996  (hereinafter
referred to as the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Act), in section 2,
after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “employer”, shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (i) of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation
of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996;’.
8.  In section 3 of the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Act,  in
sub-section (3), for the words  “collecting  the cess to the Board”, the words “within a period
of thirty days of collecting cess, to the Board” shall be substituted.
9. In section 12 of the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Act, in
sub-section (3), for the words “the  Central  Government”, the words “the Central Government
or, as the case may be, the State Government” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment of
section 3.
Amendment of
section 12.
28 of 1996.
27 of 1996.
5
10

NEW DELHI;                MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
The 12th December, 2012.
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions
of Service) Act, 1996 was enacted to regulate the employment and conditions of service of
building and other construction workers and to  provide for their safety, health and welfare
measures and the Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Act, 1996, provides
for the levy and collection of a cess on the basis of cost of construction with a view to
augmenting the resources for the welfare  schemes of  the Building and Other Construction
Workers.
2. In view of the problems faced during the implementation of these Acts, the State
Governments suggested for amending certain provisions of these Acts. The Central Advisory
Commitee under the Building and Other  Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 set up a Task Force to examine provisions of the Act in
the context of the experience during the past decade as well as suggestions received from
various stake holders.
3. On the recommendations made by the Task Force, the Central Government has,
inter alia,  proposed the following amendments in the Building and Other Construction
Workers Related Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2013, namely:—
(a) to empower the Central Government to specify, by notification, the maximum
cost of construction in the definition of ‘establishment’ under clause (j) of sub-section
(1) of section 2 of the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 instead of rupees ten lakhs for
application of the said Act;
(b) to substitute sub-section ( 1) of section 12 of the Building and Other
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of  Service) Act,
1996 to amplify the scope of the Act for registration of workers;
(c) to amend sub-section (1) of section 24 of the Building and Other Construction
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 to empower
the Central Government to notify percentage of total expenditure for meeting
administrative expenses incurred by the State Building and Other Construction
Workers Welfare Board; and
(d) to amend sub-section (3) of section 12 of the Building and Other Construction
Workers' Welfare Cess Act, 1996 so as to empower the State Governments to file
complaints in the courts to take cognizance of an offence.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE)  ACT, 1996
(27 OF 1996)
* * * * *
2.  (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means,—
* * * * *
(iii) in relation to any other establishment which employs building workers
either directly or through a contractor, the Government of the State in which that
other establishment is situate;
* * * * *
(j) “establishment” means any establishment belonging to, or under the control
of, Government, any body corporate or firm, an individual or association or other body
of individuals which or who employs building workers in any building or other
construction work; and includes an establishment belonging to a contractor, but does
not include an individual who employs such workers in any building or construction
work in relation to his own residence the total cost of such construction not being
more than rupees ten lakhs;
* * * * *
12. (1) Every building worker who has completed eighteen years of age, but has not
completed sixty years of age, and who has been engaged in any building or other construction
work for not less than ninety days during the preceding twelve months shall be eligible for
registration as a beneficiary under this Act.
* * * * *
24. (1) * * *  *
(3)  No Board shall, in any financial year, incur expenses towards salaries, allowances
and other remuneration to its members, officers and other employees and for meeting the
other administrative expenses exceeding five per cent. of its total expenses during that
financial year.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VIII
I
NSPECTING STAFF
42. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Gazetted Officer of that
Government to be the Director-General of Inspection who shall be responsible for laying
down the standards of inspection and shall also exercise the powers of an Inspector
throughout India in relation to all the establishments for which the Central Government is the
appropriate Government.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Registration
of building
workers as
beneficiaries.
Building and
Other
Construction
Workers’
Welfare Fund
and its
application.
Appointment
of Director-
General, Chief
Inspector and
Inspectors.
5

EXTRACTS FROM THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’
WELFARE CESS ACT, 1996
(28 OF 1996)
* * * * *
3. (1) * * * * *
(3) The proceeds  of the cess collected under sub-section (2) shall be paid by the local
authority or the State Government collecting the cess to the Board after deducting the cost
of collection of such cess not exceeding one per cent. of the amount collected.
* * * * *
12. (1) * * * * *
(3)  No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this section save on
a complaint made by or under the authority of the Central Government.
* * * * *
Levy and
collection of
cess.
Penalty.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to amend the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment
and Conditions of Service)  Act, 1996 and the Building and Other Construction
Workers' Welfare Cess Act, 1996.
—————
(Shri Mallikarjun Kharge, Minister of Labour and Employment)
GMGIPMRND—5689RS(S4)—13.03.2013.