Bill No. XIX-F of  2010
ORIGINAL
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND
COMPULSORY EDUCATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJY A SABHA ON 24TH MARCH, 2012
LOK SABHA ON 9TH MAY, 2012)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 19 JUNE, 2012
ACT NO. 30 OF 2012

1
Bill No. XIX-F of 2010
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 1, after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Subject to the provisions of articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution, the
provisions of this Act shall apply to conferment of rights on children to free and
compulsory education.
(5) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to Madrasas, Vedic Pathsalas and
educational institutions primarily imparting religious instruction.”.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 1.
35 of 2009.

2
3.  In the principal Act, in section 2,—
(a) in clause (d), after the word "means", the words "a child with disability or"
shall be inserted;
(b) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ee) "child with disability" includes,—
(A) a child with “disability” as defined in clause (i) of section 2 of the
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and
Full Participation) Act, 1995;
(B) a child, being a person with disability as defined in clause (j) of
section 2 of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral
Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999;
(C) a child with “severe disability” as defined in clause (o) of section
2 of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999.
4. In section 3  of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
(1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen years, including a child referred
to in clause (d) or clause (e) of section 2, shall have the right to free and compulsory
education in a neighbourhood school till the completion of his or her elementary
education.
(b) in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted;
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(3) A child with disability referred to in sub-clause (A) of clause (ee) of
section 2 shall,  without prejudice to the provisions of the Persons with
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation)
Act, 1995, and a child referred to in sub-clauses ( B) and (C) of clause (ee) of
section 2, have the same rights to pursue free and compulsory elementary
education which children with disabilities have under the provisions of Chapter V
of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and
Full Participation) Act, 1995 :
Provided that a child with “multiple disabilities” referred to in clause (h) and a child with
“severe disability” referred to in clause (o) of section 2 of the National Trust for Welfare of
Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999
may also have the right to opt for home-based education.’.
5. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the School Management Committee constituted under
sub-section (1) in respect of,—
(a) a school established and administered by minority whether based on
religion or language; and
(b) all other aided schools as defined in sub-section ( ii) of clause (
n) of
section 2,
shall perform advisory function only.”.
6. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words "School
Management Committee, constituted", the words "School Management Committee, except
the School Management Committee in respect of a school established and administered by
minority, whether based on religion or language and an aided school as defined in
sub-clause (ii) of clause (n) of section 2, constituted" shall be substituted.
1 of 1996.
44 of 1999.
44 of 1999.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 21.
Amendment
of section 22.
1 of 1996.
Amendment
of section 2.
44 of 1999.

3
7.  In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words “Within six
months”, the words “Within three years” shall be substituted.
8.  After section 38 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“39. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament.”.
Amendment
of section 25.
Insertion of
new section
39.
Power of
Central
Government
to remove
difficulties.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—1617LS(S3)—22-06-2012.