AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA.

Bill No. XIX of 1999

THE FREE MEDICAL AND ENGINEERING EDUCATION TO
DESERVING POOR STUDENTS BILL, 1999
A
BILL

to provide for the free medical and engineering education to deserving students who
cannot afford the expensive medical and engineering education, despite being
talented, due to their poor economic conditions and for matters connected therewith.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Free Medical and Engineering Education to
Deserving Poor Students Act, 1999. .

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State and in other cases, the Central Government;

Short title,
extend and
commence-
ment,

Definitions.


Appropriate
Government to
provide free
medical and
engineering
education to
every
deserving
poor student.

Supplementing
other Jaws.

Power to make
rules

(b) “poor student" means any student whose family income, from all sources, does
not exceed two thousand rupees per month;

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act,

3. (7) The appropriate Government shall provide free medical and engineering
education to every deserving poor student who has obtained such marks or passed
such examination with such distinction as may be prescribed from time to time.

(2) The appropriate Government shall provide to every poor student admitted
to any medical or engineering college including private medical or engineering college
or Institute under this Act—

(a) the entire cost of admission and tuition fee;

(0) materials like books, note-books, stationery etc. free of cost;
(c) free hostel facilities wherever necessary;

@ scholarships in such cases as may be prescribed.

4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other Jaw, for the time being in force, regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.

5: The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

10

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Most of the parents have a dream to make their sons or daughters either doctors or
engineers and so is the desire of the majority of the youth pursuing their studies in
schools. However due to a very tough competition this dream remains a dream for ever
for the majority as they are not selected for the admission to these prestigious courses.
However, there are students who are extraordinary brilliant but their dreams are not
fulfilled despite their ability to cross all the hurdles because of the poverty. The toedical
and engineering education is so costly that even middle class families cannot afford to
send their wards, what to talk of the poor and the people living below the poverty line.
Thus a large chunk of deserving students cannot have the benefit of medival and
engineering education.

Since ours is a welfare State, it is our duty to give chance to such poor but deserving
students (0 pursue the studies of them choice and fulfil their ambitions of life. In such
cases the appropriate Government should bear all the expenses of students towards their
studies in engineering or medical colleges.

Hence this Bill.
SURESH PACHOURI .


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free medical and engineering education by the
appropriate Government to a deserving poor student enrolled even in a privately owned
medical or engineering college. This Clause also provides for certain other facilities
including scholarships to poor students. At this juncture it is not practicable to calculate
the exact amount that will be spent for the purpose but an estimated recurring expenditure
of fifty crores of rupees per annum is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India if the Bill is enacted and brought into operation.

No non-recurring expenditure. is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bull empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill, The matter will relates to procedure and administrative
details only.

The delegation of legislative power 1s, therefore, of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for the free medical and engineering education to deserving students who
cannot afford the expensive medical and engineering education, despite being
talented, due to their poor economic conditions and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—113RS—08.04.1989.