10

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XIX of 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India,

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— .
1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.
2. After article 75 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely: —
“75A. Notwithstanding anything in articles 74 and 75—
(1) The House of the People shall express its lack of confidence in the Prime
Minister and his Council of Ministers only by electing his successor through a
composite motion supported by a majority of the total members of the House and

presenting an address to that effect to the President, who shall then appoint the
person so elected as the new Prime Minister.

Short title.

Insertion of
new article
TSA.

Provision as
to confi-
dence in the
Council of
Ministers.


Amendment
of article 85.

Insertion of
new article
164A.

Provision as
to confidence
in the Council
of Ministers.

Amendment
of article
174.

2

(2) In the event of failure of the Council of Ministers to secure, or retain the
confidence of the House of the People, and if the House is not able to elect a person to
be appointed as the new Prime Minister in accordance with the provisions laid down in
clause (1), the President shall, upon the advice of the Council of Ministers, prorogue
the House And suspend the operation of any provision of the Constitution relating to
the House of the people for a period which shall not exceed four months.

(3) Before the expiry of the period of four months as referred to in clause (2), the
President shall summon the House to reconsider the composite motion with or without
modification, and if the House is not able to express its confidence in the Council of
Ministers, or elect a person to be appointed as the new Prime Minister, the President
shall dissolve the House of the People.”.

3. In article 85 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso shall be added at

the end, namely:—

“Provided that the power under sub-clause (b) shall be exercised subject to the
provision of article 75A.”.

4. After article 164 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

“164A. Notwithstanding anything in articles 163 and 164—~

(1) The Legislative Assembly shall express its lack of confidence in the Chief
Minister and his Council of Ministers only by electing his successor through a
composite motion supported by a majority of the total members of the Assembly and
presenting an address to that effect to the Governor who shall then appoint the person
so elected as the new Chief Minister.

(2) In the event of the failure of the Council of Ministers to secure, or retain the
confidence of the Legislative Assembly, and if the Assembly is not able to elect a
person to be appointed as the new Chief Minister in accordance with the provisions
laid down in clause (1), the Governor shall, upon the advice of the Council of Ministers,
prorogue the Assembly and recommend to the President to suspend the operation of
any provision of the Constitution relating to the Legislative Assembly for a period
which shall not exceed four months.

(3) Before the expiry of the period of four months as referred to in clause (2), the
Governor shall summon the Assembly to reconsider the composite motion with or
without modification, and if the Assembly is not able to express its confidence in the
Council of Ministers, or elect a person to be appointed as the new Chief Minister, the
Governor shall dissolve the Legislative Assembly.”.

5. In article 174 of the Constitution, in clause (2), the following proviso shall be added

at the end, namely:—

“Provided that the power under sub-clause (b) shall be exercised subject to the
provisions of article 164A.”.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJ. ECTS AND REASONS

The Indian Political system has come under increasing stress due to fractured polity
and multiplicity of political parties. During the last five General Elections since 1989, no
single political party could secure majority in the House of the People. This period was
marked by a succession of eight coalition or minority governments resulting in frequent
elections. This had a destabilising effect on the national psyche and our socio-economic
system. A question mark has also arisen on the credibility of the present constitutional
framework.

The Government has already decided to constitute a panel to review the Constitution
to cope with emerging trends in Indian polity. A new dispensation is needed to impart
stability and efficacy to our polity.

Even within the existing constitutional framework, a provision is needed to assign a
direct and effective role to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies in
electing an alternative Government when the Council of Ministers fails to secure, or retain

* the confidence of the House/Assembly. Such a provision will accord priority and activate
the role of the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly and eliminate the vice of
backroom political manoeuvres. Moreover, in that case, the dissolution of the House/Assembly
shall become the last resort and occur only when there is insuperable constitutional impasse.

The most salient aspect of the Bill is a provision for cooling off period and
reconsideration of the composite motion before the hammer would fall leading to the inevitable
dissolution of the House/Assembly.

This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives by insertion of two new articles 750
and 164A in the Constitution.

SATISH PRADHAN


RAJYA SABHA

A
BLL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Satish Pradhan, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6599RS—22.2.2001,