1
AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 14TH MARCH, 2006
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2006.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in section 8, after sub-section 9, the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
 “5. A person against whom a court of competent jurisdiction has framed charges
for commission of an offence or offences, punishable with imprisonment for a tenure
of seven years or more, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1)
to (4), such person shall be deemed to be disqualified for a period of six years from the
date of framing  of charges.
Provided that if such person upon conviction is disqualified for a specific period,
the period of disqualification incurred under the sub section, shall be set off against
the period of disqualification incurred by the person under any of the provision of
sub-sections (1) to (4)."
Bill No. XIX  of  2006
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 8
of Act No.
43 of 1951.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is viewed by a responsible member of the society that, more and more persons, with
criminal background are entering into election fray. The present legislation, namely, the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, has certain provisions to refrain such people from
contesting elections to the House of Council of States/People and, yet, section 8 of the Act
which deals with this aspects, falls short of the expectations of the people who would like to
see that even before a person is convicted, if there is sufficient evidence against such
person, he should not be allowed to represent people and insult their honour and wisdom.
Although section 8 disqualifies a person from contesting elections, if such a person is
convicted for offences under certain specified Acts, irrespective of the period of conviction,
a conviction of minimum 2 years is required to disqualify a person in case of most of the
offences. In our country, criminal trials take a number of years to reach their logical conclusions,
and therefore, existing provisions of law in the matter of disqualification, do not fulfill the
aspirations of the people at large.
Further, under the existing provisions, even a person charge-sheeted for commission
of offence of murder and undergoing judicial custody, pending the trial, is entitled to contest
elections. Surprisingly, many of them have turned successful in their endeavour.
The amendment proposed through this bill seeks to refrain, at least, those who are
charged of serious offences punishable with imprisonment of 7 years or more. Since charge-
sheets prepared by the police cannot be relied upon for depriving the right of a citizen, the
proposed amendment seeks to disqualify a person only in cases where charges are framed
by a competent court.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK
2

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—6490RS(S1)—16-3-2006.