Bill No. XIX of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called The Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In the Preamble to the Constitution, after the words "EQUALITY of status and of
opportunity," the words "PEACE through the practice of Ahimsa;" shall be inserted.
3. In article 51A of the Constitution, after clause (k), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(l) to promote, imbibe and defend the principles of ahimsa in daily life and to
foster an outlook of compassion, forgiveness and gratitute towards all living beings."
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH FEBRUARY, 2022
Amendment
of the
Preamble.
Amendment
of article
51A.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In the attempt to forge India into a modern nation, many significant transformations
are being implemented by the State in all areas of life. However, in pursuit of noble
developmental goals, a nation cannot ignore its legacy and political heritage.
2. The Gandhian principle of ahimsa immensely influenced the direction of India's
freedom struggle. Although the generic translation of the term implies 'a refusal to do harm',
Mahatma Gandhi utilised the term to denote the largest love and the greatest charity. As
Mahatma Gandhi regarded poverty and social injustice to be the greatest forms of violence,
the inclusion of ahimsa  would also motivate this nation and its constituents to tackle the
removal of these evils on a priority basis.
3. In light of recent advocacy for the inclusion of Gandhian principles into the Indian
constitutional framework, this Bill seeks to place ahimsa in the 'Preamble' as well as within
the 'Fundamental Duties' provision of the Constitution.
4. The Preamble has been recognised as a component of the basic structure of the
Indian Constituion and is also seen a representation of its spirit. Hence, this Bill seeks to
imbed ahimsa  deep into the functioning of the State. Further, by incorporating it as a part of
the fundamental duties of every citizen of India, this Bill seeks to make ahimsa a guiding
principle in the lives of future generations of Indians.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
DR. AMAR PATNAIK
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUION OF INDIA, 1950
* * * *
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA,  having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its
citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and, worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the degnity of the individual and the unity and intertiy of the
Nation;
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty sixth day of Novermber, 1949; do
HEREBY  ADOPT,  ENACT  AND  GIVE  TO  OURSELVES  THIS  CONSTITUTION.
* * * *
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the
people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities;
to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preseve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity
so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his
child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
* * * *
3
Preamble.
Fundamental
duties.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Amar Patnaik, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2002RS(S3)—07-02-2022.