THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After article 80 of the Constitution, the following  article shall be inserted, namely:—
"80A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, seats shall be reserved in the
Council of States for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in such proportion and
in such manner as parliament may by law determine".
3.  After article 171 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"171A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, seats shall be reserved in the
Legislative Council of States for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in such
proportion and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine".
Short title,
and com-
mencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XIX  of  2011
Insertion of
new article
80A.
Reservation
of seats for
the scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in the
Council of
States.
Insertion of
new article
171A.
Reservation of
seats for the
Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled
Tribes in the
Legislative
Council of
States.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our nation though  is  the best example of unity in diversity in the world but majority
of its vast population belongs to the oppressed and exploited lot for centuries altogether in
the name of caste and creed and their sufferings are not yet over. Due to tireless efforts of
Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar the founding fathers of our Constitution provided for reservation
for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Constitution for their upliftment,
progress and make them equal in the society. Hence, reservation has been made in the public
employment, educational institutions, Lok Sabha, Legislative Assemblies of the States, local
self Governments including Municipalities, Zila Parishads, Panchayats and other
Governmental bodies and institutions, etc. for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
But, it is unfortunate that the reservation has not been extended to  Rajya  Sabha and
Legislative Councils in the States wherever they are in existence. This is against the principle
of social justice. Hence, it is necessary that seats should also be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Rajya Sabha as well as Legislative Councils in the
State Legislatures.
Hence, this Bill.
DR.  AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA
2

GMGIPMRND—960RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta,  M.P .)