1
THE NATIONAL HIMALAYAN REGION ENVIRONMENT
PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the National Himalayan Region Environment Protection
and Development Institute and fund for undertaking environment protection and
development work in the Himalayan region of the country and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian (National) Himalayan Region Environment
Protection and Development Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Fund” means the National Himalayan Region Environment Protection and
Development Fund established under section 5 of the Act.
(b) “Himalayan region” means the Himalayan region spreading along Indian
borders;
(c) “Institute” means the National Himalayan Region Environment Protection
and Development Institute established under section 3 of the Act; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XIX of   2014
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette establish
an institute to be called as the National Himalayan Region Environment Protection and
Development Institute for the purpose of carrying out the objectives under this Act.
(2) The institute shall have its headquarters at New Delhi and a regional office at the
capital of every State having Himalayan region within its territorial jurisdiction.
(3) The institute shall be headed by a Director-General appointed by the Central
Government.
(4) Every regional office of the institute shall be headed by a Director to be appointed
by the Central Government in such a manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff for the
institute and its regional offices as may be required for its functioning.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
officers and staff of the Institute and regional offices shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The National Himalayan Region Environment Protection and Development Institute
shall perform the following functions:—
(a) to frame a National Himalayan Region Environment Protection Policy in
consultation with State Governments falling in the Himalayan regions and the
environmentalists;
(b) to maintain the ecology of the Himalayan region and to protect it from climatic
changes;
(c) to ensure action inconsistent therewith and to evaluate the policy from time
to time and to amend it; and
(d) to promote and develop  traditional vocations and industries in Himalayan
regions.
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a fund to be known as the National Himalayan Region Environment Protection and
Development Fund with an initial sum of rupees twenty five thousand crore.
(2) The State Governments having the Himalayan regions shall contribute to the fund
in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) The fund shall be administered by the National Himalayan Region Environment
Protection and Development Institute established under sub-section (1) of section 3.
(4) The fund shall be utilised for the implementation of the policy for environment
protection and development of the Himalayan region.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force relating to any of the matters dealt within this Act.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Establishment
of the
National
Himalayan
Region
Environment
Protection
and
Development
Institute.
Functions of
the National
Himalayan
Region
Environment
Protection
and
Development
Institute.
Constitution
of National
Himalayan
Region
Environment
Protection
and
Development
Fund.
Power to make
rules.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REGIONS
It became clearly evident in the aftermath of the recent disaster that struck Uttarakhand
that if interference in the Himalayas in the name of unfettered development continues further,
the country may have to face even more dreadful disasters in future. A comprehensive policy
needs to be formulated for protection of environment and development in the Himalayan
region.
There is an urgent need to develop the area scourged by the national disaster in the
Himalayan region and to formulate a policy of sustainable development that does not harm
the environment of the region. In this context, there is a need for institutionalised arrangement
to give attention to the development and protection of environment in the entire Himalayan
region falling within the Indian territory. A uniform policy needs to be formulated for all the
areas falling within the Himalayan region of the country. For formulating and implementing
any such policy, it is also essential to give a fillip to the utilisation of resources available in
the Himalayan region and special means should be made available to the locals for the
development of the region.
Hence, this Bill.
PRABHAT JHA

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the National Himalayan Region
Environment Protection and Development Institute. Clause 5 provides for constitution of
the National Himalayan Region Environment Protection and Development Fund with the
initial amount of rupees twenty five thousand crore. Hence, the Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund  of India.
At this stage, it is not possible to quantify the exact amount, however, it is estimated that
a sum of rupees twenty five thousand crore per annum is likely to involve as recurring
expenditure.
A sum of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to involve as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3778RS(S3)—18-12-2014.
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the National Himalayan Region Environment Protection
and Development Institute and fund for undertaking environment protection and
development work in the Himalayan region of the country and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P.)