1
THE PROMOTION OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING IN
SCHOOLS BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide training on social and emotional learning to all educators and students enrolled
in schools affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education, Indian Certificate of
Secondary Education and State Education Boards using curricula and materials
that are scientifically accurate, age appropriate, and culturally relevant and for
other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in  the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of Social and Emotional Learning in
Schools Act, 2019.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission for Promotion of
Social and Emotional Learning in Schools, appointed under sub-section 2 of
section 4;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XIX of  2019
Definitions.
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 12TH JULY, 2019

2
 (c) "Commission" means the Commission for Promotion of  Social and Emotional
Learning in Schools set up under section 3;
 (d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
 (e) "Student Committe" means Committee set up under section 13; and
 (f) "teacher coordinator" means the authority appointed under section 16;
CHAPTER II
COMMISSION FOR SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING IN SCHOOLS
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Offical  Gazette, constitute
a "Commission for Promotion of Social and Emotional Learning in Schools", to exercise
the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the above name, having perpetual
succession and a common seal.
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and four members who shall be
appointed by the Central Government, in consultation with the Ministry of Human Resource
Development.
(2) The Secretary, Department of Higher Education Union Ministry of HRD shall serve
as the Chairperson of the Commission.
(3) Of the four members referred to in sub-section (1),
(i) two members shall be from amongst the eminent persons of ability and integrity,
who,
(a) have a thorough understanding and expertise of social and emotional
learning;
(b) have experience of working as an expert in human psychology.
(ii) two members shall be from amongst the eminent persons of ability and
integrity, who,
(a) have a thorough understanding and expertise in the field of academia;
(b) have experience of working with and implementing different pedagogical
techniques.
Provided that at least one of the four members shall be a woman.
5. (1) The Chairperson and every member of the Commission shall hold office for a term
of three years from the date of assumption of office and shall be eligible for re-appointment
for not more than three terms:
Provided that under no circumstances, the Chairperson or any member shall hold
office after attaining the age of seventy years.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 1, the Chairperson or a member
may—
(a) resign, by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less
than six months; or
(b) be removed from their office in accordance with the provisions given in
section 6.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
Constitution
of the
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Composition
of the
Commission.
Term of
office of the
members of
the
Commission.

3
6. (1) The Central Government may, by order, remove the Chairperson, or a member
from office, if the Chairperson or a member—
(a) becomes mentally unable to continue in their position;
(b) is convicted of an offence under the Indian penal Code, 1860;
(c) acquires financial or other interests which may prejudice their decisions and
functions;
(d) has in the opinion of the Central Government and the Court, so abused his
position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest.
(2) The Chairperson or a member shall not be removed under any clause of
sub-section (1), unless the Central Government gives in writing the reasons for their dismissal
and the Chairperson or the member is given a reasonable opportunity of defending themselves
in the matter.
7. (1) The Commission may, at any point, associate with itself any person whose
advice or assistance it may desire in carrying out any of the purposes of this Act but not in
contravention of any other law.
(2) A person associated with the Commission under sub-section (1) shall have a right
to take part in discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not be a member for any other
purpose.
8. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary as the Chairperson may
deem fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.
(3) The Commission shall have the autonomy to allocate and spend the funds on the
functions assigned to it under this Act.
CHAPTER III
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION FOR PROMOTION OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING IN SCHOOLS
9. (1) The primary function of the Commission shall be to develop and implement the
curricular for promotion of social and emotional learning in all schools.
(2) The Commission shall have the authority to receive annual reports from all the state
and Central education boards and act according to them as per the requirement.
10. The Commission shall also perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) review and monitor the working of every District Education Officer and the
concerned Grievance Redressal Office;
(b) ensure coordination among every District Education office and Grievance
Redressal Office;
(c) submit an annual report to the Central Government, within such time as
prescribed by the Central Government, giving a full and detailed account of the activities
undertaken by it in the previous year, and the Central Government shall cause every
such report to be laid before both houses of Parliament.
(d) make suggestions to the Central Government on the financial support required
to implement the social and emotional learning and to fulfill the other functions assigned
to it under this Act; and
(e) prescribe the study material that shall be included in school curriculm related
to social and emotional learning.
Removal from
the
membership
of the
Commission.
Advice sought
by the
Commission.
Meeting of the
Commission.
Other
Miscellaneous
functions.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
CHAPTER IV
INCLUSION OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING IN SCHOOL CURRICULUM
11. (1) The Central and State Education Boards shall modify their course content to
integrate the Social and emotional learning in their curriculum.
(2) The Central and State School Education Boards shall use biographies of famous
Indian personalities and poems that focus on the various resolution styles adopted by them
during the time of crisis.
(3) The course content shall be relevant as well as socially and culturally sensitive.
12. (1) The schools shall implement the curricula prescribed by respective Education
Boards to impart social and emotional learning through experience, demonstration, play
narratives, role play, stories and other means that catch the attention of children and make
them enjoy.
(2) The students shall be given positive credits on their report cards for their
participation in the activities related to social and emotional learning:
Provided that the evaluation shall be based on the efforts shown by the students
during the class activity and not on the academic marks.
CHAPTER V
S
TUDENT COMMITTEE (BUDDY PROJECT) IN SCHOOLS
13. (1) The appropriate Govt. shall ensure that all schools shall constitute a student
committee consisting of five representatives each from class-5, class-9 and class-12 who
shall act as a mentor for the students of the junior classes.
(2) The participation of the students as a representative of the student committee shall
be voluntary.
(3) The process to select the representatives to the student committee shall be such as
may be prescribed:
Provided that at least one-half of the representatives shall be girls.
14. (1) A candidate for selection as a representative shall be required to undergo a
written psychological test as may be prescribed by the Commission.
(2) A selected representative shall undergo an interview by Board consisting of the
teacher coordinator, school psychological counselor and a third party counselor.
(3) Each representative shall be given a certificate of appreciation after successful
completion of a year long tenure.
15. The students of a school shall be divided in following three categories for the
purpose of representation in the Student Committee from each category:
(a) Class-1 to Class-4 : The students of the first group shall have the
representative from class-5;
(b) Class-5 to Class-8: The students of the second group shall have the
representative from class-9: and
(c) Class-9 to Class-12: The students of the third group shall have the
representative from class-12.
(2) The students shall be encouraged to approach the respective student
representatives and the teacher coordinator, mentioned under section 16, for any problem
faced by them.
Activities for
social and
emotional
learning in
school
curriculum.
Education
Boards to
integrate
social and
emotional
learning in
Curricula.
Constitution
of Student
Committee.
Representation
in the Student
Committee.
Psychological
test/interview
for the
members of
student
committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
CHAPTER VI
TEACHER COORDINATOR IN SCHOOLS
16. (1) The applicant shall ensure that all schools appoint at least one teacher
coordinator subject to a maximum of four teacher coordinators who shall look after the
activities regarding social and emotional learning in the school.
 (2) The Schools may independently select a qualified counsellor on their own,
otherwise a teacher shall be selected by the Principal who shall undergo a workshop conducted
by the experts from the Department of Education in order to qualify as a coordinator.
(3) The content of the workshop, which shall be organized bi-annually by the
Commission, shall focus on the various ways to include social and emotional learning in
schools.
(4) The teacher coordinator shall be given a book, specially designed
for by the Commission that will suggest the activities that  can be organised in the
school.
(5) The teacher cordinators of the Government schools and of the schools affiliated to
State Education Boards shall participate in an additional workshop which shall be conducted
by the appropriate Government through the experts in the field of social and emotional
learning in the local language.
(6) The teachers of other educational boards shall participate in the workshop
conducted by the Commission:
Provided that teachers may additionally participate in the State Government workshops
at will.
(7) The participation in the workshop shall be mandatory in order to become a teacher
coordinator and failure in attending three consecutive workshops would result in immediate
dismissal from the position.
(8) Upon successful completion of the workshops, teachers shall be granted a certificate
of participation.
17. ( 1) At the beginning of every academic year all students shall participate in a
heuristics lab.
(2) The activities of heuristics lab shall be recorded and submitted to the District
Education Officer within first two months of the academic year.
(3) The content of the activities of heuristics lab shall be designed by the teacher
coordinator with the help of Student Committee as per the guidelines to be prescribed by the
Commission.
(4) Provided that such actvities shall focus to address the social, mental and relationship
issues through group work, role play, games etc.
CHAPTER  VII
E
CTRONIC DISSEMINATION OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL LEARNING
18. A dedicated website, especially for social and emotional learning designed and
maintained by the Commission shall be provided access to all the teacher coordinators,
under which—
(a) the teacher coordinator shall upload the pictures and videos of all the activities
taking place in a school in a digital form;
(b) various procedures, articles regarding the importance of the social and emotional
learning, documents, notices, and testimonials from the teachers as well as students, shall be
uploaded and updated from time to time; and
Provision of
teacher
coordinatiors
in shcools.
Provision
regarding
heuristics lab.
Access to
website to
teacher
coordinator.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(c) the teacher coordinator shall also use the electronic platform to provide feedback
and suggest changes.
19. The schools that are remotely located and are devoid of any proper communication
channel digitally shall directly report to the District Education Officer, who shall be required
update the website.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
20. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes
of this act.
21. The provisions of this Act or the rules made there under shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any other law, rules, orders or instructions.
22. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall,  as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
23. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following  the session or the
sucessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification on annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Direct
reporting by
remotely
located
school.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
supplements
other laws.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Rising stress amongst the youth is a common occurrence nowadays. But, there might
be a suitable solution for this elusive problem. The true potential of a country can be really
measured by the strength and skills of its youth. In India, we have one of largest youth
population on the planet. But the question remains that how well we have been able to
harness and develop their inherent potential.
We spend much less than the rest of the world on mental health issues (0.06% of the
health budget is spent on mental health care) and have only 0.30 psychiatrists, 0.17 nurses,
and 0.05 psychologists per 1,00,000 mentally ill patients in the country. According to a 2017
WHO report, 10- 20% of children and adolescents world-wide are believed to be affected
with mental health issues, with suicide and self-harm being the second leading cause of
death in this age group after road traffic injuries. The same report surveyed Indian adolescents
of whom 25% reported being depressed, 7% mentioned being bullied, 8% spoke about
suffering from anxiety, another 8% complained of experiencing loneliness, and a 10%
reportedly had no close friends, all of which are warning signs pointing towards mental
health issue. The actual figures are likely to be far higher due to under-reporting on account
of lack of awareness, and due to the stigma attached to mental health.
When we look at the current trajectory of mental health concerns in children and youth
in India, we immediately correlate it to issues arising from an over-competitive environment
and/or bullying. A 2012 Lancet study also had a similar finding, wherein they pointed out that
Indian adolescents were often pressured to have aspirations of a much higher level than the
society around them was capable of keeping pace with, leading to disappointments at a
greater scale. While it is important to understand the causes of such mental ill health, it is far
more pertinent to tackle the root of these issues, and attempt to prevent it. Mental and
emotional health are integrally related, with the later having a strong influence on the former.
These begin developing at an early age, and help us in our personal, academic, social lives
by equipping us with some basic life skills. Given schools' unique ability to access large
numbers of children, they are most commonly identified as the best places to provide this
support so as to promote the universal mental health of children. A key component of such
a support system, which has been gaining rapid recognition worldwide, has been Socio-
Emotional Learning (`SEL'). SEL has been found to be an effective tool in developing better
control over one's emotions, and in enhancing the decision-making process of an individual.
Research shows that SEL is associated with a positive impact on important mental health
variables that increase children's attachment to school, enhance their motivation to learn,
and reduce risky behaviours. SEL, when properly imparted to children or adolescents, is also
understood to have a direct impact on their earnings over their lifetime. Apart from the above,
for a country like India with its strong cultural diversity, there is an additional need for future
generations to internalize SEL because they also help them in realizing the basic values
expounded by our Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. VIKAS MAHATME
7

8
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Commission for Social Emotional
Learning in Schools. Clause 5 inter alia provides for salary and allowances payable to the
Chairperson and other Members of the Committee. Clause 20 makes it obligatory for the
Central Government to provide requisite funds to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The
Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible
at present to quantify the funds that may be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to frame rules by notification
in the Official Gazette, to carry out the provision of the Bill. The rules to be framed by the
Government pertain to matters of administrative detail only, which cannot be laid down in the
Bill itself. The delegation is, therefore, normal in character.
9

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide training on social and emotional learning to all educators and students enrolled in
schools affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education, Indian Certificate of
Secondary Education and State Education Boards using curricula and materials that
are scientifically accurate, age appropriate, and culturally relevant and for other matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
.
————
(Shri Vikas Mahatme, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1580RS(S3)—15-07-2019.