THE HIGH COURT OF HARYANA BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a separate High Court for the State of Haryana  and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the High Court of Haryana Act, 2012.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms used in this Act and
not defined but defined in the Punjab Reorgnisation Act, 1966 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 there
shall be established a separate High Court for the State of Haryana known as the High Court
of Haryana.
(2) Such number of Judges of the common High Court of Punjab and Haryana shall,
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MAY, 2012
Bill No. XIX of 2012
Definitions.
Establishment
of a separate
High Court
for the State
of Haryana.
31 of 1966. 5

2
unless they have elected otherwise, become the Judges of the High Court of Haryana as the
President may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of the common High Court of
Punjab and Haryana and the Governor of the State of Haryana, by order, determine.
(3) The expenditure in respect of salaries and allowances of the Judges of the High
Court of Haryana shall be borne by the State Government of Haryana.
4. The High Court of Haryana shall have jurisdiction, powers and authority under the
law for the time being in force in respect of the territories comprised in the State of Haryana
and any territory which may be transferred to the State in future.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Advocates Act, 1961, there shall be a
separate Bar Council for the State of Haryana known as the Bar Council of Haryana and the
Advocate-General of the State of Haryana shall be its ex-officio members.
(2) Any person hailing from the State of Haryana who at the time of the commencement
of this Act is an Advocate entitled to practice in the Common High Court of Punjab and
Haryana shall be entitled to practice as an Advocate in the High Court of Haryana.
(3) All persons hailling from the State of Haryana who at the time of the commencement
of this Act are Advocates on the roll of the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana shall become
Advocates on the roll of the Bar Council of Haryana.
(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Haryana shall be regulated in accordance
with the like principles as immediately before the commencement of this Act are in force with
respect to the right of audience in the Common High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
6. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the law in force immediately before the
commencement of this Act are in force with respect to the right of audience in the Common
High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
7. The law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act with respect to
the custody of the seal of the Common High Court of Punjab and Haryana shall apply with
respect to the custody of the seal of High Court of Haryana, mutatis-mutandis.
8. The law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act with respect to
the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the Common High Court
of Punjab and Haryana shall, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes
used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Haryana mutatis mutandis.
9. The law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act with respect to
the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division Courts of the Common High
Court of Punjab and Haryana and with respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of
those powers shall, apply in relation to the High Court of Haryana mutatis mutandis.
10. (1) The principal seat of the High Court of Haryana shall be at Chandigarh.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of Judges and division
Courts of the High Court of Haryana may also sit at such other places in the State of
Haryana as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the Governor of the State of Haryana,
appoint.
11. The law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act relating to
appeals to the Supreme Court from the Common High Court of Punjab and Haryana and the
Judges and division Courts thereof shall apply in relation to the High Court of Haryana
mutatis mutandis.
12. All proceedings pertaining to or arising within the territorial jurisdiction of the
State of Haryana pending in the Common High Court of Punjab and Haryana immediately
before the commencement of this Act shall stand transferred to the High Court of Haryana.
Jurisdiction of
the High
Court.
Bar Council
and
Advocates.
Practice and
Procedure in
the High
Court of
Haryana.
Custody of
seal of High
Court of
Haryana.
Form of writs
and other
processes.
Powers of
Judges.
Principal seat
and other
places of
sitting of
High Court of
Haryana.
Procedure to
appeals
Supreme
Court.
Transfer of
Pending
proceedings.
20
25
30
35
40
45
25 of 1961.
5
10
15

3
13. (1) For the purposes of this Act, proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in
the Common High Court of Punjab and Haryana until that Court has disposed of all issues
between the parties including any issue with respect to the taxation of the costs of the
proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court, applications for review, petition for revision and petitions for writs.
(2) References to the High Court shall be construed as including references to a
Judge or division Court thereof and references to an order made by a Court or a Judge shall
be construed as including references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by
that Court or Judge.
14. Nothing in this Act shall affect the application to the High Court of Haryana of
any provisions of the Constitution and this Act shall have effect subject to any provisions
that may be made after the commencement of this Act with respect to that High Court by
any Legislative or other authority having power to make such provision.
15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act as appears to him to be necessasry or expedient for the purposes
of removing the difficulty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Interpretation.
Savings.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A common High Court of Punjab and Haryana was envisaged for Punjab, Haryana
and Chandigarh. This system of Common High Court has caused consistent backwardness
in the legal system in Haryana because there are only district level bar councils confined to
the districts only. As such the legal system in the State has not developed to the desired
levels. Similarly, it has also been observed that Haryana is not getting its adequate place in
the benches of the Common High Court and also in the Secretariat of the Common High
Court.
The State of Haryana was carved out in the ratio of 40:60 from the erstwhile Punjab
State and Chandigarh was made a Union Territory. On this pattern, even the Assembly seats
were divided and Haryana was given the Assembly building. On the similar analogy, the
High Court of Punjab and Haryana be divided in the similar ratio in the same High Court
premise in Chandigarh itself. The present High Court building is sufficient to accommodate
two separate High Courts.
Every State has got its fundamental right to provide legal protection to every citizen
and the litigants must get justice at the earliest possible. The separation of the High Court
would not only fulfill the long pending demand of the State but serve the interest of the
people of the State. Carving of Haryana would not be complete till the State be given its own
High Court in Chandigarh. Hence, it is felt that there should be a separate High Court for the
State of Haryana at Chandigarh. Moreover, under article 214 of the Constitution, it is
compulsory that there should be a separate High Court for each State. This constitutional
provision must be implemented by the Union Government. Chandigarh is the most suitable
place for establishing the principal seat of the proposed High Court for the State of Haryana
although benches may also be established at other places in the State.
Hence this Bill.
SHADI  LAL  BATRA
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a separate High Court for the State of Haryana  and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shadi Lal Batra, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1033RS(S3)—11-05-2012.