1
THE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (IDENTIFICATION AND
DEPORTATION) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for an institutional mechanism for identification of illegal immigrants in the
country and their deportation and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Identification and Deportation of Illegal Immigrants
Act, 2018.
(2) It extents to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XIX of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD AUGUST, 2018
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'appropriate Government' menas, in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government.
(b) "illegal immigrant" means a foreign national who comes to India without any
visa or proper and valid documents issued by the designated authority of the
Government of India and settles or attempts to settle in India in the garb of bonafide
Indian citizen by obtaining ration card and other government documents by fraudulent
means;
(c) 'National Commission' means the National Commission for Identification and
Deportation of Illegal Immigrants constituted under Section 3 of the Act;
(d) 'State Commission' means the State Commission or a Joint State Commission
for identification and deportation of illegal immigrants constituted under section 6 of
the Act;
(e) "prescribed" means precribed by rules made under this act;
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, constitute a
Commission to be known as the National Commission for Identification and Deportation of
Illegal Immigrants for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) The National Commission shall consist of—
(i) a Chariperson who shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court, to be
appointed by the President of India in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(ii) four other members to be appointed by the President of India in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson and other members shall hold office for a term of five years or till
they attain the age of seventy years and shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as
may be determined by the Central Goverment.
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the National Commission with such officers
and other employees as may be necesary for the efficient functioning of the National
Commission under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the national
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall set up a State Commission for each State or a Joint
State Commission for two or more States for identitication and deportation of illegal immigrants.
7. (1) Every State Commission shall consist of,—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be a retired Judge of the High Court; and
(ii) four other members.
(2) The Chairperson and other members of the State Commission shall be appointed by
the Central Government in consultation with the Chairperson of the National Commission in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the State Commission shall hold office for
a term of five years or till they attain the age of seventy years and shall be entitled to such
salaries and allowances as may be determined by the Central Government.
Definitions.
National
Commission
for
Identification
and
Deportation of
Illegal
Immigrants.
Composition
of National
Commission.
Officers and
other
employees of
National
Commission.
Setting up of
State
Commissions.
Composition
of State
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. (1) The State Government shall provide the State Commission with such officers
and other employees as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the State
Commission under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the State
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
9. (1) Every State Commission shall—
(i) carry out necessary exercise to identify illegal immigrants and their nationality
within the areas under their jurisdiction; and
(ii) prepare a list of illegal immigrants and supply it to—
(a) the National Commission; and
(b) the district administration, which shall publish such list in the official
gazette:
 Provided that an appeal against the inclusion of the name of an individual in the list
of illegal immigrants by the State Commission shall be made before the National Commission
within ninety days of publication of the said list in the official gazette.
(2) The National Commission shall take necessary action for deportation of illegal
immigrants named in the list of illegal immigrants supplied by the State Commission;
10. The Central Government may, if it considers so in national interest, exempt any
illegal immigrants or any class of illegal immigrants from deportation or any other provisions
of this Act.
11. (1) The National Commission and the State Commission shall, for the purposes of
discharging its functions under this Act, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and
in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of section 123 and section124 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or
document from any office;
(e) issuing summons for the examination of witnesses or documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) No court, except the Supreme Court and a High Court exercising jurisdiction under
articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution shall entertain any suit, application or other
proceedings in respect of any order made by the National Commission and the State
Commission.
12. The National Commission may direct the respective State Government to:—
(i) stop all assistance or benefits being enjoyed by the illegal immigrants
immediately;
(ii) impound the ration card in the possession of illegal immigrants;
(iii) terminate the services of illegal immigrants, in case such immigrants are
employed in any public sector organisation and inform persons concerned in case
they are employed in private sector;
Officers and
other
employees of
State
Commission.
Identification
and
deportation of
illegal
immigrants.
Power of
Central
Government to
exempt certain
immigrants.
National
Commission
and State
Commission to
have powers of
civil court.
Power of
National
Commission to
direct State
Governments.
1 of 1872
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(iv) seize and dispose of any movable or immovable property owned by illegal
immigrants and take such necessary action to recover loans, if any, borrowed by them;
and
(v) facilitate speedy hearing of any civil or criminal cases against illegal immigrants.
13. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament,
provided requisite funds for the purposes of this Act, from time to time.
14. The Provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Removal of
Difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Historically, India has attracted people from all corners of the world. Many were so
smitten with the greatness of our culture that they chose to settle here permanently and over
time they have been assimilated into the Indian society. However, in the recent few decades,
illegal immigration into the country has increased manifold so much so that the influx of
immigrants created a crisis of identity among the indigenous citizens of our country. As a
result, the cultural survival of citizens is in jeopardy, their political control is weakened and
their employment opportunities are undermined by such illegal migration. It is found that
though the immigrants had settled in various States of our country, most of them failed to
identify themselves with the mainstream.
Due to linguistic similarities between illegal migrants from Bangladesh, Myanmar and
other neighbouring countries and the indigenous people, it becomes difficult to identify and
deport the illegal immigrants from Indian soil. Illegal immigrants have increased pressure on
resources of our country and the Government has to increase expenditure on education and
health facilities. Illegal immigrants are not only adding number to our booming population
but are indulging in criminal and anti-national activities. Most of the illegal immigrants have
got their names enlisted in the voting list illegally, thereby claiming the rights of citizens. The
NRC (National Register of Citizens) has taken initiatives for the detection of illegal migrants.
However, success of such initiatives will depend on strong political will. This silent and
insidious demographic invasion may result in the loss of the geo-strategic importance of
several bordering districts in the States of Assam, Tripura, Jammu and Kashmir, West Bengal
and other States. The influx of these illegal migrants is turning these regions into such
ghettos where the original inhabitants have been reduced to a minority and are facing an
identity crisis.
In view of the dangers posed by illegal immigrants, the problem is required to be dealt
effectively. Illegal migration from neighbouring countries is no longer a regional problem
which can be pushed under the carpet since these migrants have now settled in several
States including the NCT of Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.
Since we do not want our country to become world's capital of refugees and immigrants,
it is high time to solve the problems of illegal migration to save culture and identity of our
people in their own land and to save the nation from the momument threat of immigrants.
With the above objectives, the Bill seeks to —
(i) establish a National Commission and State Commissions for Identification
and Deportation of Illegal Immigrants;
(ii) provide that the State Commission shall carry out necessary exercise for
identification of illegal immigrants;
(iii) provide that Appeal against inclusion of an individual's name in the list of
illegal immigrants shall lie with the National Commission;
(iv) provide that the illegal immigrants identified by the State Commission shall
be deported by the National Commission;
(v) provide that the Central Government may, if it considers so in national interest,
exempt any illegal immigrants or any class of illegal immigrants from deportation or any
other provision of the Bill.
(vi) confer powers of civil court upon both the National Commission and the
State Commission; and
5

6
(vii) empower the National Commission to direct the State Governments to
withdraw all services provided to illegal immigrants and seize and dispose of their
property to meet their liabilities;
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NARAY AN LAL PANCHARIYA

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for Constitution of the National Commission for
Identification and Deportation of Illegal Immigrants. Clause 4 seeks to provide for appointment
of a Chairperson and other members of the National Commission.
Clause 13 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation
made by law by Parliament, provide requisite funds for the purposes of this Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. The recurring and non-recurring expenditure on this count cannot be estimated at this
stage, but has to be worked out by the Central Government while implementing the provisions
of the Bill.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules by notification in
the Official Gazette, to carry out the provision of the Bill. The rules to be framed by the
Government pertain to matters of administrative detail only, which cannot be laid down in the
Bill itself. The delegation is, therefore, normal in character.
8

MGIPMRND—1447RS(S3)—06-08-2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for an institutional mechanism for identification of illegal immigrants in the
country and their deportation and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya, M.P.)