THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Code of Criminal procedure ( Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,—
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words "at such monthly rate", the words "not less
than one-third of the monthly income of the person from whom the maintenance is
claimed", shall be inserted.
(ii) after sub-section (I) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
(IA) If the party from whom the maintenance is claimed fails to appear
before the court on three successive occasions, the Magistrate on the third
occasion shall pass the order ex-parte.
Bill No. XIX of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 29TH APRIL, 2016
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of Section
125 of Act of
1973.
5
10

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
As of now, no amount of maintenance allowance has been prescribed under section
125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The earlier limit of maintenane of rupees five
hundered was, removed in the year 2001 as that was fixed many years earlier. Though that
was a right move but in the absence of a reasonable minimum amount of monthly
allowance,dependents are facing problem. There has to be a minimum limit in this regard to
remove ambiguity so that the dependents have a reasonable amount to live with.
It has also been seen that at time the cases for maintenance stretch too long in view of
the non appearance of the person from whom maintenance has been claimed, which is
inappropriate in the interest of justice to the dependents.
Therefore, it is proposed that the amount of maintenance should not be less than one
third of the montly income of the person and if the person failed to appear before the
Magistrate for three consecutive times, ex-parte orders should be passed against him.
Hence this Bill.
VIJAY JAWAHARLAL DARDA

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—676RS(S3)—03-05-2016.