As INTRODUCED IN THE Ratya SABHA

Bill No. XL_of 2000

THE COMPULSORY DESILTATION OF DAMS AND
RIVERS BILL, 2000

A
BILL

to provide for compulsory desiltation of Dams and Rivers by the State and matters
connected therewith.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (2) This Act may be called the Compulsory Desiltation of Dams and Rivers Act,
2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
5 (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—

(व) “Dam” means a barrier constructed over a river to hold back its water to
form a reservoir for preventing floods and other purposes;
(0) “river” includes any stream, canal, creek or other channels whether they are
10 natural or artificial,

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment,

Definitions.


National plan
for desiltation
of dams and
rivers.

Compulsory
desiltation of
dams and
rivers.

Central
Government
to provide
machinery
and knowhow,

Financial
assistance not
to be given in
certain cases.

Indemnity not
to be given to
erring officials.

Central
Government
to undertake
desiltation of
Ports.

Power to
make rules.

2

(०) “desiltation” means removing of sediments of rocks and clay deposited by
flowing water in a river or dam.

(व) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. The Central Government shall formulate a National Plan for desiltation of dams and
inter state rivers of the country, from time to time, as a measure towards combating floods.

4, Every State and Union Territory Government shall carry out Compulsory desiltation
of dams located and rivers flowing through its territory during the lean periods of the years
after demarcating a definite part thereof within a time frame under the direct supervision of
the Central Water Commission.

5. The Central Government shall provide to the State Government necessary
machinery for desiltation of dams and rivers therein and shall also provide intensive training
to the personnel engaged in the desiltation operations in such State.

6. Every State Government which does not accomplish the desiltation work prescribed
under Section 4 of this Act shali not be given any financial assistance from the natural
calamities fund if it is affected by flood water of the river which was not desilted by the
concerned State Government.

4. (1) Every supervisory official entrusted with the work of desiltation of a dam or a
mver within the prescribed time frame, shall not be covered by indemmity if he does not
compicte the work within the time frame or docs not even start the work and legal proceedings
shall lie against him for negligence.

(2) If the offence of negligence is proved against such officer he shall be dismissed
forthwith without giving him any future benefits whatsover.

8, The Central Government shall undertake the desiltation of all the Ports which are
directly under its charge within a time frame.

9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Sedimentation of rivers, dams, ports and seas is a natural process. The flowing waters
of rivers continuously bring particles of rocks and clay while flowing from one place to other
and layers of silt continues to be deposited at the bottom of the river, dam, port and sea
which continues to raise their bottom levels in natural ways. When the silt hardens it raises
the bottom but reduces the depth of the river, dam, port or sea. When the depth is reduced
the river, dam, port or sea cannot carry extra water in them and the water level is raised to such
an extent that water crosses their banks and starts flowing outside. Thus sedimentation or
siltation of rivers is one of the main causes of floods in our country as the silt raises the
bottom level of the rivers. If desiltation is carried out regularly floods can be contained to a
great extent. At present a number of multi-purpose Dams are full with silt which is adversely
affecting the power generation in the country.

It is a matter of serious concern that the Central as well as several State Governments
have imported desiltation machinery and equipments from abroad or have also purchased
them from domestic market but they are not using them at all. Either the irrigation departments
do not have trained personnel for operating these machines or equipments or they
deliberately do not use these equipments for desilting because floods give them rich dividends
an the form of disbursing assistance to the affected ones. As a result these machines become
junk in the course of time and the exchequer suffers heavy losses in both the ways. If
desiltation is made compulsory and protection of indemnity is taken away from the responsible
authorities, losses to the nation can be prevented both from the floods and turning the
equipments into junk. At the same time those States who do not get the desiltation done
within a time frame should not be given any assistance for combating floods. It will have a
good effect on the negligent States.

Hence this Bill.

S. S. AHLUWALIA.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for compulsory desiltation of rivers and dams. Clause 5
provides that the Central Government shall provide machinery and knowhow for desiltation.
Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall undertake desiltation of major ports. If
enacted, the Bill will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is expected
that a sum of rupees one hundred crores is likely to be incurred as recurring expenditure per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non recurring expenditure of rupees fifty lakhs per annum is also likely to be in-
curred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The Rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for compulsory desiltation of Dams and Rivers by the State and
tatters connected therewith.

(Shri & 8 Ahluwalia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2018RS—27.7.2000.