Bill No. XL of 2015
THE ROAD SAFETY AND PROTECTION OF
VULNERABLE ROAD USERS BILL, 2015
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
Clauses
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short Title, Extent and Commencement
2. Definitions
3. Guiding Principles to be followed in the administration of the Act
CHAPTER II
R
OAD SAFETY, TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT AND RELATED OFFENCES
4. National Unified Information System
5. Electronic Road Crash and Offences System
6. Universal Road Crash Emergency Access Telephone Number
7. Unified Driving Licensing System
8. Grant of Driving License
9. Offences related to driving license
10. Electronic enforcement of traffic regulations
11. Bicyclist Safety—Protective Headgear and Conspicuity Requirement
12. Motorcyclist Safety—Protective Headgear and Conspicuity Requirement
13. Unauthorized sale of protective and conspicuity gear
14. Three-wheeled Vehicles—Safety and conspicuity Requirements
15. Light Motor Vehicles—Safety and conspicuity Requirements
16. Transport Vehicles—Safety and conspicuity Requirements
17. Restriction of carriage of person by non-motorised transport
18. Restriction of carriage of person on motor cycles
19. Restriction of carriage of person in three-wheeled vehicles
20. Seat belts for Adults in motor vehicle
21. Seat belts and seating requirements for Children in motor vehicles
22. Child Restraint Systems in Vehicle
23. Requirement to notify Bus passengers to wear seat belts
24. Prohibition of parking or abandoning of motor vehicles in certain places
25. Prohibition of driving in certain places
26. Duty to obey Child zones
27. Speed limits on roads other than restricted roads
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 7TH AUGUST, 2015

Clauses
28. Offence of driving at excessive speed
29. Offence of driving at excessive speed on restricted roads
30. Speed management signs
31. Right of way to Emergency Vehicles
32. Maintenance of safe distance from Pedestrians and Non-Motorized Transport
33. Driving which cuases threat to public safety
34. Prohibition on driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
35. Causing danger to road users
36. Leaving vehicles in dangerous position
37. Tampering with vehicles
38. Holding or getting on to a vehicle in order to be towed or carried
39. Offence of disrupting flow of traffic, etc.
40. Overloading
41. Powers regarding vehicles suspected of overloading
42. Powers to restrict use of vehicles in certain cases
43. Power to place traffic signs
44. Duty of driver in case of a crash and injury to a person
45. Duty of driver to take precuations at unguarded railway level crossings
46. Using vehicle in unsafe conditions
47. Failure to comply with standards for road design, construction and maintenance
48. Offences relating to certain communication devices
CHAPTER III
G
ENERAL OFFENCES AND INVESTIGA TION PROVISIONS
49. General provisions regarding penalties
50. General provisions for driver penalty points scheme
51. Driving uninsured vehicles
52. Punishment for offences relating to a crash
53. Driving when mentally or physcially unfit to drive
54. Punishement for abetment of certain offences
55. Offences by Companies
56. Power to arrest without warrant
57. Power to impound documents
58. Disobedience of orders, obstruction or causing death or injury of a person enforcing
the Act
59. Impairment Test
60. Breath Test
61. Clinical Test
62. Presumption of Unfitness to drive
63. Penalty for offence committed by an enforcing authority
(ii)

Clauses
64. Compounding of certain offences
65. Summary disposal of cases
66. Power of National Road Safety Authority to amend Schedules
CHAPTER IV
N
A TIONAL ROAD SAFETY AUTHORITY
67. Constitution of National Road Safety Authority
68. Appointment of Chairperson and Other Members
69. Conditions of Service of Chairperson and Other Members
70. Resignation and removal of Chairperson and Other Members
71. Restrictions on employment
72. Officers and employees of the National Raod Safety Authority
73. Term of Office of Chairperson and Members
74. Members to act as Chairperson or to Discharge his functions in Certain Circumstances
75. Vacancies etc. not to invalidate the proceedings of the National Road Safety
Authority
76. Objectives and Duties of the National Road Safety Authority
77. Regulations and other functions of the National Road Safety Authority
78. Proceedings of the National Road Safety Authority
79. Process of making regulations
80. Emergency Regulations making
81. Functions of the Chairperson
82. Tehcnical Working Groups
83. Procedure for appointing Technical Working Groups
84. Delegation of Powers of the National Road Authority
85. National Road Crash Victim Compensation Fund
86. Maintenance of Accounts
87. Budget
88. Annual and Special Reports
89. State Road Safety Authorities
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
90. Protection of action taken on good faith
91. Act to have overriding effect
92. Application of certain Laws
93. Power of Central Government to make rules
94. Power to remove difficulties
SCHEDULE  I
SCHEDULE  II
(iii)

THE ROAD SAFETY AND PROTECTION OF VULNERABLE ROAD
USERS BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to significantly reduce the high number of road accidents resulting in deaths and injuries
by establishing a protective framework for all classes of road users, including
vulnerable road users, fixing accountability on and establishing minimum safety
standards for road users, owners and vehicle manufacturers, enhancing enforcement
and improving over-all road discipline and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the Constitution of India guarantees right to life with dignity to all people;
AND WHEREAS 1.4 lakh people are killed on Indian roads every year;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to safeguard the health and prosperity of innocent
civilians by establishing a safe system where the number of fatalities and serious injuries
caused by accidents are significantly reduce in the long term.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Road Safety and Protection of Vulnerable Road Users
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India:
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XL of 2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 7TH AUGUST, 2015

2
Provided that the Central Government may, with the consent of the State Government
of Jammu and Kashmir, extend the Act to the State.
(3) It shall come into effect on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “ambulance” means a vehicle specially designed, constructed or modified
and equipped and intended to be used for emergency transportation of persons who
are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated;
(b) “certificate of registration” means the certificate issued under the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 by a competent authority to the effect that a motor vehicle has been
duly registered in accordance with the said Act;
(c) “company” means a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013
or under any previous company law;
(d) “community service” means a requirement of unpaid work under such terms
as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority imposed on a person who
has committed an offence under this Act;
(e) “driver” means any person who drives or steers a motor vehicle;
(f) “driving license” means the license issued under the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 authorizing a person to drive, otherwise than as a learner, a motor vehicle or a
motor vehicle of any specified type or class;
(g) “drug” or “drugs” means and includes any intoxicant other than alcohol,
natural or synthetic, or any natural material or any salt or preparation of such substance
or material as specified by the National Road Safety Authority under this Act;
(h) “emergency vehicle” means a transport vehicle used solely for police, fire
brigade or ambulance purposes;
(i) “goods” means any kind of movable property and includes livestock but
does not include persons and their personal effects;
Explanation.—Motor vehicles being transported on another motor vehicle shall
be also considered as goods.
(j) “gross vehicle weight” means, in respect of any vehicle, the maximum weight
of the vehicle in laden condition as specified by the manufacturer and certified by the
type approving authority;
(k) “heavy motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle the gross vehicle weight of
which exceeds twelve thousand kilograms or as specified by the National Road Safety
Authority under this Act;
(l) “licensing authority” means an authority empowered by the National Road
Safety Authority to issue licenses under this Act;
(m) “light motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle, the gross vehicle weight of
which does not exceed seven thousand five hundred kilograms or as specified by the
National Road Safety Authority;
(n) “manufacturer” means a person who is engaged in the manufacture of motor
vehicles;
(o) “mobile machinery” means heavy equipment or construction equipment or
earth moving equipment except shop or hand tools, which is self-propelled, towed, or
hauled and used primarily in construction and maintenance of roads, bridges, ditches,
buildings and land reclamation or as specified by the National Road Safety Authority;
Definitions. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
59 of
1988
18 of
2013
59 of
1988

3
(p) “motor cycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle, including a sidecar with
an extra wheel which may be attached;
(q) “motor vehicle” or “vehicle” means any mechanically propelled vehicle used
in any place whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or
internal source and includes a chassis to which a body has not been attached and a
trailer or a semi-trailer or mobile machinery; but does not include a vehicle running
upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted for use only in a factory or in any
other enclosed premises or such vehicles as may be notified by the National Road
Safety Authority from time to time;
(r) “National Road Safety Authority” means the National Authority for ensuring
Road Safety as established under section 67 of this Act;
(s) “non-motorised transport” means any mode of transport that is propelled or
powered by muscular power of either human beings or animals and excludes pedestrians;
(t) “owner” in relation to a motor vehicle means the person in whose name a
motor vehicle stands registered and where such a person is a minor, the guardian of
such minor; and in relation to a motor vehicle which is the subject of a hire-purchase
agreement, or an agreement of lease or an agreement of hypothecation, the person in
possession of the vehicle under that agreement; or in respect of an unregistered
vehicle, the person in possession or control of the vehicle; or a vehicle manufacturer
or dealer or importer till such time the vehicle is registered;
(u) “passenger” is a person who travels in a vehicle but bears little or no
responsibility for the tasks required for that vehicle to arrive at its destination or
otherwise operate the vehicle;
(v) “passenger vehicle” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use
for the carriage of passengers and their personal luggage;
(w) “permit” means a document issued under this Act authorizing the use of
motor vehicles as a transport vehicle;
(x) “private service vehicle” means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to
carry passengers and ordinarily used by or on behalf of the owner of such vehicle for
the purpose of carrying persons for, or in connection with, his trade or business
otherwise than for hire or reward but does not include a motor vehicle used for public
transportation;
(y) “property” includes goods carried in the motor vehicle, personal effects of
passengers, as well as roads, bridges, culverts, causeways, trees, posts and milestones;
(z) “protective headgear” includes any equipment or device, including helmets,
primarily intended to protect the wearer's head against impact in the event of a collision.
(za) “public place” means a road, street, way or other place, whether a
thoroughfare or not, to which the public have a right of access, and includes any place
or stand at which passengers are picked up or set down;
(zb)  “road safety” means the set of practices which identify those problems that
contribute to crashes or injuries and includes methods and measures for reducing the
risk of a road crash death or injuries sustained in a crash in a public place including but
not limited to driver education regarding responsible road sharing and protection of
vulnerable road users, enforcement of traffic laws, manufacture of vehicles with in-
built high safety standards, construction of safe roads and provision of emergency
road services;
(zc) “restricted road” includes a road on which a speed limit applies or has a
restriction on the types of vehicles which may ply on that road or has been notified by
the appropriate authority to be a restricted road;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(zd) “road crash death” means the death of any person who dies within thirty
days or such time period as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority, as
a result of injuries sustained due to a crash caused by a motor vehicle in a public place;
(ze) “semi-trailer” includes a vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn
by a motor vehicle or truck tractor or a prime mover and so constructed that an
appreciable part of its weight and that of its load rests on and is carried by the motor
vehicle or truck tractor, and a pole trailer;
(zf) “State Safety Authority” means the State Safety Authrotiy established under
Section 89 of this Act;
(zg) “Technical Working Groups” means the working groups established under
Section 82 of this Act;
(zh) “three-wheeled vehicle” means a motor vehicle having three wheels designed,
constructed or adapted for the carriage of persons and/or goods, but does not include
a two-wheeler attached with a sidecar or a two-wheeler adapted for use by differently-
abled persons;
(zi) “traffic” on roads includes motor vehicles, pedestrians, non-motorized
transport and other vehicles, either signgly or together;
(zj) “traffic signs” includes all signals including manual signals, warning sign
posts, direction posts, markings on the road or other devices for providing information,
guidance or direction to any user of the road;
(zk) “trailer” includes, a vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
or used in conjuction with a motor vehicle except—
(a) a boat, horse, snowmobile, automobile or motorcycle trailer that is not
used for business purposes or financial gain;
(b) an implement of animal husbandry;
(c) a sidecar attached to a motorcycle; and
(d) a disabled motor vehicle that is towed by a tow car.
(zl) “tranport vehicle” means a motor vehicle used for carriage of passengers for
hire or reward or a goods vehicles or a trailer or a semi-trailer or mobile machinery but
does not include a private service vehicle;
(zm) “two-wheeler” means a two wheeled motor vehicle with or without a
detachable sidecar with one or more wheels and includes a two-wheeler adapted for
use by differently-abled person;
(zn) “unladen weight” means the weight of a vehicle or trailer including all
equipment ordinarily used with the vehicle or trailer when working, but excluding the
weight of a driver or attendant; and where alternative parts or bodies are used the
unladen weight of the vehicle means the weight of the vehicle with the heaviest such
alternative part or body;
(zo) “weight” means the total weight transmitted for the time being by the wheels
of a vehicle to the surface on which the vehicle rests.
3. The Central Government, the State Governments, the National Road Safety Authority,
the State Safety Authorities and other agencies, as the case may be, while implementing the
provisions of this Act shall be guided by the following principles namely:—
(a) the desirability to facilitate the seamless movement of people, goods and
services by way of motor vehicles throughout the territory of India;
(b) the advantages offered to the public by the development of road transport
and systems of public transportation;
Guiding
principles to
be followed in
administration
of the Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(c) the development of technology, its adoption, and innovation in motor vehicles
and road transport;
(d) the necessity to ensure public safety;
(e) the necessity to protect public health;
(f) the desirability of reducing the incidence and severity of road trauma;
(g) the desirability of preventing the deterioration of the road network;
(h) the desirability to foster transparency and eliminate corrupt practices.
CHAPTER II
ROAD SAFETY, TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT AND RELATED OFFENCES
4. (1) A National Unified Information system shall be developed and maintained by
The National Road Safety Authority for the entire country for ensuring road safety.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the above provision, the National Unified
Information System shall include information relating to—
(a) the registration of motor vehicles and the renewals of such registrations;
(b) the information of manufacturers, including chassis number, and engine
number of motor vehicles either manufactured in India or registered in India;
(c) the details of insurance policies of motor vehicles registered in India;
(d) the certificates of fitness and pollution under control certificates;
(e) the issuance and renewal of driving licenses;
(f) traffic offences committed along with penalties imposed on the holders of a
driving license and registered motor vehicles;
(g) road crashes involving motor vehicles.
(3) The system shall be developed to ensure that the payment of monies and the
distribution of revenue to the states and the local government is facilitated in a seamless
manner and protects against revenue leakage.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the National Road Safety
Authority shall have the power to call for information from any person in possession, control
or ownership of such information, including the State Governments, competent licensing
authorities, competent registering authorities, motor vehicle manufacturers and such person
shall be obliged to submit the said information forthwith.
(5) Every motor vehicle manufacturer shall be obliged to provide details including the
unique chassis number assigned by it to each vehicle it manufactures to the National Road
Safety Authority for the purpose of developing and maintaining the National Unified
Information System and in such format and manner as may be specified by the National Road
Safety Authority.
(6) Whoever fails to provide information to the National Road Safety Authority shall
be committing an offence under this Act which shall attract penalty in accordance with
Schedule II.
5. (1) An Electronic Road Crash and Offences System shall be designed and developed
by the National Road Safety Authority within two years from the date of the commencement
of this Act and shall be implemented within one year of its development.
(2) The Electronic Road Crash and Offences System  shall be designed to:
(a) Enable the submission of data on road crashes and offences either
electronically or at any police station in the country; and
National
Unified
Information
System.
Electronic
Road Crash
and Offences
System.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(b) Facilitate the collection of uniform standardized information regarding road
crashes and offences.
6. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall establish a toll-free Nation-wide Road
Crash Emergency Access Telephone Number for the entire country to enable persons involved
in a road crash or any other person to alert and access first-response emergency services
that shall provide emergency services including golden-hour trauma care.
(2) The Central Government, State Government and State Safety Authority shall ensure,
through appropriate regulations or orders or directives, that all emergency services are
coordinated in their response to road crashes via the said Nation-wide Road Crash Emergency
Access Telephone Number.
(3) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying the form and
manner in which such Nation-wide Road Crash Emergency Access Telephone Number is
established and operated.
7. (1) A Unified Driving Licensing System shall be designed and developed by the
National Road Safety Authority within six months from the date of the commencement of the
Act and shall be implemented within one year of its development.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the above provision, the Unified Driving
Licensing System shall—
(a) Enable the submission of applications for different types of driving licenses
from anywhere in the country both electronically or before any competent licensing
authority in the country;
(b) Facilitates collection of uniform standardized information including biometric
or any other equivalent unique identification technology identified by the National
Road Safety Authority;
(c) Facilitate collection of such information to verify whether the applicant for a
driving license has a valid and operating bank account;
(d) Facilitates grant of license in a transparent and time bound manner; and
(e) Enable electronic payment of the fees as prescribed by the National Road
Safety Authority in consultation with the Central and the State Government for issuance
of driving license.
(3) The National Road Safety Authority in consultation with the State Safety Authorities
shall establish License Seva Kendras  in all the States to deliver license services to citizens
in a timely, transparent, more accessible and reliable manner and in a comfortable environment
through streamlined processes and trained workforce.
8. (1) The National Authority shall through rules lay down the detailed requirements
for the issuance of driving license, including mandatory driver training and competence
tests.
(2) Notwithstanding the generality of the provision under sub-section 1, no person
shall be granted a driving license unless—
(a) that person is medically fit to hold that category of license and the criteria for
fitness shall be as prescribed by the National Road Safety Authority
(b) that person has undergone mandatory driver's training in the manner and at
an institution as prescribed by the National Road Safety Authority through rules
(c) that at some time in the three months prior to the date of application, that
person has passed the specified tests of competence to drive:
Provided that the National Authority shall also prescribe through rules the procedure
for renewal of driving license.
Universal
Road Crash
Emergency
Access
Telephone
Number.
Unified
Driving
Licensing
System.
Grant of
Driving
License.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
9. (1) Any person who, while holding any driving license for the time being in force,
attempts to obtain any other driving license except as provided under this Act, shall be
punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
(2) Any person who, while holding any driving license for the time being in force,
obtains any other driving license except as provided under this Act, then both such licenses
issued to that person are deemed to be invalid.
(3) Any person who, while holding any driving license for the time being in force,
holds any other driving license except as provided under this Act shall be punishable in
accordance with Schedule I.
(4) Any person who, being disqualified under this Act for holding or obtaining a
driving license, drives a motor vehicle in any place, or applies for or obtains a driving license,
shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
(5) Any person who, not being entitled to have a driving license issued to such person
free of endorsement, applies for or obtains a driving license without disclosing, the
endorsement made on a driving license previously held by such person, shall be punishable
in accordance with Schedule II and may have to undergo compulsory refresher training.
(6) Whoever, being the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle, or the person under
whose instructions the driver of a motor vehicle, knowingly causes or permits a minor to
drive that vehicle shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
10. (1) The State Government shall prescribe electronic enforcement of road safety
and traffic regulations for any urban city within the State, which has a population above the
limit prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) For the purposes of this Section, the National Road Safety Authority shall make
regulations for electronic monitoring and enforcement for road safety, which may include
speed cameras, CCTV cameras, speed guns and other similar, progressive technology that
achieves the objectives specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
11. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying the
protective gear and conspicuity requirements including types of helmets, reflector material
and jackets, required for affording protection to persons on bicycles from death or injury in
the event of a crash.
(2) A person who is riding a bicycle without wearing protective headgear or in
contravention of regulations under this Section is guilty of an offence under this Act and
shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II.
(3) In case the offence under sub-section ( 2) has been committed by the driver, the
person shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
Explanation — For the purposes of this Section and Section 12, "helmet" includes
any head-dress as specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
12. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying the
protective gear and conspicuity requirements, including types of helmets, daytime running
lights, reflectorizing material, reflector jackets and visors, required to afford protection to
persons on motor cycles of all classes, from death or injury in the event of a crash.
(2) A person who drives or rides a motor cycle without protective gear or in contravention
of regulations under this Section is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in accordance
with Schedule II:
Provided if the person actually committing the contravention is a child under the age
of sixteen years, the driver will be held guilty of the offence:
Provided further that the requirement for protective headgear imposed by regulations
under this Section shall not apply to any follower of the Sikh religion and only while such
person is wearing a turban.
Offences
related to
driving
license.
Electronic
Enforcement
of Traffic
Regulations
Bicyclist
Safety-
Protective
headgear and
conspicuity
requirements.
Motorcyclist
Safety -
Protective
headgear and
conspicuity
requirements.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(3) In case the offence under sub-section (2) has been committed by the driver, the
person shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
Explanation — For the purposes of this Section "Daytime Running Lights" include
headlamps or lights switched on during the day in order to increase visibility and conspicuity
of the vehicle.
13. If a person sells, or offers for sale, any protective or conspicuity gear, as specified
by the National Road Safety Authority (by reference to shape, construction or any other
quality) in sections 11 and 12 for affording such protection and the gear is not:
(a) of a type specified under sections 11 and 12; or
(b) of a type authorized under regulations made under sections 11 and 12
such person is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II.
Provided a person shall not be convicted of an offence under this Section in respect
of the sale or offer for sale of any protective or conspicuity gear if that person proves that
such protective or conspicuity gear was sold or offered for sale solely for export purposes.
14. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying the
safety and conspicuity requirements including fog lights and tail lights, retro-reflective
material, or other requirements for poor or dense weather conditions, as required to afford
protection to persons on or in three wheeled vehicles of different classes, from death or
injury in the event of crash.
(2) Whoever, while driving a three wheeled vehicle contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II, and shall be awarded
penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
15. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying (by
reference to shape, construction or any other quality) the safety and conspicuity
requirements including air-bags, daytime running lights, and reflectorizing material
recommended as affording protection to persons on or in Light Motor Vehicles of different
classes, from death or injury in the event of a collision.
(2) Whoever, while driving a light motor vehicle contravenes the provisions of sub-
section, 1 shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II, and shall be awarded penalty
points in accordance with Schedule I.
16. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying (by
reference to shape, construction or any other quality) the safety and conspicuity
requirements including, but not limited to, daytime running lights, tail lights or fog lights,
retro-reflective material, and barricading requirements in case of being stationary on the
road, required as affording protection to persons on or in, or from transport vehicles of
different classes, from death or injury in the event of a crash.
(2) Whoever, while driving a transport vehicle contravenes the provisions of sub-
section (1) shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II, and shall be awarded penalty
points in accordance with Schedule I.
17. (1) No person shall conduct Carriage on a road or riding of or carriage in non-
motorized transport of persons more than such number specified by the National Road
Safety Authority.
(2) If a person is carried on or in non-motorised transport in contravention of sub-
section (1) above, the driver is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in accordance
with Schedule II.
18. (1) Not more than one person in addition to the driver may be carried on a motor
cycle.
Unauthorized
sale of
protective
and
conspicuity
gear.
Three-
wheeled
vehicles -
Safety and
conspicuity
requirements.
Light Motor
Vehicles:
Safety and
Conspicuity
Requirements.
Transport
Vehicles:
Safety and
Conspicuity
Requirements.
Restriction of
carriage of
persons on
non-
Motorized
Transport.
Restriction of
carriage of
persons on
Motor Cycles,
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(2) No person or animal in addition to the driver may be carried on a motor cycle
otherwise than sitting on a proper seat securely fixed to the motor cycle either being behind
the driver's seat or being a combined seat.
(3) If a person or animal is carried on a motor cycle in contravention of this Section,
the driver of the motor cycle is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in accordance
with Schedule II and shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
19. (1) Not more than the specified number of persons as provided by the National
Road Safety Authority may be carried on a road in a three-wheeled vehicle.
(2) If a person is carried in a three-wheeled vehicle in contravention of sub-sction (1)
above, the owner and the driver of the three-wheeled vehicle is guilty of an offence.
Explanation.—In this Section, references to a person carried in a three wheeled
vehicle includes references to persons driving the three-wheeled vehicle.
20. (1) A person who drives or rides in a motor vehicle without wearing a seat belt or
in contravention of regulations under this Section is guilty of an offence and shall be
punished in accordance with Schedule II:
Provided that no person other than the person actually committing the contravention
is guilty of an offence by reason of the contravention.
(2) In case the offence under sub-section (1) has been committed by the driver, the
person shall also be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(3) The National Road Safety Authority may by regulations specify:
(a) the description of seat belts to be worn;
(b) different requirements in relation to different classes of vehicles, different
descriptions of persons, including those with disabilities or with special health
requirements, and different circumstances; and
(c) any exceptions to sub-Section (1), and may require persons seeking such
exception to obtain a certificate, which, in certain cases, may be issued for a specified
fee.
(4) If the holder of any such certificate as under sub-section (3)(c) is informed by a
police officer that the person may be prosecuted for an offence under sub-section ( 1)
above, the person is not entitled to rely on the exception afforded by the certificate in
proceedings for that offence unless:
(a) it is produced to the police officer at the time that person is so informed; or
(b) it is produced:
(i) within seven days after the date on which the person is so informed;
or
(ii) as soon as is reasonably practicable, at such police station as the
person may have specified to the police officer; or
(iii) where it is not produced at such police station, it is not reasonably
practicable for it to be produced there before the day on which the proceedings
are commenced.
(5) For the purposes of sub-Section (4), the service of the complaint on the accused
shall be treated as the commencement of the proceedings.
21.  (1) Except as provided by regulations, a parent or guardian of the child, or in the
absence of such parent or guardian, the driver of the motor vehicle shall not allow a child
below the age of eight years to occupy the front seat of a motor vehicle when the vehicle is
in motion. In case of contravention, the driver shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II
and shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
Restriction of
carriage of
persons in
Three-
wheeled
vehicles.
Seat belts for
Adults in a
motor
vehicle.
Seat belts and
seating
requirements
for children
in motor
vehicles.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(2) Except as provided by regulations, where a child above the age of eight years
occupies the front seat of a motor vehicle, a person shall not drive the vehicle on a road
unless the child is wearing a seat belt or child restraint system in conformity with regulations.
In case of contravention, the driver shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II and
shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(3) Except as provided by regulations, where a child under the age of 14 years is in the
rear of a motor vehicle, a person shall not drive the vehicle on a road unless the child is
wearing a seat belt or child restraint system in conformity with regulations. In case of
contravention, the driver shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II and shall be
awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(4) Except as provided by regulations, a person shall not drive the passenger car on
a road in cases where a child of the specified description is in the rear of the passenger car
when:
(a) no seat belt is fitted in the rear of the passenger car; and
(b) a seat in the front of the passenger car is provided with a seat belt but is not
occupied by any person.
(5) Regulations made for the purposes of sub-section (2) or (3) above shall include an
exemption for any child holding a valid certificate signed by a medical practitioner, in the
form and manner specified by the National Road Safety Authority, to the effect that it is
inadvisable on medical grounds for that child to wear a seat belt.
(6) If the driver of a motor vehicle is informed by a police officer that the person may
be prosecuted for an offence under this section, the person is not entitled to rely on an
exception afforded to a child by a certificate referred to in sub-section (4) above in
proceedings for that offence unless:
(a) it is produced to the police officer at the time such person is so informed; or
(b) it is produced to the police officer within seven days after the date on which
such person is so informed.
(7) For the purposes of sub-section ( 6) above, the service of the complaint on the
accused shall be treated as the commencement of the proceedings.
22. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying the
types of equipment of any description to which this section applies that are required as
conducive to the safety, in the event of a collision or a sudden stop, of specified categories
of children in specified classes of motor vehicles.
(2) Regulations under this section may specify types of child restraint systems required
for children under a certain weight and height.
(3) Regulations under this section may make provision for securing that when
equipment of a type specified by the regulations is sold or offered for sale as equipment
which is so conducive:
(a) appropriate information is provided in relation to it in such manner as may
be specified; and
(b) inappropriate information is not provided in relation to it.
(4) Except in such circumstances as may be specified, if a person sells, or offers for
sale, equipment of any description for which a type is specified under this Section as
equipment which is so conducive and that equipment:
(a) is not of a type so specified; or
(b) is sold or offered for sale in contravention of regulations under this Section
Child restraint
systems in
vehicles.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
that person is, subject to sub-section ( 6) guilty of an offence and shall be punished in
accordance with Schedule II.
(5) Except in such circumstances as may be specified, if a person sells, or offers for
sale, equipment of any description for which a type is specified under this Section as
equipment conducive to the safety in the event of a crash:
(a) of children not of a category specified in relation to equipment of that type;
or
(b) of children in motor vehicles not of a category specified in relation to
equipment of that type;
that person is, subject to sub-section ( 7) guilty of an offence and shall be punished in
accordance with Schedule II.
(6) A person shall not be convicted of an offence under this Section in respect of the
sale or offer for sale of equipment if the person proves that it was sold or, as the case may
be, offered for sale for export.
(7) Regulations under this Section may make different provision in relation to different
circumstances.
Explanation.—References in this Section to selling or offering for sale include
respectively references to letting on hire and offering to let on hire.
23. (1) The operator of a bus in which any of the passenger seats are equipped with
seat belts shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that every passenger is notified of the
requirement to wear a seat belt at all times when:
(a) the passenger is in a seat equipped with a seat belt; and
(b) the bus is in motion.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a passenger may he notified by means of an
official announcement, or an audio-visual presentation, or pictorial symbol of the form as
specified.
(3) An operator who fails to comply with sub-section (1) is guilty of an offence and
shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II.
(4) Where an offence under sub-section ( 4) above which has been committed by a
company is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or may be
attributable to any neglect on the part of a director, manager, secretary or other similar
officer of the body corporate, or any person who was purporting to act in such a capacity,
that person as well as the company shall be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(5) Sub-section (1) above does not apply in relation to a bus:
(a) which is being used to provide a local service in a built-up area; or
(b) which is constructed or adapted for the carriage of standing passengers
and on which the operator permits standing as per the regulations specified by
National Road Safety Authority.
(6) For the purposes of clause (a) above, a local service is provided in a built-up area
if the entire route used by that service consists of restricted roads.
24. (1) A person is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in accordance with
Schedule II, along with being awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I if such
person parks or abandons a motor vehicle (as specified in regulations made by the National
Road Safety Authority) wholly or partly on any road including:
(a) on the verge of a road; or
Requirement
to notify bus
passengers to
wear seat
belts.
Prohibition
of parking or
abandoning of
Motor
V ehicles in
certain
places.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(b) on any land situated between two carriageways and which is not a footpath
or a cycle track; or
(c) on a footpath; or
(d) on a cycle track:
Provided that a person shall not be convicted of an offence under this Section in
respect of a vehicle if that person proves to the satisfaction of the court:
(a) that it was parked or abandoned in accordance with permission given by an
authorized person; or
(b) that it was parked or abandoned in contravention of this Section for the
purpose of saving life or extinguishing fire or meeting any other like emergency; or
(c) that the vehicle was owned or operated by a highway authority or by a
person discharging functions on behalf of a highway authority and was driven in
contravention of that sub-section in connection with the carrying out by or on behalf
of that authority of any of the following, that is:
(i) the cleaning, maintenance or improvement of; or
(ii) the maintenance or alteration of any structure or other work situated
in, the cycle track or path or their verges; or
(iii) the preventing or removing of obstructions to the cycle track or the
footpath; or
(iv) the preventing or abating in any other way of nuisances or other
interferences with the cycle track or footpath.
(d) that it was parked or abandoned in contravention of this Section but the
following conditions were satisfied—
(i) that the vehicle was parked on the verge of a road or on a footpath for
the purpose of loading or unloading with adequate warning signs, barricading
and other safety measures as specified by the National Road Safety Authority;
(ii) that the loading or unloading of the vehicle could not have been
satisfactorily performed if it had not been parked on the footpath or verge; or
(iii) that the vehicle was not left unattended at any time while it was so
parked and had adequate warning signs, barricading and other safety measures
as specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
25. (1) Any person who, without lawful authority, drives a motor vehicle wholly or
partly on a cycle track or a footpath is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in
accordance with Schedule II along with being awarded penalties in accordance with
Schedule I.
(2) A person shall not be convicted of an offence under sub-section ( 1) above with
respect to a vehicle if the person proves to the satisfaction of the court:
(a) that the vehicle was driven in contravention of that sub-section for the
purpose of saving life, or extinguishing fire or meeting any other like emergency; or
(b) that the vehicle was owned or operated by a highway authority or by a
person discharging functions on behalf of a highway authority and was driven in
contravention of that sub-section in connection with the carrying out by or on behalf-
of that authority of any of the following, that is:
(i) the cleaning, maintenance or improvement of; or
(ii) the maintenance or alteration of any structure or other work situated
in, the cycle track or footpath or their verges; or
Prohibition of
driving in
certain places.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(iii) the preventing or removing of obstructions to the cycle track or the
footpath; or
(iv) the preventing or abating in any other way of nuisances or other
interferences with the cycle track or footpath.
26. Every person shall conform to and obey any indication of a Child Zone, as
specified by the National Road Safety Authority and shall comply with all directions given
to that person by any police officer, or other authorized person, for the time being engaged
in regulation and surveillance of a child zone.
Explanation.—“Child Zone” in this Section shall mean a specified area, as notified
by the State Safety Authority in conformity with regulations specified by the National Road
Safety Authority, frequented by children including spaces outside schools, parks or specified
times in the day, where the traffic shall be regulated through interventions including speed
limits, engineering interventions and other measures to ensure the safety of children.
27. (1) The Traffic Authority through an order made under this sub-section may
prohibit:
(a) the driving of motor vehicles on that road at a speed exceeding that specified
in the order;
(b) the driving of motor vehicles on that road at a speed exceeding that specified
in the order during periods specified in the order; or
(c) the driving of motor vehicles on that road at a speed exceeding the speed for
the time being indicated by traffic signs in accordance with the order.
(2) An order made by virtue of sub-section (1)(c) may:
(a) make provision restricting the speeds that may be indicated by traffic signs
or the periods during which the indications may be given; and
(b) provide for the indications to be given only in such circumstances as may
be determined by or under the order;
but any such order must comply with regulations made under sub-section (3), except where
the State Government authorizes otherwise in a particular case.
(3) The State Government may make rules governing the provision which may be
made by orders of local authorities under sub-section ( 2)(b) and any such rules may in
particular:
(a) prescribe the circumstances in which speed limits may have effect by virtue
of an order;
(b) prescribe the speed limits which may be prescribed in an order; and
(c) make transitional provision and different provision for different cases.
(4) While an order made under sub-section (1)(a) is in force with regard to a road, that
road shall not be a restricted road for the purposes of section 29 of this Act.
(5) For the purposes of this Section a “traffic authority” shall mean an authority that
manages and regulates traffic under this Act.
28. (1) A person who drives a motor vehicle of any class in contravention of the
speed limits referred to in section 27, shall he punishable in accordance with Schedule II and
shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I for each offence so committed.
(2) Whoever causes a person who is in their employment or under their control when
driving a motor vehicle to drive the vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred to
in Section 20, shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
Duty to obey
Child Zones.
Speed limits
on roads
other than
restricted
roads.
Offence of
driving at
excessive
speed.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(3) The publication of a time-table or log book, or the giving of any direction
electronically as per which any .journey or part of a journey is to be completed within a
specified time shall, if in the opinion of the Court it is not practicable in the circumstances of
the case for that journey or part of a journey to he completed in the specified time without
contravening the speed limits referred to in Section 27, be prima facie evidence that the
person who published the time table or log book or gave the direction electronically has
committed an offence punishable under sub-section (3).
(4) Any person who commits an offence under this Section may also have his/her
license suspended or revoked subject to the penalties mentioned in Schedule II, and may
have to undergo compulsory refresher training for renewal of license, or as the case may be,
as specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
Provided that no statutory provision imposing a speed limit on motor vehicles shall
apply to any designated emergency vehicle on an occasion when it is being used for fire
and rescue authority, ambulatory purposes, disaster response or police purposes, if the
observance of that provision would be likely to hinder the use of the vehicle for the purpose
for which it is being used on that occasion.
29. (1) A person who drives a motor vehicle on a restricted road at a speed exceeding
the speed limit specified for such roads is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in
accordance with Schedule II, along with being awarded penalty points under Schedule 1.
(2) The traffic authority for a road may direct that the road,—
(a) which is a restricted road for the purposes of this Act shall cease to be a
restricted road for those purposes; or
(b) which is not a restricted road for those purposes shall become a restricted
road for those purposes.
(3) For the purposes of this section a “traffic authority” shall mean an authority that
manages and regulates traffic under this Act.
30. (1) For the purpose of ensuring that adequate guidance is given to drivers of
motor vehicle as to whether any, and if so what, limit of speed is to be observed on any road,
it shall be the duty of the State Government, in the case of a road for which that person is the
traffic authority, to place and maintain speed management signs in such positions as may
be requisite for that purpose.
(2) In the case of any other road, the local traffic authority may issue an order in
writing:
(a) to place and maintain such number of traffic signs in such positions as may
be requisite in order to give effect to general or other directions given by the State
Governments for the purpose mentioned in sub- section (1); and
(b) to alter or remove traffic signs as may be requisite in order to give effect to
such directions, either in consequence of the making of any order by the Central
Government or otherwise.
31. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained under any other law, upon the approach
of an emergency vehicle equipped with, and operating, one or more flashing, rotating, or
oscillating red or blue lights, visible under normal conditions from a distance of five hundred
feet to the front of such vehicle; or the driver is given audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle, including VIP vehicles and VIP convoys
shall yield the right-of-way, immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible to, the edge or curb of the road clear of any inter Section, and stop and remain in
such position until the emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by
a police officer or firefighter.
Offence of
driving at
excessive
speed on
restricted
roads.
Speed
Management
Signs.
Right of way
to emergency
vehicles.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(2) No operator of any vehicle, unless he is on official business, shall fallow any
emergency vehicle being operated in conformity with the provisions of sub-section (1) of
this section closer than five hundred feet, nor shall he drive into, or park the vehicle into, or
park the vehicle within, the block where the vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency
call or alarm unless he is directed otherwise by a police officer or firefighter.
(3) No motor vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
when the hose is laid down on any street, private driveway, or track for use at any fire or fire
alarm unless the fire department official in command consents that the hose be driven over.
(4) This Section does not operate to relieve the person who drives an emergency
vehicle from the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the roads.
(5) Whoever, being the driver of a motor vehicle or the person under whose instructions
a motor vehicle is being operated, knowingly causes or permits a violation of sub-
sections (1), (2) and (3) of this Section, shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II,
shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
32. (1) A person who drives a motor vehicle shall maintain a safe distance to an extent,
as specified by the National Road Safety Authority, while overtaking or passing non-
motorized transport or pedestrian, on restricted roads.
(2) A person who drives a motor vehicle in contravention of this provision, shall be
guilty of an offence, except if:
(a) it was necessary to do so to ensure safety of passengers in the motor
vehicle; or
(b) to avoid a collision on the road.
33. Whoever drives a mo or vehicle in a manner which causes a sense of alarm or
distress to the occupants of the vehicle, other road users, and persons and property near
roads, which includes driving against the authorized flow of traffic, dangerous passing and
overtaking, including by authorized convoys with escort vehicles, convoy of private service
vehicles and vehicles carrying personal security officers in the convoy, driving dangerously
and dangerous driving with children on board, having regard to all the circumstances
including the nature, condition and use of the place where the vehicle is driven and the
volume of traffic at the time or which might reasonably be expected to be at such place even
if such person is within the limits of speed for that particular road, shall be punishable for
each mentioned offence, in accordance with Schedule II, and shall be awarded penalty
points in accordance with Schedule I.
34. (1) No person shall-drive a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol and the
National Road Safety Authority may make additional regulations in this regard.
(2) A person shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II, along with being
awarded penalty points under Schedule I, if while driving, or attempting to drive a motor
vehicle, such person is deemed to have alcohol in his breath or blood on an impairment test,
on a test by a breath analyser, or any other test including clinical test.
(3) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Government and the
National Road Safety Authority, shall develop a liquor vending policy to regulate the
placement of or abolition thereof, of liquor vends adjacent to national highways.
(4) A person who, while driving, or attempting to drive a motor vehicle, is under the
influence of a narcotic, or a psychotropic substance or a drug or a prescription drug as
prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf, by notification, shall be punishable in
accordance with Schedule II, if:
(a) the person does not complete a compulsory impairment test in a manner
satisfactory to a police officer under section 59, provided that any such police officer
Maintenance
of Safe
Distance
from
Pedestrians
and Non-
motorized
transport.
Driving which
causes threat
to public
safety.
Prohibition
on Driving
under the
influence of
alcohol or
drugs.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
should be trained to give such test in the manner specified by the National Road
Safety Authority; and
(b) the person’s blood or urine, as ascertained from an analysis through a
clinical test subsequently taken under Section 61 contains evidence of the use of a
drug or drugs as specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
(5) A police officer may arrest a person without warrant if the person refuses or fails
to comply with provisions of sections 60 and 61.
(6) Any driver of a motor vehicle, carrying a child or children in the vehicle, who
violates sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of this section, shall be punishable in accordance
with Schedule II, and subjected to an immediate Cancellation of license for a period of three
years.
(7) Any person who drives a transport vehicle or a heavy motor vehicle and violates
sub-section (1) or sub-section ( 4) of this section shall be punishable in accordance with
Schedule II, and subjected to an immediate cancellation of license for a period of five years.
(8) Any person who has committed an offense under sub-section (4) of this section
will have a valid defence, if the court is satisfied that the person had consumed the relevant
qualifying drug:
(a) in accordance with:
(i) a current and valid prescription written for that person by a registered
medical practitioner; and
(ii) any instructions from a registered medical practitioner or from the
manufacturer of the qualifying drug; or,
(b) because it was administered by a registered medical practitioner, provided
that the person complied with the instructions (if any) that the registered medical
practitioner has given.
(9) It is no defence to proceedings for an offense that a provision forming part of
Sections 59, 60 and 61 has not been strictly complied with or has not been complied with at
all, provided there has been reasonable compliance with such of those provisions as apply.
35. A person is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in accordance with
Schedule II if the person intentionally and without lawful authority or reasonable cause:
(a) causes anything to be on or over a road or near a road such that it affects the
safety of road users or obstructs clear and safe vision of road users; or
(b) interferes with a motor vehicle; or
(c) interferes directly or indirectly, with traffic equipment, in such circumstances
that it would be obvious to a reasonable person that to do so would be dangerous; or
(d) damages public property.
Explanation I.— In sub-section ( 1) above "dangerous" refers to danger either of
injury to any person while on or near a road, or of serious damage to property on or near a
road; and in determining for the purposes of that sub-Section what would be obvious to a
reasonable person in a particular case, regard shall be had not only to the circumstances of
which a reasonable person could be expected to be aware but also to any circumstances
shown to have been within the knowledge of the accused.
Explanation II.— In sub-section (1) above "traffic equipment" means:
(a) anything lawfully placed on or near a road by a highway authority;
(b) a traffic sign lawfully placed on or near a road by an authorized person or by
an authorized member of the police or by a person acting under the instruction,
whether general or specific of a police officer other than a highway authority; or
Causing
danger to road
users
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(c) any fence, barrier or light lawfully placed on or near a road for the purposes
of construction or maintenance of the road, or by an authorized member of the police
or a person acting under the instructions, whether general or specific of a senior
officer of police.
Explanation III.— For the purposes of Explanation II above anything placed on or
near a road shall unless the contrary is proved be deemed to have been lawfully placed
there.
36. If a person in charge of a vehicle causes or permits the vehicle or a trailer or a semi-
trailer or mobile machinery drawn by it to remain at rest on a road in such a position or in
such condition or in such circumstances as to cause a sense of alarm or distress to occupants
of the vehicle, other road users, and persons and property near roads, that person is guilty
of an offence and shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II
37. A person is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in accordance with Schedule
II, if while a motor vehicle is on a road or on a parking place provided by a local authority,
without consent of the owner, the person:
(a) gets on to the vehicle; or
(b) tampers with the brake or other part of its mechanism, without lawful authority
or reasonable cause; or
(c) tampers with safety electronic device.
38. If for the purpose of being carried or drawn, a person without lawful authority or
reasonable cause takes or retains hold of, or gets on to, a motor vehicle or trailer or
semi-trailer or mobile machinery while in motion on a road, the person is guilty of an offence
and shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II.
39. A person who disrupts the flow of traffic in the following manners shall be guilty
of an offence and shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II:
(a) Parking a motor vehicle in a manner so as to disrupt the flow of traffic unless
that person can show that there was an emergency which necessitated such an act.
(b) Crossing any road, street, way or thoroughfare at any point where signs,
fences, barriers, or other devices are erected to prohibit or restrict such crossing
(c) Crossing any road, street, way or thoroughfare in violation of a traffic signal
or traffic sign
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Section, "flow of traffic" means the authorized
movement of motor vehicles, non-motorized transport and pedestrians.
40. (1) A person is guilty of the offence of overloading and shall be punished in
accordance with Schedule II, if the person who drives a motor vehicle, or causes or allows
a motor vehicle to be driven, including common carriers, goods transport agents and
consignees, where:
(a) the unladen weight of which exceeds the unladen weight specified in the
certificate of registration of the vehicle;
(b) the laden weight of which exceeds the gross vehicle weight specified in the
certificate or registration;
(c) the number of persons carried in the vehicle exceeds the number of
passengers the vehicle is authorized to carry in such vehicles as may be specified by
the National Road Safety Authority;
(d) an object or cargo that protrudes outside the body of the vehicle is carried
in a manner that is likely to compromise the safety of or poses a danger to any person
or property:
Leaving
vehicles in
dangerous
position.
Tampering
with vehicle.
Holding or
getting on to
vehicle in
order to be
towed or
carried.
Offence of
disrupting
Flow of
Traffic, etc.
Overloading.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
Provided that in case the contravention is committed by the driver, he shall be awarded
penalty points in accordance with Schedule I:
Provided further that standard variance in weight may be permitted for equipment,
mandated under this Act, fitted to the vehicle:
Provided further that a toll operator, as defined in National Highways Authority Act
Rules, shall be guilty of an offence under sub-Section (1), if the toll operator allows such a
motor vehicle to be driven in the Section of the road over which such toll operator operates
or has obtained a concession:
Provided further that a police officer on duty at a particular location shall be guilty of
an offence under sub-Section (1) if the police officer permits such a motor vehicle to traverse
that location.
(2) Where the driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle driven in contravention of
sub-section (1) is not the owner of the vehicle or consignor of the goods carried by the
vehicle, a Court may presume that the offence was committed with the knowledge of or
under the orders of the owner of the motor vehicle or consignor of the goods.
Provided that a consignor shall be held responsible for the offence only if that person
is the sole consignor for the goods carried in the motor vehicles.
41. (1) Any authorized person may enter into a passenger vehicle and check whether
the vehicle is carrying more passengers than it is authorized to carry.
(2) In the event of vehicle carrying more passengers than it is authorized to carry, the
authorized person may direct the driver or the owner of the vehicle to offload passengers
beyond the authorized capacity and shall direct the driver or the owner to make other
provisions for such passengers.
(3) Any person authorized in this behalf by the National Road Safety Authority or the
State Safety Authority shall, if that person has reason to believe that a motor vehicle is
being used in contravention of section 40 require the driver to convey the motor vehicle to
a weighing device in such manner as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority
and if on such weighing the motor vehicle is found to contravene in any respect the
provisions of section 40 regarding weight, that person shall, by order in writing, direct the
driver to offload the excess weight at the driver's own risk and cost and not to remove the
vehicle or trailer from that place until the laden weight has been reduced or the vehicle or
trailer has otherwise been dealt with so that it complies with section 40 and on receipt of
such notice, the driver shall comply with such directions.
(4) In case the vehicle owner or driver, as the case may be, fails to do so, such person
shall cause the extra weight to be unloaded at the risk and cost of owner or consignor and
such cost shall be recoverable from the owner of motor vehicle or consignor of goods.
(5) Where the person authorized under sub-section (1) makes the said order in writing,
that person shall furnish the relevant details of the overloading on the goods carriage
permit and also intimate the fact of such details to the authority which issued that permit.
(6) Any driver of a vehicle who refuses to stop and submit the vehicle to weighing
after being directed to do so by a person authorized in this behalf, or removes or causes the
removal of the load or part of it prior to weighing, shall be punishable in accordance with
Schedule II.
42. The State Government or any authority authorized in this behalf by the State
Government, if satisfied that it is necessary in the interest of public safety or convenience,
or because of the nature of any road or bridge, may by notification, prohibit or restrict,
subject to such exceptions and conditions as may be specified in the notification, the
driving of motor vehicles or of any specified category of motor vehicles or the use of trailers
or other road users either generally in a specified area or on a specified road and when any
such prohibition or restriction is imposed, shall cause appropriate traffic signs to be placed
in accordance with this Act.
Powers
regarding
vehicles
suspected of
overloading.
Power to
restrict the use
of vehicles in
certain cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

19
43. (1) The State Government or any authority authorized in this behalf by the State
Government, may cause or permit traffic signs to be placed in any place for the purpose of
bringing to public notice any speed limits fixed under Section 27 or any prohibitions or
restrictions imposed under this Act or generally and may designate certain roads as main
roads by notification or by the placement at suitable places of the appropriate traffic sign
for the purposes of the driving regulations made by the National Road Safety Authority.
(2) Traffic signs placed under sub-section (1) shall be of such size, color and type and
shall have the meanings set forth as per regulations by the National Road Safety Authority :
Provided that the State Government or any authority empowered in this behalf
by the State Government, may make or authorize the addition to any sign set forth in
the regulations by the National Road Safety Authority:
Provided further that such sign mentioned in the Schedule shall be reviewed
every three years and shall reflect International Standards as subscribed to by the
Government of India.
(3) A State Government or the State Safety Authority may, by notification, empower
any police officer to remove or cause to be removed any sign or advertisement which is so
placed in that officer's opinion as to obscure any traffic sign from view or any sign or
advertisement which in that officer's opinion is so similar in appearance to a traffic sign as
to be misleading.
(4) No person shall wilfully remove, alter, deface, or in any way tamper with, any
traffic signs placed under this Section.
(5) If any person in a crash causes such damage to a traffic sign and renders it useless
for the purpose for which it is placed under this Section, that person shall report the
circumstances of the occurrence to a police officer or at a police station as soon as possible,
and in any case within twenty four hours of the occurrence.
(6) Whoever violates a traffic signal shall be subjected to penalties in accordance
with Schedule II and shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
44. When any person is injured or any property of a third party is damaged, as a result
of a crash in which a motor vehicle is involved, the driver of the vehicle or other person in
charge of the vehicle shall:
(a) unless it is not practicable to do so on account of mob fury or any other
reason beyond the control of the driver, take all reasonable steps to secure medical
attention for the injured person, by conveying that person to the nearest medical
practitioner or hospital or nursing home, and it shall be the duty of every registered
medical practitioner or the doctor on duty in the hospital or nursing home to immediately
to attend to the injured person and render medical aid or treatment without waiting for
any procedural formalities, or financial arrangements unless the injured person or the
guardian of the injured person, in case the person is a minor, desires otherwise:
Provided that it shall be an offence by the owners, management, registered
medical practitioner or the doctor on duty if the registered medical practitioner or the
doctor on duty in the hospital or nursing home do not immediately attend to the
injured person.
(b) Give on the demand of an authorized police officer in uniform any information
required by that person, or, if no police officer is present, report the circumstances of
the occurrence, including the circumstances, if any, for not taking reasonable steps to
secure medical attention as required under clause (a), at the nearest police station as
soon as possible, and in any case within twenty-four hours of the occurrence;
(c) Give the following information in writing to the insurer, who has issued the
certificates of insurance, about the occurrence of the crash, namely:—
(i) insurance policy number and period of its validity;
Power to
place traffic
signs.
Duty of
driver in case
of a crash and
injury to a
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

20
(ii) date, time and place of the crash;
(iii) particulars of the persons injured or killed in the crash; and
(iv) name of the driver and the particulars of the driving license of the
driver.
Explanation.— for the purposes of this Section, the expression "driver" includes
the owner of the vehicle.
45. (1) Every driver of a motor vehicle at the approach of any unguarded railway level
crossing shall cause the vehicle to stop and the driver of the vehicle shall cause the conductor
or cleaner or attendant or any other person in the vehicle to walk up to the level crossing
and ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from either side and then drive the motor
vehicle across such level crossing, and where no conductor or cleaner or attendant or any
other person is available in the vehicle, the driver of the vehicle shall get down from the
vehicle himself to ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from either side before the
railway track is crossed.
(2) Any person who drives a motor vehicle through a railroad crossing, and fails to
yield to barriers at the crossing, or disobeys traffic signals at the crossing or commits any
other violation which could put the driver and passengers in danger at the railway crossing,
shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
46. (1) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven in any place a motor
vehicle while the vehicle has any defect, which such person knows of or could have
discovered by the exercise of ordinary care and which is calculated to render the driving of
the vehicle a source of danger to a motor vehicle in a manner which causes a sense of alarm
or distress to occupants of the vehicle, other road users, and persons and property near
roads, shall he punishable in accordance with Schedule II and shall be awarded penalty
points in accordance with Schedule I.
(2) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any place a motor
vehicle, which violates the standards specified in relation to road safety, including
headlights, taillight, indicators, break lights, tyre tread, control of noise and air pollution,
or with reduced vehicle conspicuity for other road users, shall be punishable in accordance
with Schedule II, and in each case, shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with
Schedule I.
(3) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any place a motor
vehicle which violates the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made under
the Act relating to the carriage of goods which are of dangerous or hazardous nature, shall
be punishable in accordance with Schedule II, and in each case, shall be awarded penalty
points in accordance with Schedule I.
47. (1) Any person or principal authority or contractor responsible for the design,
construction and maintenance of the safety standards of the road shall follow design,
construction and maintenance standards, as determined by the National Road Safety
Authority from time to time and shall ensure, that no death, injury or damage is caused to
road users as a result of failure to adhere to such safety standards.
(2) Any enforcing authority may bring an action for failure to maintain a road against
the designated authority under sub-Section (1), if the persons responsible for the design,
construction and maintenance of the road have not exercised due care to secure the safety
circumstances as was reasonably required in the part of the road to which the action relates
to.
(3) The designated authority under sub-section (1) shall be punishable in accordance
with Schedule II if failure on part of such designated authority to comply with standards for
road design, construction and maintenance results in a death or disability.
Duty of the
driver to take
certain
precautions at
unguarded
railway level
crossings,
Using vehicle
in unsafe
condition.
Failure to
comply with
standards for
road design,
construction
and
maintenance
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(4) For the purposes of the action under this Section the court shall in particular have
regard to the following matters:
(a) the character of the road, and the traffic which was reasonably expected to
use it;
(b) the standard of maintenance appropriate for a road of that character and use
by such traffic;
(c) the state of repair in which a reasonable person would have expected to find
in the road;
(d) whether the persons responsible for the maintenance of the road knew, or
could reasonably have been expected to know, that the condition of the part of the
road to which the action relates was likely to cause danger to users of the road;
(e) where the persons responsible for the maintenance of the road could not
reasonably have been expected to repair that part of the road before the cause of
action arose; and
(f) whether adequate warning notices of its condition had been displayed.
48. (1) Whoever uses any handheld communication device while driving a motor
vehicle shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II and shall be awarded penalty
points in accordance with Schedule.
(2) For the purpose of this Section, "communication devise" means a portable
communication device, other than a two-way radio where authorized, with which a person
is capable of making or receiving a call or performing an interactive communication function
with any other person.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this Section, "uses" includes any activity that
could divert a person's attention from the primary task of driving. Such types of distractions
include sending a short message service (SMS) message, watching a video, other phone
applications as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
CHAPTER III
G
ENERAL OFFENCES AND INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS
49. (1) Any Offence committed under this Act, may be punishable with one or more of
the following penalties:
(a) fines as specified under Schedule II;
(b) community service as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority;
(c) imprisonment for both cognizable and non-cognizable offences, as specified;
(d) impounding of vehicles for a term, as specified;
(i) All references to impounding of motor vehicles under this Act shall be
construed so as to include the immobilization of the motor vehicle on the
premises of the owner of the motor vehicle by means of an immobilisation
device;
(ii) An immobilisation means any device or appliance designed or so
adapted to be fixed to a vehicle for the purpose of preventing it from being
driven or otherwise put in motion and is of a type approved by the National
Road Safety Authority for use for that purpose.
(e) awarding of penalty points, as specified in Schedules I;
(f) suspension of licenses, registrations or permits, as specified;
(g) cancellation of licenses, registrations or permits, as specified;
(h) compulsory refresher training in a manner as specified by the National Road
Safety Authority for each offence.
Offences
relating to
certain
communication
devices.
General
provision
regarding
penalties
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
(2) Unless otherwise specified in this Act, an offence under a provision would be
considered a repeat offence if its commission takes place either within a period of one year,
or as otherwise specified by the National Road Safety Authority, from the previous
commission of an offence under the same provision:
Provided that whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation,
order or notification made under this Act shall, if no penalty is provided for the offence, be
punishable for the offence in accordance with Schedule IL
50. (1) Any person, who, while driving commits an offence under this Act shall be
awarded penalty points for the offence, in accordance with Schedule I, in addition to the
fine or imprisonment as the case may be.
(2) The consequences of accumulated penalty points, and the period of validity of
such penalty points to any holder of a driving license shall be as specified in Schedule I.
(3) The procedure for awarding penalty points and maintaining records associated
with such penalty points shall be as specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
(4) The National Road Safety Authority may also develop incentive schemes to
encourage safe driving behavior.
51. (1) Whoever drives a motor-vechile or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be
driven without a valid policy of insurance, shall have committed a cognizable offence and
shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
(2) Any person responsible for insuring a vehicle including the vehicle owner or
consignor or driver, as the case may be, fails to insure, such person shall have committed a
cognizable offence and shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
52. (1) Any person who while driving or attempting to drive, a motor vehicle or a
motor cycle causes a crash, shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II, shall be
awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I, and shall have to undergo compulsory
refresher training.
(2) Whoever while driving a motor vehicle or attempting to drive a motor vehicle
causes the death of a person while contravening any provision of this Act shall be punishable
for an offence in accordance with Schedule II, and subjected to an immediate cancellation of
license.
(3) A person commits an offence if the person does not complete a compulsory
impairment test in a manner satisfactory to a police officer, who is trained to give the test as
specified by the National Road Safety Authority, when required to do so by a police officer
under Section 59.
53. Any person who drives a motor vehicle in any place with the knowledge that they
are suffering from any disease or disability calculated to cause such driving of the vehicle
to be a source of danger to a motor vehicle in a manner which causes a sense of alarm or
distress to occupants of the vehicle, other road users, and persons and property near
roads, shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
54. Whoever abets the commission of an offence under this Act shall be punished in
the same manner as that offence:
Provided that the punishment in case of Section 40 shall only be applicable to the
owner or consigner of the vehicle.
55. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company shall be deemed to be
guilty of the contravention:
Provided that no person shall be held liable for an offence under this sub-section if he
or she proves he offence was committed without that person's knowledge or that the
person exercised reasonable due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
General
provision for
driver penalty
points
scheme.
Driving
uninsured
vehicle.
Punishment
for offences
relating to a
crash.
Driving when
mentally or
physically
unfit to drive.
Punishment
for abetment
of certain
offences.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

23
(2) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is
proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is at to any
neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Section "director" means a partner in the
firm.
56. (1) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant any person who in the
presence of such officer commits an offence punishable under sections 24, 25, 34,51 and 52
or subject to the provisions of this section.
(2) Any person arrested in connection with an offence punishable under section 34
shall, within two hours of such arrest, be subjected to a medical examination referred to in
sections 59, 60, 61 by a registered medical practitioner failing which such shall be released
from custody.
(3) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant any person, who has
committed an offence under this Act, if such person refuses to provide their name and
address on demand of such information.
(4) A police officer arresting the driver of a motor vehicle without warrant shall, if the
circumstances so require, take or cause to be taken any steps such officer may consider
proper for the temporary disposal of the vehicle.
(5) A female offender may be arrested without warrant only by a female police officer
in uniform.
57. (1) If any police officer or other person authorized in this behalf by the State
Government has reason to believe that any license, permit, certificate of registration, certificate
of insurance or other document produced by the driver or person in charge of a
motor vehicle is a false document within the meaning of ,Section 464 of the Indian
Penal Code 1860, such officer or authorized person may seize the mark of document and call
upon the driver or owner of the vehicle to account for their possession of or the presence
in the vehicle of such document.
(2) If any police officer or other person authorized in this behalf by the State
Safety Authority has reason to believe that the driver or owner of a motor vehicle who
is charged with any offence under this Act may abscond or otherwise avoid the service
of a summons, such officer or authorized person may seize any license held by such
driver or certificate of registration of the vehicle and forward it to the Court taking
cognizance of the offence and the said Court shall on the first appearance of such
driver before it, return the license or certificate of registration to the driver or owner, as
the case may be, in exchange for the temporary acknowledgement given under
sub-section ( 3).
(3) A police officer or other person seizing a license or the certificate of registration
under sub-section ( 2) shall give to the person surrendering the license or the certificate
of registration a temporary acknowledgement for the same, and such acknowledgement
shall authorize the holder to drive until the license has been returned or until such date as
may be specified by the officer or authorized person in the acknowledgement, whichever
is earlier:
Provided that if any Magistrate, police officer or other person authorized by the State
Authority in this behalf is, on an application so made, satisfied that the license cannot be,
or has not been, returned to its holder before the date specified in the acknowledgement for
any reason for which the holder is not responsible, the Magistrate, police officer or authorized
person, as the case may be, may extend the period of authorization to drive to such date as
may be specified in the acknowledgement.
Power to
arrest without
warrant.
Power to
impound
document.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
45 of 1860

24
58. (1) Whoever willfully disobeys any order lawfully issued by any person or authority
empowered under this Act to issue such order, or obstructs any person or authority in the
discharge of any functions which such person or authority is required or empowered under
this Act to discharge, shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence, be punishable in
accordance with Schedule II and be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(2) Any person who, being required by or under this Act to supply any information,
willfully withholds such information or gives information which such person knows to be
false or does not believe to be true, shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence, be
punishable in accordance with Schedule II, and be awarded penalty points in accordance
with Schedule I.
(3) Whoever causes the death of or injures any person in the discharge of any
functions which such person is required or empowered under this Act to discharge, shall, if
no other penalty is provided for the offence, be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
59. (1) A police officer in uniform or a person authorized by the traffic authority in this
behalf, may require any person, driving or attempting to drive a motor vehicle in any place,
or whom the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect has recently committed an
offence under this Act, or who is driving or attempting to drive a vehicle involved in a crash
or whom the officer has reasonable cause to suspect was driving a motor vehicle involved
in a crash, to undergo a compulsory impairment test as specified by the National Road
Safety Authority, given by a police officer trained to give the test if the police officer has
reasonable cause to suspect that the person has consumed a drug or drugs.
(2) A police officer may require a person specified under sub-section (1) to—
(a) remain in the place where stopped, for a period of time that is reasonable in
the circumstances, to undergo the compulsory impairment test; or
(b) accompany a police officer to another place to undergo the Compulsory
impairment test if it would enhance road safety, personal safety, the person's privacy,
or the giving or taking of the test.
(3) A person who has undergone a compulsory impairment test must remain at the
place where the person underwent the test until after the result of the test is ascertained.
(4) A police officer may exercise the powers in sub-sections (1) and (2) in addition to
any breath tests under /Section 60 and regardless of the outcome of any such tests.
(5) Any person will have a valid defence, if the court is satisfied that the person's
failure or refusal to undergo a compulsory impairment test is because of—
(a) a pre-existing medical condition or pre-existing disability that precludes
undergoing the test; or
(b) an injury, sustained in a motor vehicle crash giving rise to an obligation to
undergo the test that precludes undergoing the test.
60. (1) A police officer in uniform or a person authorized by the traffic authority in this
behalf, may require any person driving or attempting to drive a motor vehicle in any place,
or whom the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect has recently committed an
offence under this Act, or who is driving or attempting to drive a vehicle involved in a crash
or whom the officer has reasonable cause to suspect was driving a motor vehicle involved
in crash, to provide one or more specimens of their breath for breath tests at or near that
place, if such police officer or authorized person has reasonable cause to suspect such
person of having committed an offence under section 34.
(2) A person who has undergone a breath test must remain at the place where the
person underwent the test until after the result of the test is ascertained.
(3) A requirement for breath tests under sub-section ( 1) shall be made (unless it is
already been made) as soon as may be reasonably practicable after the commission of such
offence in accordance with the procedure specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
Disobedience
of orders,
obstruction or
causing death
or injury of a
person
enforcing the
Act.
Impairment
Tests.
Breath  tests.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

25
(4) If a motor vehicle is involved in a crash in any place and a police officer in uniform
has reasonable cause to suspect that the person who was driving the motor vehicle at the
time of the crash had alcohol in their blood or that such person was driving under the
influence of a drug referred to in section 34, the officer may require the person so driving to
provide a specimen of their breath for a breath test:
(a) if such person is at a hospital as an indoor patient, at the hospital, subject to
sub-section (2);
(b) in the case of any other person, either at or near the place where the
requirement is made; or
(c) if the police officer thinks fit, at a police station specified by the police
officer.
(5) A person shall not be required to provide such a specimen while at a hospital as an
indoor patient if the registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of that person's
case:
(a) is not first notified of the proposal to make the requirement; or
(b) objects to the provision of a specimen on the ground that its provision or
the requirement to provide it would be prejudicial to the proper care or treatment of
the patient.
(6) If it appears to a police officer in uniform, in consequence of a breath test carried
out by that officer on any person under sub-Section (1 ) or sub-section (3), that the device
by means of which the test was carried out indicates the presence of alcohol in the person's
blood, the officer may arrest that person without warrant except while that person is at a
hospital as an indoor patient.
(7) If a person is required by a police officer under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3)
to provide a specimen of breath for a breath test, and refuses or fails to do so, and the police
officer has reasonable cause to suspect that person of having alcohol in their blood, the
police officer may arrest that person without warrant except while that person is at a hospital
as an indoor patient.
(8) A person arrested under this Section shall, while at a police station, be given an
opportunity to provide a specimen of breath for a breath test there.
(9) The results of a breath test made in pursuance of the provisions of this Section
shall be admissible in evidence.
(10) For the purposes of this Section, "breath test" means a preliminary test for the
purpose of obtaining, by means of a device of a type approved by the National Road Safety
Authority, by notification, an indication whether as to the presence of alcohol in a person's
blood or breath is likely to exceed the specified limit.
61. (1) A person who has been arrested under section 34 may, while at a police station,
be required by a police officer to provide to such registered medical practitioner as may be
produced by such police officer, a specimen of their blood or urine for a clinical test if:
(a) it appears to the police officer that the device, by means of which breath test
was taken in relation to such person, indicates the presence of alcohol in the blood or
urine of such person; or
(b) such person, when given the opportunity to submit to a breath test, has
refused, omitted or failed to do so; or
(c) the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that the person has
consumed a drug or drugs, and such person, when required to complete a compulsory
impairment test, under Section 59 and subject to the provisions under section 59 (5),
by the police officer who is trained to give such test does not complete such test in a
manner satisfactory to such police officer.
Clinical test.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
(2) A person who has been required by a police offer under sub-section (1) to permit
the taking of a blood specimen must, without delay after being requested to do so by a
registered medical practitioner, permit that practitioner to take a blood specimen from that
person.
(3) Where the person required to provide such specimen is a female, and the registered
medical practitioner produced by such police officer is a male medical practitioner, the
specimen shall be taken only in the presence of a female, whether a medical practitioner or
not.
(4) A person while at a hospital as an indoor patient may be required by a police
officer to provide at the hospital a specimen of their blood or urine for a clinical test:
(a) if it appears to the police officer that the device by means of which a breath
test is carried out in relation to the breath of such person indicates the presence of
alcohol in the blood or urine of such person; or
(b) if the person having been required, whether at the hospital or elsewhere, to
provide a specimen of breath for a breath test, has refused, omitted or failed to do so
and a police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that person of having alcohol in
their blood or urine; or
(c) if the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that the person has
consumed drug or drugs, and the person does not complete a compulsory impairment
test in a manner satisfactory to a police officer, who is trained to give the test, when
required to do so by a police officer under Section 59, and subject to the provisions
under section 59 (5).
(5) A person shall not be required to provide a specimen of blood or urine for a clinical
test under sub-section (2) if the  registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of such
person's case:
(a) is not first notified of the proposal to make the requirement; or
(b) objects to the provision of such specimen on the ground that its provision
or the requirement to provide it would be prejudicial to the proper care or treatment of
the patient.
(6) The results of a clinical test made in pursuance of this Section shall be admissible
in evidence.
(7) For the purposes of this Section, "clinical test" means the analysis of a specimen
of blood or urine made at a laboratory  established, maintained or recognised by the Central
Government or a State Government.
62. In any proceeding for an offence punishable under Section 98 if it is proved that
the accused when requested by a police officer at any time so to do, had refused, omitted or
failed to consent to the taking of or providing a specimen of their breath for a breath test or
a specimen of their blood or urine for a clinical test, such refusal, omission or failure may,
unless reasonable cause for the same is shown, be presumed to be a circumstance supporting
any evidence given on behalf or the prosecution, or rebutting any evidence given on behalf
of the defence, with respect to that person's condition at that time.
63. Any authority that is empowered to enforce the provisions of this Act shall, if
such authority commits an offence under this Act, incur twice the penalty authorized for
that offence.
64. (1) Any Offcence Committed after the commencement this Act, which is punishable
with fine only, may, before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by
such officers or authorities and for such amount as the Central Government may, by
notification, provide in this behalf.
Presumption
of unfitness
to drive.
Penalty for
offence
committed by
an enforcing
authority.
Compounding
of certain
offences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
(2) sub-section (1) is subject to the following:
(a) that the amount is not less than the minimum amount of fine as may have
been provided under this Act;
(b) that offences involving imprisonment shall not be compounded;
(c) that any third or subsequent offence shall not be compoundable;
(d) that penalty points specified for the offence will apply and cannot be waived.
65. (1) The Court taking cognizance of any offence (other than an offence which the
Central Government may by rules prescribe in this behalf) under this Act:
(a) may, if the offence is an offence punishable with imprisonment under this
Act; and
(b) shall, in any other case, state upon the summons to be served on the
accused person that he:
(i) may appear by pleader or in person; or
(ii) may, by a specified date prior to the hearing of the charge, plead
guilty to the charge and remit to the Court, by money order, such sum (not
exceeding the maximum fine that may be imposed for the offence) as the Court
may specify, and the plea of guilt indicated in the money order coupon itself :
Provided that the Court shall, in the case of any of the offences referred to in
sub-section (2), state upon the summons that the accused person, if such person
pleads guilty, shall so plead in the manner specified in clause (b) and shall forward the
driving license to the Court with such letter containing such plea.
(2) Where the offence dealt with in accordance with sub-section ( 1) is an offence
prescribed by the Central Government by rules for the purposes of this sub-section, the
Court shall, if the accused person pleads guilty to the charge and forwards that person's
driving license to the Court with the letter containing such plea, make an endorsement of
such conviction on such driving license.
66. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall have the power to amend Schedules
in order to amend the offences punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER  IV
N
ATIONAL ROAD SAFETY AUTHORITY
67. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of commencement of this
Act, establish by notification a National Road Safety Authority of India to exercise the
powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.
(2) The National Authority shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having
perpetual succession and a common seal with the power, subject to the provisions of this
Act to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may, by the aforesaid
name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Authority shall consist of:—
(a) The Union Minister for Road Transport and Highways as the Patron, not
being a member;
(b) A chairperson, who shall have the rank of a Secretary to the Government of
India;
(c) At least four and not more than eight members excluding the Chairperson,
who shall have the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India.
(4) A member of the National Road Safety Authority, not being the Chairperson, shall
be a person of ability, integrity and standing and with special knowledge of, or professional
Summary
disposal of
cases.
Power of
National
Road Safety
Authority to
amend
Schedules.
Constitution
of a National
Road Safety
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
experience in either one or more subjects of economics, transport, urban planning, law,
traffic management and regulation, medical sciences and trauma care, crash investigation
and forensics, air pollution, road safety, insurance, motor vehicles, civil engineering, which,
in the opinion of the Central Government, will be useful for the National Road Safety
Authority to render its functions and fulfill its objectives under this Act.
(5) All members of the National Road Safety Authority shall be whole-time members.
(6) The members of the National Road Safety Authority shall be appointed in such
manner so as to secure the highest standards of professional competence and a range of
relevant expertise in order to effectively discharge the duties and functions of the National
Road Safety Authority under the Act.
(7) The head office of the National Road Safety Authority shall be in the National
Capital Region of Delhi.
(8) The National Road Safety Authority may establish such number of offices at such
places in India as may be deemed fit by it to render its functions and to fulfil its objectives.
68. (1) The Chairperson and the members of the National Road Safety Authority shall
be appointed by the Central Government from a panel of persons recommended by a selection
committee established under this Act.
(2) The selection committee shall consist of:
(a) the Cabinet Secretary as the Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways as a member;
(c) two Secretaries to the Government of India.
(d) three experts of repute with special knowledge of, or professional experience
in either one or more subjects of economics, transport, urban planning, law, traffic
management and regulation, medical sciences and trauma care, crash investigation
and forensics, air pollution, road safety, insurance, motor vehicles, automotive
engineering, civil engineering as members.
(3) The term of the selection committee and the manner of selection of the panel of
persons shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government shall make a reference to the selection committee for
filling up a vacancy in the National Road Safety Authority —
(a) Within one month from the date of occurrence of a vacancy by reason of
death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a member of the National Road
Safety Authority; or
(b) three months before the superannuation or completion of the term of office
of the Chairperson or a member of the National Road Safety Authority.
(5) For every vacancy referred to it, the selection committee shall make such
recommendations within two months from the date on which reference is made to it.
(6) Any person who is a member of the selection committee shall not be entitled to be
recommended under Sub-section 5, whether during his/her term with the selection committee
or for two years thereafter.
(7) Before making any recommendations under Sub-section 5, the selection committee
shall satisfy itself that the persons so recommended are capable of functioning independently
as a member of the National Road Safety Authority, where such independence means the
ability to maintain and exercise independent judgment in the discharge of duties.
(8) The Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson, and the members of the
National Road Safety Authority, within one month of the recommendation of the selection
committee being submitted under Sub-section 5.
Appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

29
69. ( 1) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or member, the Central
Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial or other
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially such person's function as a member.
(2) The salary, term of office, and other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and the members, including leave, medical benefits and any other aspect of
employment shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the members shall not
be varied to their disadvantage after appointment.
70. (1) The Chairperson or any Member may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the Prime Minister of India, resign his office.
(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or any
other Member of the National Road Safety Authority if such person has,—
(a) been adjudged as an insolvent;
(b) been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of Central Government,
involves moral turpitude;
(c) become physically or mentally incapable of discharging the person's duties;
(d) acquired such financial or other interests as is likely to affect prejudicially
the person's functions; or
(e) so abused the person's position as to render the person's continuation in
office prejudicial to the public interest.
(3) No Member shall be removed under clauses (d) or (e) of sub-Section (1) unless
such person has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
71. No member of the National Road Safety Authority may, for a period of two years
from the date on which they cease to hold office, directly or indirectly, for their own account
or as agent, administrator, officer, director, retainer, member of the executive body or
shareholder or equity owner of any other person, conduct any activity within the jurisdiction
of the National Road Safety Authority under this Act:
Provided that this Section shall not apply when a member of the National Road Safety
Authority is appointed as a member of the State Safety Authority.
72. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall have the power to determine the
number, nature and categories of officers and employees required by it to discharge its functions.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other conditions of service of the,
officers, and employees shall be such as may be specified by regulations by the National
Road Safety Authority.
73. The Chairperson and a Member of the National Road Safety Authority shall hold
office for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he
attains the age of sixty five years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for reappointment
for another term of three years.
74. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Central Government may, by notification,
authorize one of the Members to act as the Chairperson until the appointment of a new
Chairperson to fill such vacancy.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on
leave or otherwise, one of the Members as the Central Government may, by notification,
authorize in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on
which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
Conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and members.
Resiganation
and Removal
of
Chairperson
and members.
Restrictions
on
employment.
Officers and
employees of
the National
Road Safety
Authorty.
Term of
office of
Chairperson
and Members.
Member to
act as
Chairperson
or to
Discharge his
Functions in
Certain
Circumstances.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

30
75. No act or proceedings of the Authority shall be questioned or shall be invalidated
merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the
Authority.
76. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall have the overall objective of
eliminating practices that are adverse to transportation safety, road safety, and innovation
and adoption of new technology.
(2) The objective of the National Road Safety Authority shall be reviewed and ratified
every five years by the parliament.
(3) In pursuit of the objective under sub-section (1), the National Road Safety Authority
may regulate and monitor on various matters, including:
(a) the formulation of standards for road safety, road infrastructure and control
of traffic;
(b) the facilitation of safe, and sustainable utilization of road transport
ecosystem;
(c) the performance targets set by it annually;
(d) the safety of vulnerable road users.
(4) The National Road Safety Authority shall function as an economic regulator for
the purposes of developing a framework to guide the determination of costs of safety
equipment to be installed in motor vehicles. To develop such a framework the National
Road Safety Authority shall be guided by the following —
(a) the recognition that the promotion of safety of road users is of paramount
importance;
(b) the general principles identified for the administration of this Act under
Section 3;
(c) the commercial principles governing the manufacture and installation of
safety equipment including that the costs be commensurate with the services being
provided;
(d) the requirement to encourage competition, innovation, efficiency, and
economical use of resources;
(e) the need that prescribed safety equipment should be correlated with the
anticipated safety outcomes and should be technology neutral; and
( f ) the requirement to safeguard consumer interest and ensure equity.
77. (1) The National Road Safety Authority may, by regulations, inter alia specify
the following: —
(a) the standards for the design, construction, operation and maintenance of
motor vehicles, parts of motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, mobile machinery,
including—
(i) safety standards and minimum requirements for such design,
construction and maintenance for promoting safety of the occupants and other
road users;
(ii) safety standards and minimum requirements for such design,
construction and maintenance for protection of environment; and
(iii) conditions for safe usage of such vehicles with regard to occupants
of the motor vehicle, other road users, and persons and property near roads,
including for motor vehicles independent of body, trailer, mobile machinery or
as a whole.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
Invalidate the
Proceedings of
the Authority
Objectives and
Duties of the
National Road
Safety
Authority.
Regulations
and other
functions of
the National
Road Safety
Authortty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

31
(b) the standards for the design and construction of passenger transport vehicles
for promoting the safety and comfort of the passengers and drivers of such vehicles,
including for the bus body.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section bus body means the portion
of a passenger transport vehicle that encloses such vehicle's occupant space, exclusive
of the bumpers, the chassis frame, and any structure forward of the last point of the
windshield mounting.
(c) the standards for the design and construction of the truck body of goods
transport vehicles for promoting the safety and comfort of the drivers as well as
occupants of such vehicles and the safe carriage of the goods by such vehicles.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section the truck body means the portion
of the goods transport vehicle that encloses such vehicle's occupant space and
space for the carriage of goods, exclusive of the bumpers, the chassis frame, and any
structure forward of the forward most point of the windshield mounting.
(d) the standards and procedures for the tests of competence for issuance of
licences;
(e) the conduct of safety and performance audits to monitor compliance with
the standards anywhere in India as may be specified by the National Road Safety
Authority;
(f) the creation, maintenance and sharing of a standard, national, uniform
database for collecting and managing data including data relating to licenses,
registrations, insurance, permits, road crashes, offences and penalties;
(g) the procedure and the enforcement of quality control in relation to any
aspect of transport and road safety and fuel quality as specified under this Act;
(h) the methods of data collection, analysis and exchange of information among
enforcement authorities engaged in road safety;
(i) the evaluation of enforcement and administration of this Act;
(j) the accreditation of assessors for safety audits, inspections and ratings;
(k) guidelines relating to safety features for non-motorized transport and for
safe operating conditions for such transport;
(l) catering for the special requirements of vulnerable road users such as children,
senior citizens, differently-abled persons, non-motorized transport and pedestrians
relating to road safety and traffic management;
(m) catering for the safety and security of people travelling by road transport,
especially women, children and senior citizens;
(n) guidelines for and enabling electronic payment of fines and any other
payments;
(o) guidelines for the design, construction, operation, and maintenance of roads
to ensure safety of road users;
(p) guidelines for the management of traffic on roads, including the schemes for
segregation of various classes of road users and their right of way;
(q) the electronic collection and dissemination of information related to restricted
roads, no entries, one ways, restricted entry and time-zones for various classes of
vehicles;
(r) guidelines for crash investigation procedure and training of enforcement
agencies;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

32
(s) guidelines for creation of child safety zones;
(t) the standards for technology deployed in pursuance of this Act; and
(u) on any other matters which are necessary to fulfil its functions under this
Act.
(2) In addition, the National Road Safety Authority shall—
(a) provide technical advice and assistance to the Central Government, and
advise the Central Government and the State Governments on administration of the
provisions relating to safety as contained in this Act;
(b) advise the State Government, urban local bodies, municipalities, panchayati
raj institutions on matters relating to or arising out of traffic management on roads
and the use of motor vehicles for the purposes of ensuring road safety;
(c) make regulations specifying guidelines for establishing and operating trauma
facilities and para-medical facilities for dealing with traffic related injuries on roads
and highways;
(d) make regulations specifying guidelines for building capacity and skills in
traffic police, hospitals, highway authorities, educational and research organizations
and other organizations dealing with road safety and traffic management;
(e) promote relevant practices in road safety and traffic management, undertake
road safety and traffic education programmes, and conduct campaigns to create
awareness amongst all Sections of road users;
(f) involve relevant interest groups and non-government organizations working
in the area of road safety and traffic management, and assist them in promotion of
efficient traffic management and road safety practices;
(g) establish a network of organizations with the aim to facilitate a technical co-
operation framework by the co-ordination of activities, the exchange of information,
the development and implementation of joint projects, the exchange of expertise and
best practices in the fields within the purview of the National Road Safety Authority's
responsibility;
(h) co-ordinate with other agencies such as education boards and institutions,
health services and non- government organizations in matters relating to road safety
and traffic management;
(i) contribute to the development of international technical standards for motor
vehicles and roads;
(j) promote co-ordination of work on motor vehicles and road standards
undertaken by international governmental and non-government organizations;
(k) promote consistency between international technical standards and
domestic standards while ensuring that the level of safety adopted in the country is
not compromised; and
(l) the process or methodology for the crash testing of vehicles.
(3) For the purpose of performing its regulatory and other functions under this Act,
the National Road Safety Authority shall conduct research, by way of collecting data, and
performing such analysis as may be relevant and necessary, and this may include—
(a) conducting or causing to be conducted research in different spheres of
road safety and traffic management and publishing its findings;
(b) establishing procedures and centres for multi-disciplinary crash
investigation;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

33
(c) establishing the procedure and methodology for data collection, transmission
and analysis at appropriate levels, and defining the role of different agencies involved
in the process;
(d) collecting and storing data from any central or state agency or body or other
institution with respect to road safety and traffic information;
(e) identifying areas or traffic congestion and crash prone zones on National
and State highways, rural and city roads and plans to mitigate the identified problems
in a time-bound manner; and
(f) any other measures necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the purposes
of this Act.
(4) The National Road Safety Authority shall make it public without undue delay—
(a) the opinions of the Technical Working Groups, including all representations
made to it by external experts, and at public hearings;
(b) the annual declarations of interest made by the Chairperson, members of the
National Road Safety Authority and members of the Technical Working Groups,
including declarations of interest, if any, made in relation to items on the agenda of
meetings;
(c) the results of its technical studies; and
(d) the annual report of its activities.
78. (1) The Chairperson and the members of the National Road Safety Authority
shall, in addition to attending office regularly meet at least once a month, and at such times
and places, and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings, including quorum at such meetings and procedure for such meetings,
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) The Patron shall be free to attend and participate in any meetings or consultation
or events of the National Road Safety Authority, Technical Working Groups or all or any
other bodies or groups or advisory teams established by the National Road Safety Authority
for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over meetings of the National Road
Safety Authority unless the Patron is attending the said meeting in which case the Patron
shall preside over such meeting.
(4) If the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the National Road Safety
Authority, the Chairperson can designate any other member to preside over the meeting.
(5) The Chairperson and members must, at all times, act in good faith, and use diligence
in the discharge of their duties.
(6) The Chairperson or any member who has any direct or indirect interest in any
matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the National Road Safety Authority
must, as soon as it comes to the Chairperson's or such member's knowledge, disclose the
nature of interest to the National Road Safety Authority.
(7) A disclosure made by the Chairperson or a member will be recorded in the
proceedings of the meeting, and the Chairperson or such member must recuse from any
deliberation or decision of the National Road Safety Authority with respect to that matter or
any matter connected therewith.
(8) Provided that if the Chairperson has to recuse himself or herself from a proceeding
of the National Road Safety Authority, the Patron shall designate a member of the Authority
to discharge the functions of the Chairperson for that matter.
Proceedings
of the
National
Road Safety
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
(9) All orders and decisions of the National Road Safety Authority shall be
authenticated by the Chairperson.
79. (1) If the National Road Safety Authority proposes to make any regulations, it
shall publish a draft of the proposed regulations for inviting public expension.
(2) Every draft of a proposed regulation which is published under this Section must
be accompanied by a statement setting out:
(a) the objectives of the proposed regulation;
(b) how the draft regulations fulfil the particular provision of this Act under
which the regulations are made;
(c) a regulatory impact analysis of the proposed regulations and a cost-benefit
analysis where feasible;
(d) the process by which any person may make a representation in relation to
the proposed regulations;
(e) the implications of any regulations applied with retrospective effect; and
(f) the implementation schedule for any regulations, which shall be determined
after due consultation with all stakeholders including consumers and industry.
(3) Before finalizing the draft of any regulation, the National Road Safety Authority
must consider any representations made to it in accordance with clause ( d) of
sub-section (2):
Provided that the decision of the National Road Safety Authority shall be final with
regard to whether or not it had considered any representations made to it.
(4) To finalize the regulations the National Road Safety Authority must approve that
the regulations are consistent with the Act and must publish—
(a) all the representations received under sub-section (2)(d); and
(b) unless specified otherwise, at least a general account of the response to the
representations.
(5) If the notified regulations substantially differ from the proposed regulations
published by the National Road Safety Authority under sub-section ( 1), in addition, to
complying with sub-section (4), it must publish the details and reasons for such change.
(6) When carrying out a cost-benefit analysis for the purposes of this Section, the
National Road Safety Authority must consider the probable costs that will be borne by:
(a) the persons required to comply with the regulations;
(b) road users, both directly and indirectly;
(c) the National Road Safety Authority in enforcing the regulations; and
(d) any other persons affected by the regulations.
(7) The National Road Safety Authority must consider the probable benefits that will
accrue to road users and other persons as a result of the regulations.
(8) The National Road Safety Authority must use the best available data and, where
not available, reasonable estimates to carry out the analysis.
80. (1) The National Road Safety Authority may dispense with the procedure under
section (16), if the time taken to comply with it has the potential to cause considerable harm
or losses for the persons likely to be affected by such regulations.
Process for
making
regulations.
Emergency
regulation
making.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

35
(2) If the National Road Safety Authority makes regulations under this Section, it
must:
(i) publish the reasons for invoking this Section; and
(ii) submit a report to the Central Government within one week of invoking this
Section.
(3) Unless the Central Government communicates its approval in writing within thirty
days to the National Road Safety Authority, the regulations made under this Section will
cease to have effect after a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date on which
the regulations are notified by the National Road Safety Authority:
Provided that, where the approval of the Central Government is not received in writing,
the regulations made under this Section will continue to have effect beyond the period of
one hundred and eighty days, if the National Road Safety Authority completes the procedure
under section 16 of this Act within the hundred and eighty day period specified in this
Section.
81. The Chairperson shall be the legal representative of the National Road Safety
Authority and shall be responsible for:
(a) the day-to-day administration of the National Road Safety Authority;
(b) drawing up proposals for the National Road Safety Authority's work
programmes, including the prioritisation of work;
(c) implementing the work programmes and the decisions adopted by the
National Road Safety Authority;
(d) ensuring the provision of appropriate technical and administrative support
for the Technical Working Groups;
(e) ensuring that the National Road Safety Authority carries out its tasks in
accordance with the requirements of its stakeholders, in particular with regard to the
adequacy of the services it provides and the time taken to provide such services;
(f) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution
of the budget of the National Road Safety Authority;
(g) identifying potential risks for the transport ecosystem in India, particularly
with respect to road and transport safety;
(h) pooling of knowledge;
(i) ensuring close cooperation between the National Road Safety Authority
and the enforcement agencies and organizations operating in the field of transport,
roads and motor vehicles;
(j) engaging with the Central Government, arid for ensuring a regular dialogue
with the Technical Working Groups; and
(k) reporting to the Patron on any matter relating to the National Road Safety
Authority as may be requested by the Patron.
(2) Every year, the Chairperson shall submit for adoption, by way of an annual review
meeting, to all the members of the National Road Safety Authority :
(a) programmes of work;
(b) the annual accounts for the previous year;
(c) the budget for the coming year;
(d) action taken report or response to instructions of the members of the National
Road Safety Authority; and
Functions of
the
Chairperson.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

36
(e) a general report covering all the activities of the National Road Safety
Authority in the previous year.
(3) The Chairperson shall, following adoption under sub-section ( 2), forward the
general report and the programs to the Central Government and the State Governments and
shall have them published.
(4) The Chairperson shall approve all financial expenditure of the National Road
Safety Authority and report its activities to the Central Government.
(5) The Chairperson shall have administrative control over the officers and other
employees of the National Road Safety Authority.
82. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall establish Technical Working Groups,
which shall consist of independent technical experts, where such independence means the
ability to maintain and exercise independent judgment in the discharge of duties.
(2) Each Technical Working Group constituted under this Section shall be headed by
a member of the National Road Safety Authority designated by the Chairperson in
consultation with the Central Government, considering such member's special knowledge
and field of professional experience and any declarations of interest made by members from
time to time.
(3) The Technical Working Group shall invite the relevant industry and consumer
representatives to its deliberations.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the National Road Safety
Authority may establish such number of Technical Working Groups as it considers
necessary, including on the following matters:
(a) Roads standards;
(b) Traffic management;
(c) Testing standards for offences including drink-driving, and over-speeding;
(d) Technology and enforcement;
(e) Transport infrastructure and safety;
(f) Crash Investigation and Forensics;
(g) Data Collection and Analytics.
(5) The National Road Safety Authority may from time to time re-constitute the
Technical Working Groups by adding new members or by omitting the existing members or
by changing the name of the Group as the case may be.
(6) The administrative, financial and research support for the Technical Working
Groups shall be provided by the National Road Safety Authority.
83. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall appoint the members of all Technical
Working Groups for a period of three years, which shall be renewable for such period as
may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority, and the call for applications shall
be published in relevant leading international technical publications and on the website of
the National Road Safety Authority.
(2) The mode and manner of operation of Technical Working Groups as well as
coordination between the various Technical Working Groups shall be specified by the
National Road Safety Authority.
(3) These regulations under sub-section (3) shall relate in particular to:
(a) the number of times that a member can serve consecutively on a Technical
Working Group;
Technical
Working
Groups.
Procedure for
appointing
Technical
Working
Groups.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

37
(b) the number of members in each Technical Working Group;
(c) the procedure to reimburse the expenses of members of the Technical Working
Group;
(d) the manner in which tasks and requests for technical opinions are assigned
to the Technical Working Groups;
(e) the creation and organization of the body of the Technical Working Groups,
and the mode and manner of involvement and engagement of extemal experts being
included in the Technical Working Groups;
(f) the possibility, mode and manner of observers being invited to meetings of
the Technical Working Groups;
(g) the possibility, mode and manner of organising public hearings;
(h) the conduct of meetings, including provision for meetings, to be held without
the physical presence of a member of a Technical Working Group; and
(i) the quorum of the meeting, meeting notice, agenda of the meeting and such
other matters.
84. The National Road Safety Authority shall have the power to delegate all or any
powers or functions that have been conferred upon it by this Act to any person or group of
persons barring such exceptions as may be provided for in this Act:
Provided that the National Road Safety Authority cannot delegate its power to make
regulations under this Act.
85. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament in
this behalf, make to the National Road Safety Authority, grants and loans of such sums of
money as the Central Government considers necessary.
(2) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National Road Crash Victim
Compensation Fund to which the following shall be credited—
(a) any grants and loans made to the National Road Safety Authority by the
Central Government;
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a proportion of the
insurance premiums or a road safety cess on such insurance premiums collected in
the country, apportioned under this Act, as prescribed by the Central Government;
and
(c) all sums received by the National Road Safety Authority from such other
sources as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) The National Road Crash Victim Compensation fund shall be used for providing
immediate interim relief, medical treatment and rehabilitation to road accident victims in the
territory of India
(4) Provided that the following persons may claim from such Victim's Compensation
Fund:
(a) A person who has been grievously hurt in a road accident till such time as
the person may be stabilized;
(b) One or more legal representatives of a person who died in a road accident
that was not caused by the deceased on whose behalf the claim is being made and/or
for those road accidents where no person can be held liable;
(c) A person grievously hurt in a road accident where no fault can be fixed upon
either that person or on any other person involved in the accident; and
Delegation of
Powers of the
National
Road Safety
Authority.
National
Road Crash
Victim
Compensation
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

38
(d) Any other person as the National Road Safety Authority may specify by
regulations.
(5) Provided that the maximum compensation made available by the fund in any case
shall be as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
(6) In all cases specified in sub-section 3, when the claim of such person becomes
payable, then the Fund is entitled to recover from the insurer the amount equivalent to such
compensation received by such person.
86. (1) The National Road Safety Authority all maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall audit the accounts of the
National Road Safety Authority, and specify the intervals at which such audits may be
conducted, and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by
the National Road Safety Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may appoint any person in connection
with the audit under sub-section ( 2) and such person shall have the same rights and
privileges and authority in connection with the audit as the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular,
shall have the right to demand the production of books of accounts and other documents
and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the National Road Safety Authority.
(4) The accounts of the National Road Safety Authority, as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed in this behalf, together with the
audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that
Government shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
87. The National Road Safety Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time
in each financial year as may be prescribed, by rules made by the Central Government, the
budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated expenditure of the National Road
Safety Authority and forward the same to the Central Government.
88. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall submit an annual report to the
Central Government and may at any time submit special reports on any matter which, in its
opinion, is of such urgency or importance that it should not be deferred till submission of
the annual report.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual and special reports of the Authority
to be laid before each house of Parliament, along with a memorandum of action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Authority, and the reasons for non-
acceptance of the recommendations, if any.
89. (1) Every State Government shall establish a State Road Safety Authority within
six months from the commencement of this Act in consultation with the National Road
Safety Authority.
(2) The composition, manner of appointment and the functions of State Road Safety
Authority shall be as prescribed by the National Road Safety Authority through regulations.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
90. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie  against the Central
Government or the Authority or any officer of the Central Government or any Member,
officer or other employees of the Authority for any thing which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
Maintenance
of Accounts.
Budget.
Annual and
Special
Reports.
State Road
Safety
Authorities.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

39
91. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
92. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to the provisions of the Motor
V ehicles Act. 1988.
93. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made by the
Board, under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House or
Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
One session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or
regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
94. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as it may deem necessary for removimg the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
SCHEDULE  I
SCHEME  OF  PENALTY  POINTS  FOR  DRIVERS
1. Penalty Point System
Section Offence Penalty points
11,12 Offences relating to protective headgear 2
11, 12,14, Offences relating to conspicuity 1
15,16
18 Failing to restrict the number of people on 2
motor cycles
20 Offences relating to seat belts 2
21 Offences relating to the seating of Children 2
28 Offence of driving at excessive speed
33 Driving which causes threat to public safety 3 for 1st offence
4 for each subsequent offence
34 Driving under the influence of alcohol 3
or drugs
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Application
of certain
laws.
59 to
1988.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
1 for 1st offence and if exceeding
the  speed limit by more than
5 kmph but  less than 9 kmph
2 for 1st offence and if exceeding
the speed limit by more than
9 kmph
3 for each subsequent offence
5
10
15
20

40
39 Penalty for causing obstruction to free flow of 1
traffic
43 Violation of Traffic Signals and Traffic Signs 3
46 Using vehicles in unsafe condition 3
48 Offences relating to certain communication 2
devices
49 General provision regarding penalties 1
52 Punishment for offences relating to a crash 2
58 Disobedience of orders, obstruction and refusal 3
of information
2. Award of penalty points
(1) The enforcing authority or any person authorized in this behalf shall award penalty
points corresponding to the specific offence to any person who commits an offence as
provided under Schedule II. The penalty points shall be endorsed and their record shall be
maintained in a manner as may be specified by the national authority.
(2) For the offences involving judicial proceedings and imprisonment, the court shall
award penalty points in addition to the fine or imprisonment that may be imposed.
3. Duration of validity of penalty points
Penalty points awarded for an offence shall remain on record for a period of 3 years
from the date of award.
4. Suspension and Cancellation of License
(1) At any point of time, if the cumulative total of the penalty points accrued by a
driver crosses the limit of twelve (12) points, the driving license shall be suspended for the
period of one year. On suspension of the driving license, the accrued penalty points shall
cease to subsist.
(2) If a driver whose license has been suspended again accumulates twelve (12)
points, that person's driving license shall be cancelled for a period of five years.
(3) If a person holding a learner's license accrues four (4) points, then that person's
learner's license shall be cancelled. The person whose learner's license has been cancelled
shall produce a certificate of driving as specified from recognized school or establishment
when that person applies for fresh learner's license.
Section Offence Penalty points

41
Schedule II
Scheme for levying penalties including fines, imprisonment and impounding of vehicles
SectionOffence Type of RepeatPenalties to be Imposed
Vehicle orOffence
Offender
FineCommunityImprisonment Vehicle Suspension/RefresherRemarks
(INR)ServiceImpounding Cancellation ofTraining
licence or Permit
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
9 (1) Offences relating to driving I10,000 — 1 month — Cancellation of —Either penalty
license—Person holding aall existing or both may be
license attempts to holdlicencesimposed
other licenceII 10,000 1 month Cancellation of
all existing
licences
9 (3) Offences relating to driving I10,000 1 month Cancellation ofEither penalty
licenses—Person holdingall existing or both may be
driving license holdslicencesimposed
any other driving licenceII 10,000 1 month Cancellation of
all existing
licences
9 (4) Offences relating to driving I10,000 3 monthsEither penalty
licences—Disqualified foror both may be
holding or obtaining drivingII 10,000 3 monthsimposed
licences
9 (5) Offences relating to driving I10,000 3 months
licences—Not disclosing II10,000 3 months
endorsement made
11, 12Offences relating to protective
headgear5,000Per person
11 Non-1,500
motorised
transport
12 Offences relating toMotor cycles2,500
conspicuity
14 Three2,500Fine to be paid by
wheelersowner
15 Light motor5,000
vehicles
16 Transport 10,000
Vehicles

42
20 Offences relating to5,000Per  person
seat belts
21 Offences relating to5,000Per child
seating of children
24 Prohibition of  parking I2,500
or abandoning of II5,000
motor vehicles at
certain places
25 Prohibition of driving I5,000
in certain places II10,000 2 weeks 1 month licence
suspension
2,500Speeding by more
than 5 kmph but
 less than  9 kmph
Motor I5,000Speeding by more
Cyclesthan 9 kmph but
 less than 19 kmph
10,000 1 month 1 month licence Y esSpeeding by
suspensionmore than
19 kmph
28 (1)  Offence of driiving II 10,000 3 months 3month licence Y es
at excessive speedsuspension
3,500Speeding by more
than 5 kmph but
less than 9 kmph
Light I7,000Speeding by more
motorthan 9 kmph but
V ehicles less than 19 kmph
15,000 1 month 1 month licence Y esSpeeding by
suspensionmore than
19 kmph
II 25,000 3 months 3 month licence Y es
10,000suspensionSpeeding by
more than 5 kmph
but less than 9 kmph
I 15,000 2 months 2 month licence Y esSpeeding by
suspensionmore than 9
kmph but less
than 19kmph
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

43
Medium25,000 3 months Cancellation of Y esSpeeding by
and Heavylicense for onemore than
Vehiclesyear; Suspension19kmph
of permit for 6
months
II 50,000 6 months Cancellation of
license for one
year;  Suspension
of permit for 6
months
28 (2) Offence of driving at excessive Punishment in the same manner as provided for section above but the term for the impounding of
speed—Providing instructions tothe car shall be twice as long.
drive at excessive speed
31 Failure to yield right of way to I5,000
emergency vehicles II10,000Ye s
Non- I 500 15 hours
motorised
transport II1,000 30 hoursOne week
33 Driving which causes threat to Two- I2,500Three daysOne weekImpounding to
public safety—Driving againstwheelers andbe imposed in
the authorised flow of trafficthree-addition to fine or
wheelersimprisonment
or both.
II 5,000One week Two weeks Yes
Light motor I5,000One week Two weeksImpounding to
vehiclebe imposed in
addition to fine or
imprisonment
or both.
II 10,000 T wo weeksOne month Y es
Medium and I10,000 T wo weeksOne month Y esImpounding
heavy motorand training to
vehiclesbe imposed in
addition to fine or
imprisonment
 or both.
II 20,00One month Two months Y es
33 Driving which causes threat to All I2,500 15 hours Three daysEither penalty
public safety—Dangerousor both may be
passing or overtakingimposed.
II 5,000 30 hoursOne week Yes
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

44
33 Driving which causes threat to All I15,000Fifteen daysEither penalty
public safety—Dangerousor both may be
driving with children on boardimposed.
II 30,000 One monthSix months Yes
licence
suspension
33 Driving which causes threat to All I2,500
publicity safety—DangerousII 5,000Ye s
lane changing
34 (2) Prohibition on Driving under the Type I
130,000 Twelve Eighteen months Licence
influence of alcohol or drugsdriver months whichfrom the date of Suspension in
may extendconviction, oraddition to fine or
to eighteendate ofimprosonment
monthssentencing oror both.
date of release.
Type II230,000100 hoursImpoundSix months
driver for one licence
week suspension from
the date of
conviction, or
date of
sentencing or
date of release.
Type III
310,000Not more Six monthsLicence
driverthan sixlicencesuspension in
monthssuspension fromaddition to fine
the date of or
conviction, orimprisonment
date of or both.
sentencing or
date of rlease.
All Y esNot morePermanent
driversthan two cancellation of
years driving licence.
34(4)Driving under the influence of All I15,000Not more Six months
alcohol or drugs—Drugsthan threelicence
months suspension
II (within30,000Six months toThirty days Twelve months
threeone yearlicence
years)suspension
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

45
39 Penalty for causing obstruction toMotor1,000
free flow of traffic, etc. Vehiclesper hour
Pedestrians 200
Two- 10,000
wheelers
Light motor25,000Suspension for
vehiclesone month of
40 OverloadingMedium35,000permit granted
motor vehiclesunder above
Heavy motor50,000sections
vehicles
All vehicles Yes50,000Cancelation of
permit granted
under above
sections
40(2)Overloading50,000Fine to be paid
by the owner
of a vehicle or
the consignor
Powres regarding vehicles
suspected of overloading—
41(2)Refusal to submit vehicle for35,000
weighing after being directed to
do so by a person authorised in
this behalf.
Non-
motorised1,000
transport
43(6) Violation of traffic signs I5,000
II 10,000
All motorIII andOne month Y es
vehiclesbeyod15,000licence
suspension
Non-
43(6) Violation of traffic sign-Stopmotorised 500
signal or stop signtransport
All motor
vehicles1,000 T wo weeks
Not moreEither or both
45 Railroad crossing offences5,000than twopenalties may
weeks be imposed
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

46
If bodily injury
or damage to
Two and/orproperty is
46(1)Using vehicle in unsafe conditionThree 5,000 1 monthcaused the fine
wheelersis to be
increased to
Rs. 25,000
Light Motor7,500 1 month
Vehicles
Medium and
Heavy Motor10,000 2 months
Vehicles
Two and/or I5,000 1 month
Three II 15,000 2 months
Using vehicle in unsafe condition wheelers
46(2) —Violation of standards specifiedLight Motor I7,500 1 month
in relation to road safety, control Vehicles II15,000 2 months
of noise and air pollutionMedium and I10,000 2 months
Heavy MotorII15,000 4 months
Vehicles
Using vehicle in unsafe condition I50,000 6 months
—Driving of motor vehicle inEither penalty
46(3)violation of provisions and rulesor both may be
relating to the carriage ofimposed
dangerous and hazardous goods 6 months
II 1 Lakhwhich may
extend to one
year
Failure to comply with standard 10Fine per
47 for road design, construction andLakhperson killed
maintenanceor disabled
I 4,000
48 Offences relating to certain II6,000
communications devices
III andOne month
beyond10,000licence Y es
suspension
I 2,500
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

47
49 General Provision II5,000
Two- 5,000
wheelers
51 Driving uninsured vehicleThree-10,000
wheelers and
Light motor
vehicles
Medium and25,000
Heavy motor
vehicles
52 (1) Punishment for offences relating10,000 T ow weeks Yes
to a crashlicence
suspension
52 (2) Causing death in certain 1 LakhNot less than
circumstancesfive years
3 Lakhs Not less than Death of a
seven yearsChild
53 Driving when mentally or5,000
physically unfit to drive
54 Punishment for abetment ofPunishment in the same manner as that of the underlying offencePunishment
certain offencesunder above
sections to
apply only to
owner and
consignor
58 (1) Disobedience of order2,500
58 (2) Withholding of information or5,000One monthEither or both
giving false informationof the penalties
to be imposed
58 (3) Causing injury or death of a 1 Lakh Four years For causing
person enforcing the Actdeath
1 Lakh Two yearsFor causing
injury
1Type I driver is a driver driving any of the following vehicles:
(a) V ehicles with children on board
(b) Educational institution bus
(c) Heavy Motor Vehicles
(d) V ehicles carrying dangerous or hazardous goods
(e) Chartered service vehicle
1 2 3456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

48
(f) Restricted chartered service vehicle
(g) Metered service vehicle
(h) Restricted metered service vehicle
(i) Scheduled Service vehicle
(j) Restricted scheduled service vehicle
(k) Taxi
The allowable blood alcohol concentration for such drivers is less than 20.0 mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood
2 A driver who is not a Type I driver and is—
(a) Between the age of 18 to 30 years; or
(b) Learner's license holder or recently disqualified drivers
The allowable blood alcohol concentration for such drivers is less than 20.0 mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood

49
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The growing number of road accidents in the country has become an issue of
immediate concern. In 2013 itself, 1.4 lakh people were killed and 4.7 lakh injured in road
crashes in India. Erstwhile Planning Commission has established that India loses 3 per cent
of GDP every year due to road crashes. However, the existing Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
does not address the issue of road safety in its entirety.
In S. Rajaseekaran v. Union of India, 2014, the Honorable Supreme Court of India
observed that Indian roads have proved to be giant killers demanding immediate attention
and remedial action. Thus there is an urgent need to revamp the road safety measures and
traffic management system in order to ensure road safety and wellbeing of all road users.
The Road Safety & Protection of Vulnerable Road-users Bill, 2015 inter-alia provides
for the following namely:
(i) Establishment of National and State Road Safety Authorities for promoting
road safety measures and practices including the monitoring and regulation of safety
standards for all classes of road users;
(ii) Provisions for road safety and traffic management that shall include
development of electronic road crash and offences system; and
(iii) Comprehensive and enhanced penalty system which shall act as a measure
of reform for offenders and also ensure deterrence and a sense of discipline among
drivers.
The enactment of the proposed Bill will enable creating a safer environment on the
Indian roads and protect lakh of innocent road users including vulnerable road users from
being killed every year.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
HUSAIN DALWAI

50
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 67 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National Road Safety Authority.
Clause 69 provides for remuneration and facilities to the Chairperson and members of the
National Road Safety. Clause 85 provides for the setting up of National Road Crash Victim
Compensation Fund.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
not possible at present to quantify the funds that may involve but it is estimated that a sum
of rupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum. Non-recurring
expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore may also involve for creating assets
and infrastructure.

51
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 66 of the Bill gives power to the National Road Safety Authority to amend the
Schedules to the Act. Clause 77 gives the power to the National Authority to make regulations
for ensuring road safety. Clause 93 confers power upon the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. The rules will relate to
matters of details only. The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to significantly reduce the high number of road accidents resulting in deaths and injuries by
establishing a protective framework for all classes of road users, including vulnerable
road users, fixing accountability on and establishing minimum safety standards for
road users, owners. and vehicle manufactures, enhancing enforcement and improving
overall road discipline and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, MP.)
GMGIPMRND—2155RS(S3)—07-08-2015.