Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE VEDIC EDUCATION (COMPULSORY TEACHING IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to provide for making teaching of vedic education compulsory in educational
institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Vedic Education (Compulsory Teaching in Educational
Institutions) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Bill No. XL of 2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 15TH DECEMBER, 2017

2
(3)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the commencement of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means,—
(i) the Central Government in the case of educational institutions run by
the Central Government; and
(ii) in all other cases the State Government;
(b) “Council” means the Vedic Education Council established under section 4 of
this Act;
(c) “educational institution” means an institution imparting education to children
upto the level of secondary education but does not include a minority educational
institution;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) “vedic education” means education in principles and ideals underlying vedic
literature, vedid philosophy and vedic life, which are non-religious in character.
3. Vedic education as recommended by the Council shall be taught as a compulsory
subject in all educational institutions in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute,
with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, a Council to be known as
the Vedic Education Council.
(2) The Council shall consist of such number of members, having special knowledge
or experience in the fields of history, education or vedic studies, as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and staff as may be
required for effective functioning of the Council.
(4) The salary and other allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the members and officers and staff of the Council shall be such as may be
prescribed from time to time.
5. The Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(1) to make recommendations to the appropriate Government on the curriculum for
vedic education for each class;
(2) to make recommendations to the appropriate Government regarding the class or
category of students or educational institutions which shall be exempt from the provisions
of the Act;
(3) to prescribe to the appropriate Government the principles and standards to be
observed for granting accreditation to institutions imparting training to teachers of vedic
education; and
(4) to advise the appropriate Government on imposition of penalty under section 7 of
the Act.
Definitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
vedic
education in
educational
institutions.
Constitution
of Vedic
Education
Council.
Functions of
the Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Council for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
7. Where an educational institution fails to comply with the provisions of section 3 of
this Act, then for the first failure, it shall be liable to a fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees and for successive failures, the institution shall be liable to a fine which may extend
to ten lakh rupees or de-recognition of the educational institution or both:
Provided that no penalty under this section shall be imposed on any educational
institution unless a reasonable opportunity of being heard has been provided to such
institution:
Provided further that no penalty under this section shall be imposed except on the
recommendation of the Vedic Education Council.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Penalty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Removal of
Difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Vedic period is considered among the most glorious periods in Indian history.
This was a period when civilisation grew and flourished socially, culturally, educationally
and spiritually. The richness of vedic culture is so clearly evident in vedic literature - the
Vedas being the most prominent among them. It is not surprising that the vedic philosophy
enshrined in this literature pervaded all walks of vedic life. A grave misconception that has
subsisted over centuries is that vedic literature is predominantly religious in character. On
the contrary, Vedas are eternal and their appeal is universal since they transcend all religions.
In fact, the essence or core of all religions, where they all agree, is the true vedic religion.
Vedas talk about equality, universal brotherhood, harmonious development of life and
a rational, thinking. The essence of vedic knowledge, therefore, lies in those philosophical
aspects that teach people to lead a life to its perfection. This is exactly what was sought to be
achieved by imparting education in gurukuls.
Unlike the modern education, which is largely academic in nature, vedic education was
more comprehensive in nature. It was not intended just to ensure employability of the pupils.
Rather, it aimed at formation of individual character and inculcation of a sense of
righteousness, self- control and discipline. Towards this end, vedic education touched all
aspects of human life - from physical development to sublimation of instincts, commitment to
motherland and indebtedness to mother earth.
Considering the relevance of these objectives in the present age and the contribution
vedic education can make towards the objective of creating a responsible citizenry, the Bill
provides for:—
(i) compulsory vedic education of non-religious character in educational
institutions;
(ii) establishment of a Vedic Education Council for this purpose;
(iii) imposition of pecuniary penalty or derecognition for failure to comply with
the provisions of the Bill; and
(iv) empowering the Vedic Education Council to recommend which class or
category of students or educational institutions shall be exempt from the provisions of
the Bill.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NARAYAN LAL PANCHARIYA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Vedic Education Council consisting
of such number of members as may be prescribed and for salary and other allowances
payable to its members, officers and staff. Clause 6 provides for making available adequate
funds to the Council by the Central Government for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, would involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of fifteen crore rupees and non-recurring expenditure
of two crore rupees per annum will be incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of India for the
purpose of the Bill.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause, 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislature power is of normal in character.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for making teaching of vedic education compulsory in educational institutions
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2899RS(S3)—15-12-2017.