1
THE SAFEGUARDING AND ADJUDICATING FARMERS' ECONOMIC
RIGHTS COMMISSION BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an autonomous body, called the Safeguarding and
Adjudicating Farmers' Economic Rights Commission, to help improve the economic
conditions of farmers, reduce their indebtedness and for all matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Safegudarding and Adjudicating Farmers' Economic
Rights Commission Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government shall, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short, title and
commencement.
Bill No. XL  of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 12TH JULY, 2019
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Appropriate Government" means, in the case of State, the Government of
the State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(b) "Capital" includes any monetary assests or interest arising out of the same,
owned  or incurred by an individual or group of individuals.
(c) "Chief Commissioner" means the Chairman of the Commission.
(d) "Commission" means, the Safeguarding and Adjudicating Farmers' Economic
Rights (SAFER) Commission established under section 3.
(e) "Committee" means the search-cum Selection Committee constituted under
sub-section (5) of section 3.
(f) "Complainant" means a farmer or member related to a farmer, who has lodged
a complaint with the Commission, in the prescribed format.
(g) "Creditor" means a person or institution that, in the regular course of business,
advances finance to a farmer for any purpose, and shall include the legal representatives
and successors-in-interest, whether by inheritance, assignment or otherwise, of the
person or institution that advances the finance.
(h) "Farmer" means an Indian citizen who undertakes cultivation in his own land
or in any other land on sharing basis or on lease or performs any other livelihood work
related to agriculture.
(i) "Land" includes benefits to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth
or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth.
(j) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(k) "Small and Marginal Farmers" means a farmer, in possessions of irrigated or
unirrigated land being used for agricultural purposes of a size of not more than two
hectares.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
the Safeguarding and Adjudicating Farmer's Economic Rights (SAFER) Commission, to
alleviate economic indebtedness and protect farmers from economic exploitation.
(2) The Commission shall consist of:
(i) A Chief Commissioner—Chairman, with a term of four years.
(ii) A Deputy Chief Commissioner—Member, with a term of four years.
(iii) Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer's Welfare—Member
(iv) Secretary, Ministry of Finance—Member
(v) Five Members to be appointed by the President, by warrant of his signature
and seal, from amongst persons with special knowledge in the field of agriculture,
agricultural finance and judicial matters connected therewith, each with a tenure of six
years.
(3) Each Member of the Commission shall have an equal voting right on any decision
made by the Commission:
Provided that the Chief Commissioner shall have a veto, which may be exercised for
the reasons to be recorded in writing.
(4) All decisions of the commission shall be made by a simple majority,
(5) The Chief Commissioner and Deputy Chief Commissioner shall be selected by a
Search-Cum-Selection Committee consisting of Cabinet Secretary (Chairperson), Secretary,
Definitions.
Establishment
of a SAFER
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer's Welfare (Deputy Chairperson) and three other eminent
agriculture scientists to be co-opted as members.
(6) The Committee shall submit a penal of names for the post of Chief Commissioner
and Deputy Chief Commissioner from amongst person satisfying the criteria that he shall.
(i) be an eminent scholar or researcher or professor of agriculture, with noted
publications in reputed sources, or an expert in building governance institutions for
agriculture or agricultural finance, with certified experience of the same;
(ii) be an Indian Citizen or an Overseas Citizen of India; and
(iii) not be, or have been, a part of any registered political party.
(7) The Chief Commissioner and Deputy Chief Commissioner shall be appointed by
the Central Government from the Panel submitted by the Committee.
(8) Any casual vacancy in the post of Chief Commissioner and Deputy Chief Commissioner
shall be filled by the Central Government by the same procedure, within six months.
(9) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and other staff
including experts to the Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(10) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and onditions of service
of the Chief Commissioner, Deputy Chief Commissioner, Members, Officers and any other
Staff, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(11) The Commission shall have the powers to regulate its own procedure.
4. ( 1) It shall be the duty of the Commission to take such steps, as it may deem
appropriate, for the safeguarding of farmers' economic rights and alleviating economic distress
amongst farmers.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Commission
shall perform the following functions for the economic welfare of farmers—
(a) Investigate all complaints made to be Commission, or any other relevant
authority, by farmers regarding exploitation by creditors, illegal or malafide foreclosures
on farmers' property, or any case of economic distress due to indebtedness:
Provided that the complaint is registered, in the prescribed format with the Commission
within two months of an order for the execution of a decree to initiate debt recovery.
(b) investigate all complaints made to the Commission, by farmers, regarding the
deprivation of farmers' economic rights, including but not limited to, access to subsidies,
access to reliable markets and provision of Minimum Support Prices;
(c) investigate, or participate in ongoing investigations by submitting written
Reports to the relevant authorities, any lapses in enforcement of current Central or
State Acts regarding economic indebtedness and debt recovery in the agricultural
sector; and
(d) participate in the planning process to alleviate the economic indebtedness
and general agrarian distress amongst farmers in the country.
(3) During the period of investigation of any complaints made under sub-section (2) of
section 4, the Commission shall have the powers to:
(a) introduce a temporary moratorium on debt recovery;
(b) introduce a temporary moratorium on the alienation of land; and
(c) conduct a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) regarding the process of debt
recovery and alienation of property, giving regard to the complainant's and his
dependants' income and its sources, in order to ascertain the minimum amount of land
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
and capital necessary to provide for the maintenance of the complainant and his
dependants, including an adequate amount of shelter.
(4) On completion of investigation of any complaints made under sub-section (2) of
section 4, the Commission shall have the powers to:
(a) declare null and void, in its entirety, any debt recovery or alienation of
property that the Commission feels is manifestly unjust or illegal;
(b) order a partical exemption of land, living quarters and capital, owned by the
complainant, based upon the Social Impact Assessment carried out under clause (c) of
sub-section (3) of section 4; and
(c) advise the appropriate Government, through a written Report, to act upon—
(i) an established lapse in law enforcement;
(ii) an established lapse in provision of Minimum Support Price;
(iii) an established lapse in provision of any economic right guaranteed to
farmers under existing State and Central Law; and
(iv) an established illegality in the process of debt recovery by a financial
institution or finance provider named in said case;
(5) All investigations shall be completed within six months of the complaint being
registered with the Commission.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall consult the Commission on all matters relating
to loan waivers, and any matters connected to farmer indebtedness.
(2) All Members barring the Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer's Welfare
and the Secretary, Ministry of  Finance, shall be involved in the consultation process.
(3) The Commission shall with regard to loan waivers submit a report to the appropriate
Government delineating the quantum of waiver necessary for each individual applicant,
giving a preferene to small and marginal farmers.
(4) With regard to the completion of an investigation by the Commission on complant
under sub-section (2) of section 4, the Commission shall submit a report to the appropriate
Government, including recommendations for enforcement of existing laws, policies and
schemes and/or the enactment of new policies, laws and schemes and/or recommendations
for the initiation of judicial processes against individuals found, by the investigation, to be
acting illegally.
(5) The Commission shall with regard to any other matter connected to farmer
indebtedness submit a report to the appropriate Government, under conditions as may be
prescribed on a case-by-case basis.
(6) The appropriate Government shall respond to each a Report by the Commission in
writing, accepting or rejecting its recommendations with reasons for the rejection.
6. (1) The Commission shall, within six months of its constitution establish a functional
online Portal for Complaints to be made under this Act.
(2) The Portal shall have provisions for accepting the following:
(a) complaints made by farmers regarding matters falling under the purview of
this Act.
(b) complaints made by farmers under any other existing Central or State Laws
regarding agriculture or any matters connected therewith.
(c) complaints made by farmers to any other relevant authorities, regarding the
levels of economic distress in agriculture or any matters connected therewith, that the
complainant wishes to forward to commission.
Appropriate
Government
to consult the
Commission.
Establishment
of a Portal for
Complaints.
5
10
15
25
30
35
40
20
45

5
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
for the
Commission.
(d) appeals made to the Commission by farmers, against the adjudication of a
case by any State Debt Conciliation Board:
Provided that the complaints made offline, either in person or by post to the Block
Development Officer or any other Officer of similar or higher rank shall be lodged with the
Commission through the Online Portal, not more than three days after its receipt by concerned
officer.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide adequate funds from the Consolidated Fund of  India to the Commission
for carrying out of provisions made under this Act.
8. (1) if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as it may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of  Parliament.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has a great tradition of agriculture. We are among the world's largest producers
of wheat, rice, fruits, vegetables, sugarcane and cotton. We are the world's largest producers
of pulses and milk. Farming provides almost 50% of the nation with its primary source of
livelihood. We have seen massive advances in productivity, to the extent that we are now an
entirely self-sufficient country when it comes to food demand vis-a-vis food supply. And
yet, our farmers are the unhappiest they have ever been. The last few years have seen
protests by farmers across the nation, from Delhi to Tamil Nadu. As a nation, we should not
fail to provide for those who put food on our table. Be it in infrastructure, access to markets,
agricultural finance or simply a fair price for their produce, farmers should be supported.
Several schemes and policies have been enacted to alleviate the distress within the
agrarian sector. Governments have given loan waivers and regularly hiked the Minimum
Support Prices, every time there is discontent within the farming community. However, there
is a need to tackle the core, sectoral issues. Exploitation by moneylenders, subsequent
alienation of land and property, unfair market prices and exploitation by middlemen—these
are the key underlying issues that any policy or scheme to eventually fail. These issues
makes keep the farmers stuck within a vicious cycle of debt and uncertainty. Taking away a
farmer's land and only source of income through debt recovery he is unable to provide for his
family with the middlemen hoarding all profits for himself, the farmer is forced to discontinue
farming. There is, therefore, an urgent need to establish a SAFER Commission, whose sole
purpose is to listen to farmers and fight for their economic rights. The Commission shall
ensure that the farmers of the country know that the Govenrment stands for them, and will do
everything it can to ensure they get their fair share.
Hence, this Bill.
PARTAP SINGH BAJWA
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Safeguarding and Adjudicating
Farmers' Economic Rights (SAFER) Commission. It also provides for the appointment of and
payment of salaries for a Chief Commissioner , a Deputy Chief Commissioner, members,
officers and any other staff as may be necessary. Clause 7 provides for the Central Government
to provide adequate funds for the smooth functioning of the Commission. The Bill therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore will be involved. A
non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an autonomous body, called the Safeguarding and
Adjudicating Farmers' Economic Rights Commission, to help improve the economic
conditions of farmers, reduce their indebtedness and for all matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
.
————
(Shri Partap Singh Bajwa, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1564RS(S3)—15.07.2019