1
THE WORKING WOMEN (BASIC FACILITIES AND WELFARE)
BILL 2014
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of women from discrimination, and for the basic facilities
like creche, recreational facilities, maternity benefits, hostel and transport facilities,
etc. and for the welfare measures to be taken by the employers and the State for
the women employees working in government establishments; public sector
enterprises including banks and ports, educational institutions including
universities, colleges and schools; factories, mines, plantations,
agricultural fields, orchards and such other places and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Working Women (Basic Facilities and Welfare) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. XL  of  2014
Short title,
extent and
Commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" includes a still born child;
(c) "employer" means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the control of an
appropriate Government, the person or authority appointed by the appropriate
government for the supervision and control of the employees or where no person
or authority is so appointed, the head of the establishment.;
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local self-government or
authority, the person appointed by such authority or local self-government for
the supervision and control of the employees or where no person is so appointed
the Chief Executive Officer by whatever name called of the local self-government
or the authority as the case may be;
(iii) in other cases, the person who or the authority which has the ultimate
control over the affairs of the establishment;
(d) "establishment" include an office of the appropriate Government, quasi
government or department including telegraph office, post office, telephone exchange
etc., a mine, a plantation, an agricultural field, a hospital or nursing home, a shop or any
business establishment, a brick kiln, construction site, any banking establishment,
any private office or house, any school, college university or like institution,
establishment for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances and
any other such place where a woman is employed for any work whatsoever;
(e) "factory" means a factory as defined in the Factories Act, 1948;
(f) "industry" means an industry as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act. 1947;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that no discrimination
is done by any establishment on gender basis with its women employees particularly in the
matter of payment of wages which are paid to her male counterpart in such establishment.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every employer shall provide basic child care facilities essential for the children of women
workers in his establishment with provision of minimum needs like milk, tiffin, clothes, toys
and trained ayahs to look after children of women working therein.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every employer of an agricultural
field provide mobile childcare facilities for the working women in his establishment:
Provided that two or more such employers may provide such childcare facilities
collectively for their establishments.
(3) The appropriate Government shall open such number of creches at such places as
it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every employer provides retiring
rooms with facilities like bathroom, latrine, drinking water  at the workplace or worksite of the
working women and also provide recreational facilities like radio, television, etc. for them and
their children.
Definitions.
63 of 1948.
14 of 1947.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
Non-
discrimination
and equal
wages for
working
women.
Employer to
have childcare
facilities for
working
women.
Recreational
facilities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2

6. The appropriate Government alongwith the employer shall provide adequate and
proper security measures for the safety of working women in the establishment, factory or
industry, as the case may be, as well as to and from their places of residence.
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate government to ensure reservation of beds and
proper and adequate maternity facilities for the working women in the hospitals and
dispensaries having indoor patient facilities therein.
8. The appropriate Government as well as an employer shall provide hostel and
residential facilities both for married and unmarried working women nearest to their place of
work and shall also provide cheap, safe and quick transport facilities for such working
women.
9. The appropriate Government shall ensure protection from health hazards particularly
for the women working in factories or industries like beedi, tobacco, stone mines, cashew,
fish processing, salt, silk construction projects and such other establishments as may be
prescribed.
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall maintain a register of working women in
such manner and at such place as may be prescribed;
(2) The appropriate Government may require an employer to furnish for the purposes
of this Act, such statistical and other information, in such form and within such period as
may be prescribed.
11. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith  contained in any  other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be  in addition to and not
in derogation  of any other law for the  time being applicable to the working women.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
Security
Arrangements.
Maternity
Facilities.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
Hostel and
transport
facilities.
Protection
from health
hazards.
Register of
women
working.
3

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Despite the unabated female foeticides and dwindling population of girls in the country
and the conservative  attitude of the society towards  women, more and more women are
venturing out of their houses to work  to support their families. As a result, the number of
working women in government services,  factories, industries, commercial  establishments,
agriculture, mines, fish processing sector, silk industry and so on so forth is increasing  day
by day, but their conditions of employment need  amelioration. V arious basic and essential
facilities which are supposed to be  made available to the working women by the government
and private employers are either absent or not adequate and satisfactory. Unfortunately, in
most of the private sector including agricultural sector, the facilities are  rather minimal or
negligible and the  working women are an exploited lot there. The existing labour laws also do
not provide  for proper medical, educational, recreational and other facilities for the working
women and their children. As regards, other social security causes like security, transport,
accommodation has also not been made so far. In many  establishments they are  not given
equal work. This discrimination has to be stopped.
Hence it has become necessary to provide adequate welfare measures  for the working
women.
Hence this Bill.
K.C. TYAGI

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause  4 of the Bill provides for childcare facilities, whereas  clause 5 provides  for
recreational  facilities and clause  7 provides for matenity facilities. Similarly clause 8 provides
for hostel and transport facilities for  the working women. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure  from the Consolidated  Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of Rs. two
thousand crore may involve  as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of Rs. five thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the  Central Government to make rules for carrying  out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of women from discrimination, and for the basic facilities like
creche, recreational facilities, maternity benefits, hostel and transport facilities,
etc. and for the welfare measures to be taken by the employers and the State for
the women employees working in government establishments; public sector
enterprises including banks and ports, educational institutions including
universities, colleges and schools; factories, mines, plantations,
agricultural fields, orchards and such other places and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri K.C. Tyagi, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—3806RS(S3)—18-12-2014.