AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA  SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
THE UNDERDEVELOPED AND BACKWARD AREAS AND REGIONS
(SPECIAL PROVISION FOR ACCELERATED DEVELOPMENT)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an autonomous Central Authority to ensure rapid,
accelerated and overall development of poor, underdeveloped and backward
areas and regions of the country which lag behind in matters of
development of economic, social, educational, technical,
infrastructural and industrial fields and assure their
speedy development in a planned manner and for
 matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Underdeveloped and Backward Areas and Regions
(Special Provisions for Accelerated Development) Act, 2006.
Bill No.  XL of  2006
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the Underdeveloped and Backward Areas and Regions
Development Authority established under Section 4;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "underdeveloped and backward areas and regions" means the areas and
regions which are economically, socially, educationally and industrially lagging behind
from the rest of the country and so declared by Central Government under Section 3.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not  later than one year from
the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such areas and
regions of the country as poor, underdeveloped and backward areas and regions, which in
its opinion require priority attention to bring them at par with the rest of areas and regions of
the country.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
an Authority to be known as the Underdeveloped and Backward Areas and Regions
Development Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Bhubaneswar in the State of Orissa
and the authority may, with the consent of the appropriate Government establish offices at
other places in the country.
5. The Authority shall consist of the following members:—
(a) The Prime Minister who shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the Authority.
(b) The Deputy Chairman of the Union Planning Commission who shall be the
Vice Chairperson of the Authority;
(c) five members of Parliament representing underdeveloped and backward
regions of whom three shall be from the Lok Sabha and two from the Rajya Sabha to be
nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
(d) ten members to be appointed by the Central Government representing the
Planning Commission and Ministries/Departments of Agriculture, Rural Development,
Industry, Finance, Railways, Road Transport, Human Resource Development, Power
and Water Resources of the Union Government;
(e) not more than five members to be appointed by the Central Government by
rotation in the alphabetical order to represent the Governments of the States having
the underdeveloped and backward areas and regions.
6. (1) The Authority shall follow such procedure for holding its meetings and the
quorum for such meetings shall be such as may be prescribed.
(2) No act or proceeding taken by the Authority under this Act shall be questioned on
the ground merely of;—
(a) the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the Constitution of the Authority,
or
Definitions.
Notification
of
underdeveloped
and backward
areas and
regions.
Establishment
of
Underdeveloped
and Backward
Areas and
Regions
Development
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.
Procedure to
be followed by
the Authority.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(b) any omission, defect or irregularity not affecting the merits of the case.
7. (1) The Authority shall have a Secretariat consisting of such officers, employees
and establishment as may be prescribed.
(2) The conditions of service, emoluments and other perks of the officers and
employees shall be such as may be determined from time to time for the efficient functioning
of the Secretariat of the Authority.
8. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, adequate funds for the developmental works to be
undertaken by the Authority and for its administrative expenses.
9. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to undertake such special steps in order to
ensure rapid and accelerated development of underdeveloped and backward areas and
regions of the country, as it may deem necessary and expedient to do so for the overall
development of such areas and regions.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall initiate measures for the accelerated development particularly of industrial growth with
immunity of investments, infrastructure pertaining to railways, roads, communication network,
agriculture, irrigation facilities by implementing watershed projects in a big way and
constructing wells, bore wells, canals, ponds, etc., potable water facilities, power projects
pertaining to thermal, hydel, solar and wind energies, forests, agro based industries and
livestock, poultry, piggery, orchards, cooperatives of milk and other things, cottage and
village industries, health services, family welfare, education, network of PDS, Public
Distribution System, vocational avenues, tourism and such other activities as the Authority
may deem necessary for the overall development of the underdeveloped and backward
areas and regions of the country.
10. The appropriate Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, provide the requisite
necessary assistance to the Authority in undertakings its developmental work in the areas
and regions within the territorial jurisdiction of such Government.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
12. The Authority shall submit an annual report, in such form and in such manner, as
may be prescribed, of its activities of development undertaken under this Act to the President
of India who shall cause the report to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament along
with action taken by Government thereon as soon as it is received.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Secretariat of
the Authority.
Funds of the
Authority.
Authority to
ensure rapid
growth and
development
of
underdeveloped
and backard
areas and
regions.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
requisite
assistance to
the Authority.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Annual
report of the
Authority.
Supplementing
provision.
Power to
make rules.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is very awesome that even after more than five decades of independence and
implementation of as many as Nine Five Year Plans and the Tenth Five Year Plan being
midway of implementation there are many States, areas and regions which are still
underdeveloped, backward and inflicted with extreme poverty, hunger and sufferings in the
country. The eastern parts of the country particularly Orissa, Bihar, Jharkhand, Eastern Uttar
Pradesh, entire North-Eastern region, Chhattisgarh and Tribal areas of Madhya Pradesh in
the Central India, Vidarbha, Marathwada, Saurashtra, Kutchh desert and famine prove areas
of Rajasthan in the western parts, Telengana, Mehboob Nagar, Rayalseema in Andhra Pradesh
and other areas in Southern parts of the country are still most backward. Kalahandi-Bolangir-
Koraput (KBK) in Orissa are synonymous with backwardness and hunger. Non development
of many areas and regions has given rise to demand for creation of new States. Some new
States have already been created whereas the demand for other States like Vidarbha,
Gorkhaland, Telengana, Harit Pradesh, Bodoland, etc. is being raised frequently. Though
reducing regional imbalance is one of the primary goals of our Five Year Plans but,
unfortunately, this imbalance still persists which clearly shows that we have not paid the
required attention to the development of such States, areas and region in the right earnest.
So in the larger interest of the country as a whole, it has become necessary to develop
such underdeveloped States, areas and regions on priority basis for which special efforts
have to be made and necessary steps need to be taken at the national and State levels to
secure rapid and accelerated development of such States, areas and regions. For this purpose
an autonomous Authority should be established for implementing State, area and region
based package programmes for their overall development in coordination with Central and
State Governments so as to ensure accelerated development of underdeveloped and backward
States, areas and regions in the country.
Hence this Bill.
B.J. PANDA

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Underdeveloped and Backward
Areas and Regions Development Authority. Clause 8 provides for the funds of the Authority.
The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not
possible to assess the actual requirement of funds at this stage but it is estimated that a
recurring expenditure to the tune of two thousand crore rupees per annum is likely to be
involved.
Non-recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore rupees is also likely to be
incurred.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill, which will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an autonomous Central Authority to ensure rapid,
accelerated and overall development of poor, underdeveloped and backward
areas and regions of the country which lag behind in matters of
development of economic, social, educational, technical,
infrastructural  and industrial fields and assure their
speedy development in a planned manner and for
matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri B.J. Panda, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—514RS—(S5)—12-05-2006.

8
jkT; lHkk esa 12 ebZ] 2006 dks iqj%LFkkfir :i esa
7- leqfpr ljdkj ,slh ckfydk] ftls nsg&O;kikj vFkok os';ko`fÙk ls cpk;k x;k gks vFkok tks
bl vf/kfu;e ds izorZu ds i'pkr~ /ka/ks ls ckgj gks xbZ gks] ds fy,] ;FkklaHko 'kh?kz] iquokZl vkSj
dY;k.kdkjh mik; rS;kj djsxh vkSj bu mik;ksa esa fu%'kqYd fpfdRlh; ns[kjs[k] vkJ;] Hkkstu] diM+s
vkSj nSuafnu thou;kiu dh vU; vko';drk,a] O;kolkf;d f'k{kk lfgr fu%'kqYd f'k{kk] ykHkdj
jkstxkj] fookg vkSj bl rjg ds vU; ;Fkkfofgr mik; 'kkfey gksaxsA
8- dsUæh; ljdkj bl fufeÙk laln dh fof/k }kjk fofu;ksx ds i'pkr~] bl vf/kfu;e ds
iz;kstuksa dks dk;kZfUor djus ds fy, le;&le; ij i;kZIr vko';d fuf/k;ka iznku djsxhA
bu ckfydkvksa dks cpkus ds fy;s ckfydkvksa dks nsg&O;kikj vFkok os';ko`fÙk esa /kdsyus ;k blds fy,
MGIPMRND—499RS—(CRC)—12-05-2006.