 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. XL of  2024  
THE RIGHT TO DIGITAL LITERACY BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a Digital Literacy Curriculum in all educational 
institutions to make the              youth digitally literate and 
 for matters connected therewith 
 or incidental thereto. 
 BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy - fifth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called Right to Digital Literacy Act, 2024.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
Commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “appropriate Government” means in relation to a State,
Government of that particular State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b) “Curriculum” means the Digital Literacy Curriculum formulated
under section 3; 
(c) “data privacy” means empowering individuals to make their own
decisions about who can process their data and for what purpose; 
(d) “data protection” means keeping data safe from unauthorized
access; 
(e) “digital” means regularly updating and cleaning electronic
devices, using passwords that follow security protocols, organizing the 
files stored on the device, optimizing setting etc; 
(f) “digital literacy" means the knowledge, skills and attitudes that
allow individuals to be both safe and empowered in an increasingly digital 
world; 
(g) “disinformation" means false information deliberately spread to
deceive people; 
(h) “educational institutions” means all schools and colleges in the
territory of India; 
(i) "impact assessment" means a holistic evaluation to understand the
extent to which the Curriculum has penetrated into the lives of children 
and young adults and has enabled them to use the internet safely; 
(j) "misinformation" means incorrect or misleading information;
(k) “Online Financial Fraud” means the act of obtaining financial
gain through profit-driven criminal activity, including identity fraud, 
ransomware attacks, email and internet fraud, and attempts to steal 
financial account, credit card, or other payment card information; 
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(m) “sextortion” means a form of online abuse, wherein the
cybercriminal makes use of various channels like instant messaging 
applications, short messaging service, online dating applications, social 
media platforms, porn sites etc., to lure the users into intimate video or 
audio chats and makes them pose nude or obtains revealing pictures from 
them; 
(n) "social media etiquette" means treating others with respect
online, personal information, images, or videos of anyone not to be shared 
without consent etc.; and 
(o) "virtual digital asset" shall have the same meaning as defined
under sub- section (c) of section 3 of the Finance Act, 2022. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 6 of 2022. 

3 
5 
3.1. Digital Literacy 
Curriculam. 
10 
15 
20 
(1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official  
Gazette, within six months from the date of  commencement of this Act, 
formulate a Digital Literacy Curriculum for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act.
(2) From such date, as the appropriate Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette specify, the Curriculum shall be adopted in 
all educational institutions.
(3) The appropriate Government shall take all measures to ensure that the 
Curriculum,—
(a) is designed after a preliminary diagnostic review of the local 
context and due  consultations with concerned stakeholders in such manner 
as may be prescribed; 
(b) includes content relating to data protection, data privacy, social 
media etiquette, digital  hygiene,  misinformation,  disinformation, online 
financial fraud, sextortion, virtual  digital assets and any  other  relevant 
subject that the appropriate  Government may decide; 
(c) is framed on a grade- by-grade basis for all educational 
institutions; and 
(d) is revised  at such  requisite  intervals  of  time,  as  may  b e 
prescribed by the appropriate Government, to keep pace with the changing 
technological landscape.
25 
30 
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to address the
human resource requirements for implementation of the Curriculum
by planning, developing, implementing and regularly updating
educational and training programs in collaboration with institutions
of higher education and training.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure the appointment of such
number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be prescribed for
teaching the Curriculum in educational institutions.
(3) The appropriate Government shall make efforts to incorporate
international best practices in digital literacy in the curriculum.
Appropriate 
Government  
to take  
measures to address 
human resource  
requirement  
training etc.  
35 
5. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to ensure effective
co-ordination between services provided by concerned Ministries and
Departments of that Government such as those dealing with Information
Technology, Education, Finance, Home Affairs, Women and Child
Development for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Co-ordination 
within the  
appropriate 
Government. 
40 
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall design an impact assessment
mechanism to evaluate the efficiency of the Curriculum.
(2) The appropriate Government shall conduct an impact assessment
as per  sub-section (1) at five-year intervals in such manner as may be
prescribed:
   Provided that the first impact assessment shall be conducted 
after five years of the implementation of the Curriculum. 
Impact  
assessment. 
45 
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State
Governments, from time to time, for carrying  out the purposes of this
Act.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 

4 
Act to have 
overriding 
Effect. 
8. The provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any
other law for the time being in force.
Power to 
make 
rules. 
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or  both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be
laid, as soon    as may be after it is made, before each House of the State
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature
consists of one House, before that House.
5 
10  
15 
  20 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 As o f December 2023,  there are  a  total  o f 93.6  crore  internet 
subscribers in India according  to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
(TRAI). Since  the  Covid-19 pandemic made  remote working  and remote 
learning the norm, the world has witnessed a surge in dependence on the 
internet.  Hence, social media platforms have become mainstream vehicles for 
civic participation. As a result, invasions of privacy, increasing surveillance, 
digital financial transactions are just some of the complex issues that face 
us today. 
As per NITI Aayog, "Most of the internet users are in urban educated 
classes. This situation reflects that majority of the Indians still remain unfazed 
by the information technology revolution.  With such a disparity in digital 
access and literacy, it is hard to aspire for inclusion and  equity. India  is 
expected to have the largest working age population, which requires rapid 
job creation. Digital literacy becomes a crucial medium of communication 
with global  citizens". 
Even though children are seemingly adept at using digital tools, this 
does not mean that they are digitally literate. Digital literacy encompasses 
awareness of digital rights, balanced use of technology, digital emotional 
intelligence, digital  safety  and 
security and  civic  digital self-expression. 
School going  children  can  be extremely  vulnerable  to  cyber bullying, 
phishing, online scams, malware and the like. Besides, children need to be 
sensitised                             to the perpetual nature of the internet and the perils of posting 
personally identifiable information online. Children and young adults need 
to b e digitally  literate  even when  they  are offline  since  their  schooling, 
societal conditioning and future job opportunities largely  depend on their 
understanding of and participation in the digital ecosystem. 
This Bill assumes greater significance since India does not have a Data 
Protection law yet. At the same time, it is only a first step towards our goal of a 
digitally literate India. Various  challenges to mainstreaming digital literacy 
include low-quality  technological infrastructure,  cost  of  infrastructure 
needed for the use of Information and Communications Technology  (ICT), 
lack of online content in local languages and that related to everyday life, 
lack of understanding  of the decision  makers,  lack  of  evidence  based 
information and a lack  of  sufficient regulation  in relation to privacy and 
transparency. We must look at digital literacy as one part of the solution and 
not the panacea. 
Notably, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child, in 
2014, advised  member  governments (including  India)  to include digital 
literacy in their  national  school  curriculums.  Countries like Scotland, 
Australia, Netherlands already have a digital  literacy  framework in place. 
Even though the National Education Policy, 2020 envisages digital literacy as a 
part of the curriculum framework for school and adult education, it does not 
define the  same. This Bill  seeks to incorporate a rights based approach to 
digital literacy and citizenship. The thrust to Digital India must 
be accompanied by an adequate legislative response to the  opportunities 
and threats presented by the internet. 
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives 
DEREK O’BRIEN 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appropriate Government to take 
measures as regard to human resource development and training by 
appointing teachers for imparting education on Digital Literacy 
Curriculum. Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall 
provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  
 The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about 
rupees one hundred crore would be involved. 

7 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause  9 of the Bill empowers the  appropriate Government to make 
rules for carrying out  the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to 
matters of details only, the delegation of  legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a Digital Literacy Curriculum in all educational 
institutions to make the              youth digitally literate and 
 for matters connected therewith 
 or incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shri Derek O’Brien, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)—031—10.02.2025. 