1
THE COMPULSORY PERIODICAL DESILTATION OF DAMS,
RESERVOIRS AND RIVERS BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory periodical desiltation of dams, reservoirs, rivers and such
other water bodies and an institutional mechanism by establishing a National
Authority to ensure timely and periodical desiltation of such water bodies in the
country to increase their water holding capacity and ensure smooth flow of water
which will reduce the incidence of floods and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Periodical Desiltation of Dams, Reservoirs
and Rivers Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XL of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
5

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Authority” means the National Desiltation Authority of India established
under section 3;
(c) “Dam” means any artificial barrier and its appurtenant structure constructed
across rivers or tributaries thereof to impound or divert water which also include
barrage, weir and similar water impounding structures;
(d) “desiltation” means removing of sediments of rocks and clay deposited by
flowing stream of water in a river, dams and other water bodies.
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “reservoir” in relation to a dam shall mean any spread of water impounded by
such a dam.
3. (1) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a
National Desiltation Authority of India, within a period of sixty days from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose off properties, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Aurangabad in the State of
Maharashtra and the Authority may also establish offices at other places in India.
(4) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, a deputy Chairperson and four
other members having such qualifications and experience to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be
prescribed;
(6) The Authority shall have its own Secretariat headed by a Secretary and such
number of officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority
and the salaries, allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the
Secretary, other officers and staff shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) The Authority shall comply with such directions, as may, from time to time, be
given to it by the Central Government.
(8) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in the manner as may be
prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall prepare a list of dams, reservoirs and rivers in the country
and chalk out a programme for desiltation of each of these dams, reservoir and river and
prescribe norms for desiltation, prioritisation of works, proper surveillance, inspection and
maintenance of such works and shall ensure that every dam, reservoir and river undergoes
desiltation process at least once in every five year.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions, contained in sub-section (1),
the Authority shall make all endeavours to,—
(a) make provision for machinery, vehicles and necessary infrastructure required
for desiltation works;
Definitions.
Establishment
of National
Desiltation
Authority of
India.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
Functions of
the Authority.

3
(b) hire services of experts in the field of desiltation works in consultation with
Dredging Corporation of India;
(c) suggest measures for the use of silt which will be generated after the desiltation
works;
(d) make provisions for safety, emergency action plan and such other measures,
as may be prescribed, during the desiltation works undertaken by the Authority.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to extend requisite help, manpower
and assistance to the Authority, as and when required by it.
6. (1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time, as may be prescribed,
its report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous financial year and
submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause the annual report to be laid
before each House Parliament.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide to the Authority by way of grants such sums of money as may be
required for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Appropriate
Government
to extend
required help
to the
Authority.
Annual
Report.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has many rivers and there are several cities and villages near their banks.
These rivers give much required water for drinking and other purposes and for irrigation
purposes to grow crops in major parts of the country. On many rivers, dams have been
constructed to generate hydro-power to meet the power demands of our vast nation. The
water stored in these dams is also used for drinking and irrigation purposes.
Similarly, large number of reservoirs have been constructed across the country which
store rainwater which is used for drinking and other purposes. For instance, Mumbai, the
financial capital of the nation and a metropolitan city is mainly dependent on nearby reservoirs
for its daily water supply and so is the case of other cities in the State of Maharashtra and
other parts of the country.
However, the holy rivers which provide water for our lifeline also bring havoc and
destructions through floods. One of the main reasons for flooding of these rivers is deposit
of huge quantities of silt in them which has substantially reduced their water holding capacity
resulting in floods.
Similarly, large quantities of silt deposited in dams and reservoirs across the country
which has substantially reduced their capacity to hold water in them. As a result, for instance,
when summer approaches the water level in reservoirs near Mumbai goes down substantially
resulting in severe water crisis and this happens almost every year. Since the rivers, dams,
reservoirs, etc. in the country are never desilted, the situation is becoming from bad to worst.
Floods are causing huge losses of human lives, properties, crops, livestock and bring miseries
to the people year after year. Similarly, huge deposits of silt in dams and reservoirs is causing
severe water crisis for drinking as well as irrigation purposes. Hence, it has become obvious
for periodical desiltation of rivers, dams and reservoirs in the country. It is felt that every
river, dam and reservoir must be desilted once in every five year. For this purpose, an
Authority be established at the national level to ensure desiltation of these water bodies as
per time schedule.
Hence, this Bill.
RAJKUMAR DHOOT

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of National Desiltation Authority of
India. Clause 7 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide required funds to
the Authority. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is not possible to quantify the amount at this stage but it is estimated that a sum of
rupees fifty thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Since large number of modern machines, vehicles, equipments, etc. have to be put in
place, a non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one lakh crore may also involve from
the Consolidated Fund of India.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is therefore of normal character.

MGIPMRND—4319RS—11-12-2019.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory periodical desiltation of dams, reservoirs, rivers and such
other water bodies and an institutional mechanism by establishing a National
Authority to ensure timely and periodical desiltation of such water
bodies in the country to increase their water holding capacity
and ensure smooth flow of water which will reduce the
incidence of floods and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .)