1
THE STATES REORGANIZATION COMMISSION BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Commission for reorganization of States within the
geographical boundaries of the Union of India with an objective to preserve and
strengthen the unity of the India keeping into consideration, the linguistic, cultural,
financial, economic and administrative viability of reorganization of a State
corresponding to the safety and welfare of the citizens of the State as well as of the
citizens of the nation.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the States Reorganization Commission Bill, 2022.
(2) It shall extend to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in  the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XL of 2022
5
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022

2
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission;
(ii) "Commission" means the States Reorganization Commission established
under section 3;
(iii) "Deputy Chairperson" means the Deputy Chairperson of the Commission;
(iv) "dissolution" means the action of formally discontinuing the existence of
the Commission after the Commission has formally discharged its functions as assigned
to it under section 8 of this Act;
(v) "Members" means the Members of the Commission; and
(vi) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules as made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE STATES REORGANIZATION COMMISSION
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Commission, to be known as the
States Reorganization Commission, to exercise the power conferred upon, and to perform
the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of the following persons to be appointed by the
Central Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson;
(c) the following persons as Members, namely:—
(i) two representatives from Ministry of Home Affairs, not below the rank
of Additional Secretary to the Government of India;
(ii) three representatives from All India Services, preferably from Indian
Administrative Services and Indian Police Services not below the rank of Joint
Secretary or equivalent; and
(iii) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court.
(2) The Central Government may also appoint temporary or part-time Members to the
Commission, as may be prescribed, who shall be selected from amongst persons who:—
(a) have special knowledge of the finances and accounts of the Government; or
(b) have considerable experience in matters of State administration; or
(c) have special knowledge of linguistics and culture of the concerned State; or
(d) are members of State services of the concerned State; or
(e) are, or have been qualified to be appointed as Judge of High Court.
(3) The Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other members of the Commission
shall be persons of outstanding ability and eminence, proven capacity for institution building
and governance with high levels of integrity; with not less than experience of ten years in
handling matters of public affairs.
Constitution
of States
Reorganization
Commission.
Composition
of
Commission.
40

3
Term of
Office and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5. (1) The Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson/Members and part-time Members shall
hold office for such period, beginning from the date of appointment by the Central Government,
till the date of dissolution of the Commission after the Commission discharges the purposes
mentioned as per this Act:
Provided that Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members shall cease to hold
office on attaining the age of seventy years or earlier on resignation, by letter addressed to
the President of India.
(2) Where a Member is absent from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the
Commission and the cause of such absence is not attributable to any valid reason in the
opinion of Commission, such Member shall be deemed to have vacated the seat.
(3) A vacancy caused under sub-section ( 2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh
nomination by the Central Government.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, Members part time Members and officers and staff
of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson,
Deputy Chairperson or any Member, who —
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted with an offence which, in the opinion of Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of continuing in office; or
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interests as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions; or
(f ) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to public interest.
(2) No person shall be removed under clauses (e) and (f ) of sub-section (1) unless he
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
7. (1) The Commission shall meet at least once every quarter at such time and place as
may be appointed by the Chairperson.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the Commission and if, for any
reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Commission, the Deputy
Chairperson, shall preside over the meeting.
(3) The Commission shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be provided by
regulations made under this Act.
(4) The general superintendence, direction and control of the administration of the
Commission shall vest in the Chairperson.
8. (1) The  Commission shall perform such functions with regard to the reorganization
of the State as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Commission
shall ensure the following for the preservation of unity of the nation as well as safety and
welfare of the citizens of the State:—
(a) allocate land within the geographical boundary of the Union of India;
Removal of
Chairperson
and Members
of
Commission.
Meetings of
the
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.

4
(b) allocate water and other natural resources after reorganization;
(c) in conformity to the All India Services Act of 1951, allocate All India Services
officers after reorganization;
(d) in consultation with the State Government, allocate State Government
employees after reorganization;
(e) in consultation with the Election Commission of India and, delimit
constituencies for the elections to the House of the People and State Legislative
Assemblies; and
(f) allocation of financial assets after reorganization.
9. (1) The Commission shall be entrusted with such powers as may be prescribed by
the Central Government to ensure proper fulfillment of the function under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to:—
(a) order any person to furnish information on such points or matters as in the
opinion of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the
consideration of the Commission; and
(b) secure the assistance of any office or agency under the administrative control
of the State undergoing reorganization, for carrying out the functions of the Commission
assigned under this Act.
CHAPTER III
M
ISCELLANEOUS
10. (1) In performance of its functions under this Act, the Commission shall be bound
by such directions on questions of policy of reorganization as the Central Government may
issue from time to time:
Provided that the Commission shall be duly given an opportunity to communicate and
express its views before any direction is given to it.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether the concern expressed by the
Commission is one of policy of reorganization or not, shall be final.
11. (1) The Commission shall submit its report on the reorganization of States to the
Central Government within a period of one year of the date of first sitting of the Commission:
Provided that the Central Government, may, on a special request made by the
Commission, extend the time of submission of such report by not more than six months as it
may deem appropriate.
(2) The Commission shall furnish any information related to the process of
reorganization, as sought by the Central Government from time to time:
Provided that the Commission shall duly be given time to collect and collate the
sought information as deemed appropriate by the Central Government.
(3) The report as stated in sub-section (1) and information as stated in sub-section (2),
after critical observation by the Central Government, be published in a downloadable format
on a Central Government Website:
Provided that the report shall be published within not more than fifteen days from the
date of submission to the Central Government and any other information shall be published
within not more than seven days from the submission of information to the Central
Government.
Powers of
Commission.
Powers of
Central
Government
to issue
directions to
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Report of the
Commission.
40

5
12.  (1) The Commission shall have its own funds and all the receipts of the Commission
shall be credited thereto and all payments made by the Commission shall be made therefrom.
(2) The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the Commission to carry out its functions, as it
may consider necessary.
(3) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for the performance of its
functions under this Act and such sums shall be treated as an expenditure payable out of the
fund of the Commission.
(4) The Funds belonging to the Commission shall be kept in such bank as may be
prescribed by the Central Government for the purpose or invested in securities authorized
by the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, at the discretion of the Commission.
(5) If  any sum granted by the Central Government remains wholly or partly unspent
after the dissolution of Commission, such sum may, at the direction of Central Government,
may be used for other official purposes as deemed fit by the Central Government.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this act, the Central
Government may make such an order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty
so arisen:
Provided that no such order or direction shall be given after the process of
reorganization of State or dissolution of the Commission, whichever is earlier, has been
completed.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification published in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may comprise of one session or two or more successive sessions. If before the expiry of the
session, immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both the
Houses are in agreement of any applicable modification in the rule(s) or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may so be. However, that any such modification
or annulment shall be, without prejudice, to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Powers of
Central
Government
to remove
difficulty.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Finance and
accounts of
the
Commission.
2 of 1882.

6
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS   AND   REASONS
The States Reorganization Commission was formed in 1953 to receive recommendations
for fair partition of the States of the Union of India after Independence. The Commission's
primary purpose then was to re-organize India which could be said to be a result of accidents
and circumstances attending to the growth of British power. Now, after 72 years of
Independence, a new Commission is required which would focus upon the reorganization of
the States and districts from other modern viewpoints, specific to the financial, economic
and administrative viability corresponding to the present day India and needs of the State
seeking any such reorganization.
Hence, this Bill.
Dr. SASMIT  PATRA

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, Members, part-time
Members and officers and staff of the Commission. Clause 12 of this Bill provides for the
grants of sums of money to the Commission to carry out its functions as prescribed. Therefore
recurring expenditure is involved from the Consolidated Fund of India which cannot be
estimated at present. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

MGIPMRND—853RS—08-08-2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Commission for reorganization of States within the
geographical boundaries of the Union of India with an objective to preserve and
strengthen the unity of the India keeping into consideration, the linguistic, cultural,
financial, economic and administrative viability of reorganization of a State
corresponding to the safety and welfare of the citizens of the State as well as of the
citizens of the nation.
————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P.)