As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XL of 2001

THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL

further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2001. Short title and
. commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
5 in the Official Gazette, appoint.
59 of 1988. 2. In section 66 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Amendment
Act), in sub-section (3), clause (/) shall be omitted. of section 66.

3. In section 67 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), in clause (i), the proviso shall Amendment
be omitted. of section 67.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) is a Central legislation through which the
road transport is regulated in the country. By the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994,
inter alia, amendments were made to make special provisions under sections 66 and 67 so
as to provide that vehicles operating on eco-friendly fuels shall be exempted from the
requirements of permits and also the owners of such vehicics shall have the discretion to fix
fares and freights for carriage of passengers and goods. The intention in bringing the said
amendments was to encourage the operation of vehicles with such eco-friendly fuels.

2. However, it has been observed that during the last several years, not only the
supply of eco-friendly fucls like CNG has increased tremendously, a large number of
vehicles have come on the road which in terms of sections 66 and 67, as amended by the
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994, are operating without any requirement of permits
and are, therefore, not subject to any control of the State Governments. The number of such
vehicles is likely to further increase substantially.

3. The aforesaid situation is likely to lead to indiscipline on the roads and consequent
increase in the road accidents. It is, therefore, considered essential to remove exemption
provided under sections 66 and 67 of the said Act to CNG operated vehicles so that vehicles
which operate on eco-friendly fuels are also covered by the terms and conditions applicable
to all other vehicles.

4. The proposed amendments are essential in the overall interest of securing road
safety and maintaining a clean environment.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New Dewi; Major General (Retd.) 8. ९. KHANDURI.
The 26th March, 2001.


ANNEXURE
Extracts FROM tHE Motor Viinictes Act, 1988
(59 oF 1988)

* * * * *

CHAPTER V
CONTROL OF TRANSPORT VEHICLES

66. (1) * * * * Necessity for
permits.

(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply—
* * * * *

(010 any motor vehicle which is operated by electric battery, compressed natural
gas or solar energy.

* * * * *
67. (1) A State Government, having regard to— Power to State
. . Government
(a) the advantages offered to the public, trade and industry by the development to control road
of motor transport, transport.

(b) the desirability of co-ordinating road and rail transport,
(c) the desirability of preventing the deterioration of the road system, and

(व) the desirability of preventing uneconomic competition among holders of
permits,
may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, issue directions both to the
State Transport Authority and Regional Transport Authority—

(i) regarding the fixing of fares and freights (including the maximum and
minimum in respect thereof) for stage carriages, contract carriages and goods
carriages:

Provided that the fares and freights in respect of such stage carriages,
contract carriages and goods carriages operated by battery, compressed natural
gas or solar energy shall be fixed by the owner or operator;

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.

(Major General (Retd,) B.C. Khanduri, Minister of State for Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—45RS—10-4-2001.