1
THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. After section 22 of the Central Universities Act, 2009, the following new section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"22A. (1) It shall be mandatory for every University to constitute an Industry-
Academia Linkage Cell which shall be the principal body within the University for the
purpose of developing the requisite skills among the students to facilitate their transfer
from academia to industry.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XL of  2023
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Insertion of
new Section
22A.
5
10
Industry-
Academia
Linkage Cell.

2
(2) The Industry-Academia Linkage Cell shall be responsible for performing such 
functions that shall include but not be limited to:
(a) enable active and streamlined co-operation between the University and related
industries and industrial institutions;
(b) foster an environment of ingenuity and research within the University;
(c) provide incubation facilities for students;
(d) create opportunities for students to participate in real-life industrial projects;
and
(e) undertake any other activity that falls within its ambit in the interest of the
students.".
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Indian education system is often criticised for encouraging rote memorization, a 
concept that only encourages students to lear n everything through repetition. Employers 
themselves have often raised concerns about Indian students lacking intrinsic skills such as 
problem-solving, critical thinking and leadership.
A study has revealed that about 50 per cent. of the Indian youth are not on tar get to 
possess the essential skills that will b e required for various jobs in 2030. Around 1/6th of 
Indian students pursue engineering but due to a lack of skills required to execute technical 
jobs, less than 20 per cent. are employed in the field. Another study found that 80 per cent. 
of Indian engineers are not equipped for a job in the knowledge economy, a system that is 
largely based on the consumption and production of intellectual capital. Yet another study 
of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) students in India highlighted 
that they do not gain critical thinking skills over 4 years of the undergraduate degree taken 
up by them, as compared to similarly placed students in other countries. Even though Indian 
students are known for their expertise in science and technology and  u ndergo massive 
migration in such fields, clearly the curricula followed in Indian Universities do not help them 
acquire crucial skills to thrive in the industry.
The persisting constraints in research and development (R&D) coupled with a lack of 
interdisciplinary opportunities have resulted in a weak innovation ecosystem in academia. It 
is no coincidence that India has 8 scientists for 1000 people, as compared to 18 in Canada, 21 
in the US and 53 in South  Korea. To address this situation, there is a compelling need to 
facilitate stronger linkages between academia and industry . This will enable students to 
attain transferrable skills from Universities and carry them forward when entering industries, 
thus creating more value for the economy as a whole.
While the National Education Policy, 2020 does emphasise the need for greater industry-
academia linkages, it has not laid down any distinct roadmap or strategy for facilitating the 
same. Hen ce, this Bill mandates every Central University in th e country to constitute 
an Industry-Academic Linkage Cell that will help in the creation of an ecosy stem at the 
University level for facilitating the tr ansfer of knowledge from academic and r esearch 
institutions to the industrial market. This will also provide a much-need ed nudge towards 
revamping the current teaching mechanism and envisioning the syllabi in a manner that 
actively encourages creativity and curiosity among students.
Hence, this Bill.
V.  VIJAYASAI  REDDY.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
————
(Shri V . Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)— 063—08-12-2023.