AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
 Bill No. XL of 2025 
THE EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES REGULATION BILL, 2025 
___________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
___________ 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION OF EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES
3. Re
gistration of Educational Consultancies.
4. Portal for Public Verification of Registration of Educational Consultancies.
CHAP
TER III 
 CENTRAL ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES 
5. Establishment of the Central Advisory Council for Educational Consultancies.
6. Ter
m of office and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of the Central Advisory Council. 
7. Officers and staff of the Central Advisory Council.
8. Functions of the Central Advisory Council.
CHAP
TER IV 
 STATE COUNCIL FOR EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES 
9. Establishment of the State Council for Educational Consultancies.
10. Composition of the State Council.
11. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members of the State Council.
12. Resignation and Removal.
13. Restrictions on employment of the Chairperson or Members after cessation of office.
14. Vacancies, etc. not to invalidate acts or proceedings of the State Council.
15. Officers and staff of the State Council.

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
16.
Members, officers and staff of the State Council to be public servants.
17. Functions of the State Council.
18. Powers of the State Council.
19. State Council to have powers of a Civil Court.
CHAPTER V 
 EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
20. Establishment of the Educational Consultancies Appellate Tribunal.
21. Appeals to the Appellate Tribunal.
22. Composition of the Appellate Tribunal.
23. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal.
24. Officers and staff of the Appellate Tribunal.
25. Members, officers and staff of the Appellate Tribunal to be public servants.
26. Powers of the Appellate Tribunal.
27. Appeals to High Court.
CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
28. Unauthorised operation of educational consultancy.
29. Misrepresentation and fraudulent practices.
30. Breach of trust amounting to cheating.
31. Obstruction of the functioning of the State Council.
32. Offences by companies.
CHAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
33. Grants and loans by the Central Government.
34. Grants and loans by the State or Union territory Government.
35. Constitution of Fund.
36. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to the Consolidated Fund of India or State Account.
37. Budget, Accounts and Audit.
38. Annual Report.
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS
39. Powe r of appropriate Government to make rules and of the State Council to make regulations.
40. Act to have overriding effect.
41. Power to remove difficulties.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. XL of 2025 
THE EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES 
 REGULATION BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a regulatory regime to oversee and ensure quality 
and ethical practices of educational consultancies in  
the country and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Educational Consultancies Regulation Act,
2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Educational Consultancies
Appellate Tribunal established under section 20; 
(b) "appropriate Government" means,—
(i) in relation to a Union territory without Legislature, the
Central Government; and 
(ii) in relation to a State or Union territory with Legislature,
the Government of that State or Union territory, as the case may 
be;  
(c) “Central Advisory Council” means t he Central Advisor y
C
ouncil for Educational Consultancies established under section 5; 
(d) "educational consultancy"  means any professional servi ce
r
endered by a person or an institution that provides guidance and 
support to its clients including students , parents, educators and 
institutions or others in connection with admission process, 
application procedures, career counselling or related assistance for 
admission in educational institutions in  the country or abroad 
including visa assistance, engaging i n promotional activities such as 
organising seminars and workshops to showcase educational 
programs and institutions, managing recruitment campaigns etc. for 
the purpose of improving educational outcomes;  
(e) "educational institutions ” means schools, coll eges,
universities or institutions imparting educational courses either in in 
the country or abroad; 
(f)
“F
und” means the Educational Consultancies Fund
constituted under section 35 of this Act; 
(g) “fraudulent” shall have the same meaning as has been
ascribed to it under sub-section (9) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023; 
(h ) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(i) "S
tate Council" means the State Council for Educational
Consultancies established under section 9; and 
(j) "s
tudent"  means  a  person  who seeks to or is receiving the
services of an educational consultancy. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
45
 of 2023. 
CHAPTER II 
 REGISTRATION OF EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES
35 
Registration of 
Educational 
Consultancies. 
3. (1)  Every educational consultancy operating in the country shall, within
such period from the commencement of this Act, as may be prescribed, or
within such further period as may be specified, by notification in the Official
Gazette, by the State Council established under section 7 of this Act, apply
for registration: Provided that no educational consultancy shall operate after
the period as provided under sub-section (1), unless a registration thereof
has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every application for registration under sub-section (1) shall be made to
the State Council concerned, in such form and manner, accompanied by
s
uch fee and within such time, as may be prescribed.
(
3) The registration granted under sub-section (1) shall be valid for such
period and may be renewed from time to time in such manner and on
payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.
(4) The State Council may, after making such inquiry as it deems fit and
being satisfied about the eligibility of the applicant, grant or reject the 
40 
45 
50 

3 
certificate of registration and may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and 
after giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, cancel or 
suspend the registration granted, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
5 
10 
4. The State Council shall establish and maintain a publicly accessible
online portal  where citizens can verify the registration of  educational
consultancies, including their  current  status and validity, in such
manner and in such form, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the portal shall, also display the list of educational
consultancies, whose application for registration has been rejected and
whose registration has been cancelled or otherwise rendered void.
Portal for 
verification of 
registration of 
educational 
consultancies. 
CHAPTER III 
CENTRAL ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
5. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of one year from
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Council to be known as the Central Advisory Council for
Educational Consultancies  to exercise the powers conferred on it and
to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
The Central Advisory Council shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
(2) The headquarters of the Central Advisory Council shall be at New
Delhi.
(3) The Central Advisory Council shall consist of the following,
namely:—
(i) the Union Minister of Education – Chairperson, ex-
officio; 
( ii) representatives of the Union Ministries  of  Finance;
Corporate A ffairs, and  Law and Justice; Department of 
Consumer Affairs and Niti Aayog, to be appointed by the Central 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed – Members ex-
officio: 
     P rovided  that one representative of any other Union 
Ministry or Department may also be additionally appointed as an 
ex-officio Member by the Central Government, if so deemed 
necessary by the Central Advisory Council, in such manner as 
may be prescribed; 
(iii) five ex-officio Members, one each to be nominated by
the State Governments, , in such manner and for such term as may 
be prescribed, on rotational basis from amongst all States, to 
ensure that all States get due representation: 
   Provided that the five States which get to nominate 
members for a given term shall be determined by draw of lot and 
the States which have been selected through previous draw(s) of 
lot will not be included in the next draw of lot; 
(iv) five ex-officio Members, one each to be nominated by
the State Councils for Educational Consultancies, in such manner 
and for such term as may be prescribed, on rotational basis from 
amongst all the State Councils, to ensure that all State Councils 
get due representation: 
        Provided that the five State Councils, which get to 
nominate members for a given term shall be determined by draw 
of lot and the State Councils which have been selected through 
Establishment of 
the Central 
Advisory 
Council for 
Educational 
Consultancies.
 

4 
previous draw(s) of lot will not be included in the next draw of 
lot; and 
(v) not more than ten Members to represent the interests of
the educational consultancies industry and higher education 
sector to be appointed by the Central Government, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Central Advisory Council shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure for transaction of its business and frame regulations, as deemed
necessary, for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
5 
Term of office 
and other 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson and 
Members of the 
Central 
Advisory 
Council. 
6. (1)  The members of the Central Advisory Council, other than the ex-officio
members, shall hold office for such term, as may be prescribed. 
(2) The allowances payable to the Chairperson and ex-officio members,
the salaries and allowances payable to the members, other than the ex-
officio members, and other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and members of the Central Advisory Council shall be
such as may be prescribed.
10 
15 
Officers and 
staff of the  
Central 
Advisory 
Council. 
7. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Central
Advisory Council, appoint such number of officers and staff, as may be
necessary, for the efficient discharge of the functions assigned to it
under this Act.
(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff of the
Central Advisory Council so appointed, shall be such as may be
prescribed.
20 
Functions of the 
Central 
Advisory 
Council. 
8. The functions of the Central Advisory Council shall be to advise and make
recommendations to the Central Government— 
(a) on all matters concerning the implementation of this Act;
(b) on major questions of policy related to educational
consultancies; 
(c) for the protection of interests of students;
(d) to foster the growth and development of the educational
consultancies sector; and 
(e) on any other matter related to the educational consultancies
sector or the education sector in general, as may be assigned to it by 
the Central Government. 
25 
30 
35 
CHAPTER IV 
STATE COUNCIL FOR EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES
Establishment of 
the State 
Council for 
Educational 
Consultancies.
 
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette,  establish a State Council for Educational Consultancies  in
each State and Union Territory to be known as the ––––(name of the
State/Union territory) Council for Educational Consultancies, to
perform the functions assigned to it under the Act.
(2) The State Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid
having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall, by the said name,
sue or be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the State Council shall be at such place, as the
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint.
40 
45 

5 
(4) The State Council shall have the power to regulate its own procedure
for transaction of its business and frame regulations, as deemed necessary,
for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
10. (1) The State Council shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than
four other Members   to be appointed by the appropriate Government, 
in such manner as may be prescribed, from amongst persons having 
adequate knowledge of and professional experience in the management 
of educational institutions, on the recommendations of a Selection 
Committee: 
        P rovided  that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the 
State Government shall not be appointed as Chairperson of the State 
Council, unless such person has held the post of Additional Secretary 
to the Central Government or any equivalent post in the Central 
Government or State Government: 
        Provided further that a person who is, or has been, in the service 
of the State Government shall not be appointed as a member of the 
State Council, unless such person has held the post of Secretary to the 
State Government or any equivalent post in the State Government or 
Central Government. 
(2) The Selection Committee shall consist of the following, namely–
(a) Chief Justice of the High Court concerned or a person
nominated by him in this behalf, in such manner as may be 
prescribed – Chairperson; 
(b) Secretary of the Ministry of Education of the State
Government - Member; ; and 
(c) Secretary of the Department of Law of the State
Government - Member: 
(3) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure in a
transparent manner for selecting the Chairperson and Members of the State
Council.
(4 ) The Selection Committee, while screening potential candidates and
before making recommendations for their appointment as Chairperson or
member of the State Council, shall satisfy that such person does not have
any financial, pecuniary or other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially
their function in such capacity, and such findings of the Selection
Committee shall be recorded in writing.
Composition of 
the State 
Council. 
40 
11. (1) The Chairperson and Members of the State Council shall hold office for
a term not exceeding five years from the date upon which they enter  their
office, or until they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier,
and shall not be eligible for re-appointment.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members of the State
Council, shall be such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to
their disadvantage during their tenure.
Term of office 
and other 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson and 
Members of the 
State Council. 
45 
50 
12. (1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)  of section  11,
the Chairperson or a Member of the State Council, as the case may be, may,
by writing under his hand to the appropriate Government, resign from his
office, by giving a notice to that effect of not less than three months, in the
prescribed form and on acceptance of the same, the resignation shall take
effect and the office of the Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be,
Resignation and 
Removal. 

6 
shall become vacant: 
Provided that in the case of a Member, the resignation shall be routed 
through the Chairperson of the State Council. 
(2) The appropriate Government may, , by order, remove from office, the
Chairperson or  any Member of the State Council, if the Chairperson or such
other Member, as the case may be,—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for  an  offence,
involving moral turpitude; or 
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent Court; or 
(d) refuses toa act or has become physically or mentally incapable
of acting as a Member; or 
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest which is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions; or 
(f) has, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, so abused
his office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the 
interest of the office or public interest:  
     Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall not be 
removed from his office on the grounds specified under clause (e) or 
(f) of sub-section (2) except after an inquiry made by a Judge of the
High Court in which such Chairperson or Member has been informed
of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in respect of those charges.
(3) A ny  vacancy caused under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be filled up
within a period of three months from the date on which such vacancy occurs:
 Provided that the Chairperson or any other member appointed against a 
casual vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term of the 
Chairperson or member in whose place he has been appointed. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Restrictions on 
employment of 
Chairperson and 
Members after 
cessation of 
office. 
13. (1) The Chairperson or a Member of the State Council, ceasing to hold
office as such, shall not –
(a ) accept any employment in, or connected with, the
management or administration of, any person or organisation which 
has been associated with any work under this Act, from the date on 
which he ceases to hold office: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any 
employment under the appropriate Government or a local authority or 
in any statutory authority or any corporation established by or under 
any Central, State or provincial Act or a Government Company, as 
defined under clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, 
which is not a promoter as per the provisions of this Act; or 
(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in
connection with any specific proceeding or transaction or negotiation 
or a case to which the State Council is a party and with respect to 
which the Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation of 
office, acted for or provided advice to the State Council; or 
(c) give advice to any person using information which was
obtained in his capacity as the Chairperson or a Member and being 
unavailable to or not being able to be made available to the public; or 
30 
35 
40 
45 
18
 of 2013. 

7 
5 
(d) enter into a contract of service with or accept an appointment
to a Board of Directors of, or accept an offer of employment with, an 
entity with which he had direct and significant official dealings during 
his term of office as such.  
(2) The Chairperson and Members shall not communicate with or reveal to
any person any matter which had been brought under  his consideration  or
known to him while acting as such.
10 
15 
14. No act or proceeding of the State Council shall be questioned or shall be
invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the State
Council; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or
Member thereof; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Council not
affecting the merits of the case. 
Vacancies, 
etc. not to 
invalidate 
acts or 
proceedings 
of the State 
Council. 
20 
15. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the State
Council, appoint such number of officers and staff, as may be necessary, 
for the efficient discharge of the functions assigned to it and the powers 
conferred on it under this Act.  
(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff of the
State Council so appointed, shall be such as may be prescribed.
Officers and 
staff of the 
State 
Council. 
45 of 2023. 
25 
16. The Chairperson, Members, officers and staff of the State Council shall be
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of sub-
section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
Chairperson, 
Members, 
officers and staff 
of the State 
Council to be 
public servants. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
17. (1) The State Council shall   perform all or any of the following  functions,
namely—
(a) register and regulate educational consultancies registered
under this Act in accordance with the procedure laid down under 
section 3; 
(b) publish and maintain a website or online portal of records,
for public viewing, of all educational consultancies for which 
registration has been given, with such details as may be prescribed, 
including information provided in the application  based on which 
registration has been granted;  
(c) receive, record and address the grievances submitted by any
aggrieved person about the conduct of any educational consultancy, 
whether registered or unregistered; 
(d) maintain a database, on its website, for public viewing, and
enter the names and photographs of promoters of educational 
consultancies, who  have been identified by the State Council to have 
avoided registration under the Act; 
(e) maintain a database, on its website, for public viewing, and
enter the names and photographs of promoters of educational 
consultancies who have applied and registered under this Act, with 
such details as may be prescribed, including those whose registration 
has been rejected or revoked;  
(f) ensure compliance of its regulations or orders or directions
made in exercise of its powers under this Act and take appropriate 
action against those found to be in contravention thereof; 
Functions of the 
State Council. 

8 
(g) perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by
the appropriate Government, as may be necessary to carry out the 
purposes of this Act; 
(h) assess educational consultancies for their compliance to the
regulations framed under the Act; examine the qualifications and 
experience of the consultants of the educational consultancies and 
ensure that they maintain the requisite standards of service; and 
(i) any other function, as may be assigned to it by the
appropriate Government, from time to time. 
(2) A complainant may approach the State Council and register a complaint
therewith in the prescribed form and manner and the State Council shall 
endeavour to adjudicate on the complaint, preferably within one hundred 
and eighty days from the date of registration of the complaint.  
5 
10 
Powers of the 
State Council. 
18. (1) The State Council shall have the following powers, namely:—
(a) formulate regulations under the Act and issue directions for
the implementation of the provisions of the Act, as deemed necessary; 
(b) carry out regular inspections to monitor educational
consultancies; 
(c) deregister educational consultancies that do not comply with
the rules and regulations framed hereinunder; and 
(d) impose penalty for offences committed under this Act or
whoever acts in contravention of the Act, rules and regulations made 
thereunder. 
(2) The State Council shall, while exercising the powers given under sub-
section (1), be guided by the principles of natural justice and,  the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
15 
20 
25 
State Council to 
have powers of a 
Civil Court. 
19. The State Council shall, while investigating complaints received under sub-
section (2) of section 17 and exercising the powers conferred under section
18, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and in particular, in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
any part of India and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
30 
35 
CHAPTER  V 
EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
40 
Establishment of 
the Educational 
Consultancies 
Appellate 
Tribunal.
 
20. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within a period of one year from
the date of  commencement  of this Act, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the — (name
of the State/Union T erritory) Educational Consultancies Appellate
Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the Appellate Tribunal).
(2) The appropriate Government may, if it deems necessary, establish
one or more benches of the Appellate Tribunal, for various
jurisdictions, in a State or Union Territory, as the case may be.
45 

9 
5 
10 
(3) The appropriate Government of two or more States or Union
Territories may, if  they deem fit, establish one single Appellate
Tribunal:
Provided that, until the establishment of an Appellate Tribunal under 
this section, the appropriate Government shall designate, by order, any 
Appellate Tribunal functioning under any law for the time being in force, to 
be the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals under the Act:  
Provided further that after the Appellate Tribunal under this section is 
established, all matters pending with the Appellate Tribunal designated to 
hear appeals, shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal so established 
and shall be heard from the stage such appeal is transferred. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
21. (1) The appropriate Government or the competent authority or any person
aggrieved by any direction or order or decision of the State Council under 
this Act may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction 
over the matter. 
(
2) Every appeal made under sub-section (1) shall be preferred within a
period of sixty days from the date on which a copy of the direction or order
or decision made by the State Council  is  received by the appropriate
Government or the competent authority or the aggrieved person and it shall
be in such form and accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after 
the expiry of sixty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for 
not filing it within that period. 
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal
may after giving the parties  a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass 
such orders, including interim orders, as it thinks fit. 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to
the parties and to the State Council.
(5) The appeal preferred under sub-section (1), shall be dealt with by  the
Appellate Tribunal, as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be
made by it to dispose of the appeal within a period of sixty days from the
date of receipt of such appeal:
Provided t hat  where any such appeal could not be disposed of within 
the said period of sixty days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons 
in writing for not disposing of the appeal within that period.. 
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality
or propriety or correctness of any order or decision of the State Council , on
its own motion or otherwise, call for the records relevant to deposing of such
appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit.
Appeals to the 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
40 
45 
22. (1) Every bench of the Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a
Chairperson and not less than two whole time Members, of which one 
shall be a Judicial member and other shall be a Technical or 
Administrative Member, to be appointed by the appropriate 
Government.   
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the
Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed and shall not be
varied to their disadvantage during their tenure.
Composition of 
the Appellate 
Tribunal. 

10 
Qualifications 
for appointment 
as Chairperson 
and Members of 
the Appellate 
Tribunal. 
23. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a
Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he,—
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is or has been a Judge of a High
Court; 
(b) in the case of a Judicial Member, he has held a judicial office
in the territory of India for at least fifteen years or has been a member 
of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post of Additional 
Secretary of that service or any equivalent post, or has been an 
advocate for at least twenty years; and 
(c) in the case of a Technical or Administrative Member, he is a
person who is well-versed in the field and possesses experience of at 
least twenty years in the educational services field or who has held  a 
post in the Central Government or a State Government equivalent to 
the post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or  an  
equivalent post in the State Government. 
(2) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the
appropriate Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
Court or his nominee.
(3) The Judicial Members and Technical or Administrative Members of
the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the appropriate Government
on the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of the Chief
Justice of the High Court or his nominee, the Secretary of the Department
handling Housing in the appropriate Government and the Law Secretary
in the appropriate Government.
5 
10 
15 
20 
Officers and 
staff of the 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
24. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide to each bench of the
Appellate Tribunal with such number of officers and staff, as may be 
considered necessary, to assist it in its efficient functioning. 
(2) The method of recruitment and the qualifications and experience of
as well as the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so appointed to assist the
Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
25 
30 
Chairperson, 
Members, 
officers and staff 
of the Appellate 
Tribunal to be 
public servants. 
25. The Chairperson, Members, officers and staff of the  Appellate Tribunal
shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of 
the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of sub-
section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 35 
. 
45
 of 2023. 
Powers of the 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
26. (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down
by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles
of natural justice.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have
power to regulate its own procedure.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall also not be bound by the rules of evidence
contained in the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of discharging its
functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
40 
45 
50 
5 of 1908. 
47
 of 2023. 
5 of 1908. 

11 
45 of 2023. 
46 of 2023. 
5 
10 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or
documents; 
(e) reviewing its decisions;
(f) dismissing an application for default or directing it ex parte; and
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be
judicial proceedings for the purposes of the relevant provisions of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 relating to offences affecting the
administration of justice; and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be
a civil court for the purposes of the relevant provisions of the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 relating to the procedure for prosecution in
such cases.
5 of 1908. 
15 
20 
27. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate
Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the High Court concerned, within a period 
of sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order of the 
Appellate Tribunal, to him, on any one or more of the grounds specified in 
section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908: 
Pro
vided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry 
of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal  within  the 
specified period. 
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate
Tribunal with the consent of the parties.
Appeals to High 
Court. 
25 
CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS
28. If any  educational consultancy , contravenes the provisions of section 3, it
shall be   guilty  of  the  offence of “unauthorised operation of educational
consultancy”  and  shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend up to two years, or  with fine of  one lakh rupees, or with both.
Unauthorised 
operation of 
educational 
consultancy.  
30 
35 
29. Any educational consultancy   which, by misrepresentation or through
fraudulent  means, induces a student to pay fees or other charges under the
pretence of securing admission to an educational institution or employment,
shall be  guilty  of the offence of “misrepresentation and fraudulent
practices” and shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend up to three years, or  with fine of  two lakh and fifty thousand rupees,
or with both.
 Misrepresentation 
and Fraudulent 
Practices. 
40 
45 
30. Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with the responsibility to provide
educational  consultancy services, or having carried out such
responsibilities, dishonestly fails to deliver or misappropriates those
services, or dishonestly uses or neglects the provision of those services in
violation of any legal obligation, direction, or contractual agreement,
express or implied, related to the discharge of such trust, or wilfully allows
any other person to do so,  shall be guilty of the offence of “breach of trust
amounting to cheating” and  shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend up to five years, or  with fine of  one lakh rupees, or with
both.
Breach of trust 
amounting to 
cheating. 
50 
31. Any person who wilfully obstructs or hinders the functioning of the State
Council or its officers in the exercise of their duties under this Act shall be
guilty of the offence of “Obstruction of the functioning of the State Council”
and  shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend up
to two years, or a fine of  one lakh rupees, or with both.
Obstruction of the 
functioning of the 
State Council. 

12 
Offences by 
companies. 
32. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
every person who, at the time, the offence was committed was in charge of,
or was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided t hat  nothing contained in this sub-section, shall render any
such person liable to any punishment under this Act if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding a nything contained in sub-section (1), where an
offence under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or
is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,— 
(
a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm,
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
5 
10 
15 
20 
CHAPTER VII 
 FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
Grants and loans 
by the Central 
Government. 
33. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament in this behalf, make to the Central Advisory Council and
the State Council of the Union territories without Legislature, grants
and loans of such sums of money as that Government may think fit for
being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
25 
Grants and loans 
by the State or 
Union territory 
Government. 
34. The State or Union territory Government may, after due appropriation
made by State or Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, by
law in this behalf, make to the State Council concerned, grants and
loans of such sums of money as the State or Union territory
Government may think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
30 
Constitution of 
Fund. 
35. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a fund to be called the
'Educational Consultancies Fund’ and there shall be credited thereto,—
(a) a ll  Government grants received by the State Council;
(b) the fees received under this Act;
(c) t he  interest accrued on the amounts referred to in clauses (a)
to (b). 
(
2) The F und  shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and
other Members and the administrative expenses including the salaries
and allowances payable to the officers and other employees of the 
State Council and the Appellate Tribunal;  
(b) the other expenses of the State Council in connection with
the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of this Act. 
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Committee of such Members of the
State Council as may be determined by the Chairperson of that Council.
35 
40 
45 

13 
(4) The Committee appointed under sub-section (3) shall spend monies out
of the Fund for carrying out the objects for which the Fund has been
constituted.
5 
36. (1) All sums realised, by way of penalties, imposed by the State Council or
the Appellate Tribunal, in the Union Territories,  shall be credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India.
(2) All sums realised, by way of penalties, imposed by the State Council or
the Appellate Tribunal, in a State, shall be credited to such account as the
State Government may specify
Crediting sums 
realised by way 
of penalties to 
the Consolidated 
Fund of India or 
State Account. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
37. (1) The State Council shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such
form as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government in  consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
(2) The accounts of the State Council shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India or bat such intervals as may be specified by
him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be
payable by the State Council to the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act
shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with
such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor General generally has in
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular shall
have the right to demand and production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices
of the State Council.
(4) The accounts of the State Council, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to
the appropriate Government by the State Council and the appropriate
Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after
it is received, before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, before
the State Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of
two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that
House.
Budget, 
Accounts and 
Audit. 
40 
45 
38. (1) The State Council shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such
time of each financial year, as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during
the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the appropriate
Government.
(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament or, as the
case may be, before each House of the State Legislature or the Union
territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such
legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Annual Report. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
50 
39. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Council may, from time to time, with the approval of the
appropriate Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules
Power of the 
appropriate 
Government to 
make rules and 
of the State 
Council to make 
regulations. 

14 
made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary 
or expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made
by the State Council of the Union territories without Legislature under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule. Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government or the Union Terri tory
Government, as the case may be and every regulation made by the State 
Council of the State Government or the Union Territory Government, as the 
case may be, under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of the State Legislature or the Union Territory  
Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Act to have  
overriding 
effect.  
40. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
41. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this  Act  as may
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry
of five years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
25 
30 

15 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Educational consultancies in India are organizations or individuals that offer 
professional advice and support to students seeking higher education opportunities, 
both within the country and abroad. In India, educational consultancies play a 
significant role due to the diverse and often complex landscape of educational 
opportunities available across different regions and disciplines. Their core 
functions include assisting students in selecting appropriate educational 
institutions, navigating admission processes, and completing application 
procedures. They also provide services such as career counselling, entrance exam 
preparation, and visa assistance for studying abroad. These consultancies may also 
engage in promotional activities to showcase educational programs and institutions, 
organizing seminars and workshops to inform and attract potential students. 
Furthermore, they assist educational institutions by managing recruitment 
campaigns and facilitating connections with prospective students. 
 As the number and influence of these consultancies grow, there is a need for 
a regulatory body to ensure quality and ethical practices. This Bill outlines the 
features and structure of a  Central Advisory Council for Educational Consultancies 
and a State Council for Educational Consultancies in each State and Union territory 
to oversee and regulate the functioning of educational consultancies in India and 
makes their registration mandatory.  The Bill also provides a grievance redressal 
mechanism for the general public within the structure of the State Council and for 
an Appellate Tribunal in each State and Union territory to hear and decide on 
appeals against the decisions of the State Council.  Offences by educational 
consultancies and penalties for each such offence has also been well-defined in the 
Bill for strict compliance of the provisions thereof.  With a well-defined structure 
and comprehensive features,  the regulatory mechanism proposed for educational 
consultancies and the services rendered by them would ensure ethical practices in 
the industry, protect the interests of students and parents, and contribute to the 
overall improvement of the educational landscape in India. 
 Th e Bill seeks to achieve the above-mentioned objectives. 
A.A. RAHIM. 

16 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
       Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment and maintenance of a 
publicly accessible online portal registration status and other relevant details of 
educational consultancies by the State Council.  Clause 5 provides for the 
establishment of a Central Advisory Council for Educational Consultancies 
whereas Clause 6 provides for the salary and allowances as well as other conditions 
of service of the Chairperson and Members thereof.  Clause 7 of the Bill provides 
for the officers and staff of the Central Advisory Council and for the salary and 
allowances payable to them as well as the other conditions of their service.  Clause 
9 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a State Council for Educational 
Consultancies in each State and Union territory. Clause 10 of the Bill provides for 
the composition of the State Council whereas Clause 11 provides for the salary and 
allowances payable to and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and 
Members thereof.  Clause 15 provides for the officers and staff of the State Council 
and for the salary and allowances payable to them as well as the other terms and 
conditions of their service. Clause 20 provides for the establishment of an 
Educational Consultancies A ppellate  Tribunal in each State and Union territory to 
adjudicate disputes and hear appeals arising out of the decisions of the State 
Council.  Clause  22 of the Bill provides for the composition of the Appellate 
Tribunal and for the salary and allowances payable to and other conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and Members thereof.  Clause  24 of the Bill provides 
for such number of officers and staff as may be required to assist the Appellate 
Tribunal and for the salary and allowances payable to them and for the other 
conditions of their service.  Clause 33 of the Bill provides for the Central 
Government to provide adequate funds to the Central Advisory Council and the 
State Council of the Union territories without Legislature to aid its efficient 
functioning. 
       The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult to estimate the exact quantum of expenditure likely to be involved at this 
stage. 

17 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION 
       Clause 39 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to frame 
rules and the State Council to frame regulations with the approval of the 
appropriate Government for implementation of the provisions of this Act. Clause 
41 provides that the Central Government may, make such provisions, by order, as 
may be necessary for removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of 
this Bill.      As the matters in respect of which rules or regulations or orders may 
be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself, the delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a regulatory regime to oversee and ensure quality 
and ethical practices of educational consultancies in  
the country and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
_______ 
(Shri A. 
A. Rahim, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS―PMB(E)―049―10.02.2026. 