Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE FERTILIZER (PRICE CONTROL) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for the fixing of maximum retail price of all fertilizers by the Central
Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (l) This Act may be called the Fertilizer (Price Control) Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XL  of  2013
[AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH JULY, 2014]
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “dealer” means a person engaged in  the business of selling fertilizers whether
in wholesale or retail or industrial use and includes a manufacturer, importer and a pool
handling agency carrying on such business and his agents;
(b) “fertilizer” means any substance used or intended to be used as a fertilizer of
the soil or crop and specified in Part A of Schedule 1 of the Fertilizer (Control) Order,
1985 and includes a mixture of fertilizer and special mixture of Fertilizers;
(c) “importer” means a person who imports fertilizer in accordance with the
export and import policy of the Central Government, as amended from time to time;
(d) “manufacturer” means a person carrying on business of manufacturing of
fertilizers;
(e) “maximum retail price” meansthe ceiling price plus taxes and duties as
applicable at which the fertilizer shall be sold in the market;
(f) “pool handling agency” means an agency entrusted by the Central Government
with functions relating to handling and distribution of imported fertilizers;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the
maximum retail price or rate at which any fertilizer may be sold by a dealer, manufacturer,
importer or a pool handling agency.
(2) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee of Experts  in such manner
and on such conditions as may be prescribed   within sixty days of  the enforcement this Act,
with a view to examine and recommend the maximum retail price of the fertilizers.
(3) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the recommendations from the
Committee of Experts, fix the maximum retail price of the fertilizers.
(4) The Central Government shall revise the maximum retail price of the fertilizers
once in a year based on the recommendations of the Committee of Experts.
4.  No dealer, manufacturer, importer or pool handling agency shall sell or offer for sale
any fertilizer at a price exceeding the maximum price or rate fixed under clause (3) of section 3.
5. (1) The Central Government shall reimburse the excess cost of production over the
fixed selling price of the fertilizer as subsidy to the fertilizer manufacturing companies.
(2) The subsidy as prescribed under  clause (1)  shall be decided by the Central
Government in consultation with the Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers (Department of
Fertilizers), Ministry of Agriculture and Departments of Agriculture of all the State
Governments.
6. The provision of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anything  inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force.
7. The Central Government may by notification in the Official  Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Fixation of
price of
fertilizer by
the Central
Government.
Prohibitions
on selling of
fertilizer at a
price
exceeding the
price
determined by
the Central
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
subsidy.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Chemical Fertilizers play a significant role in making the agricultural sector of the
country, self reliant. As rightly stated by the working group of  Planning Commission,
agricultural productivity is very importantly depended on the usage of optimum primary,
secondary and micro nutrients and hence the role of Government becomes more significant
in making available all types of nutrient at affordable prices to farmers at appropriate time.
India followed a system of controlled prices for all fertilizers until 1992, when the
government decontrolled Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers. Now, urea being the
only controlled fertilizer, is sold at statutory notified uniform sale price, and decontrolled
Phosphatic and Potassic fertilizes are sold at indicative maximum retail prices (MRPs). After
the decontrol, the prices of the Phosphatic & Potassic fertilizers registered a sharp increase
in the market, which exercised an adverse impact on the demand and consumption of the
same. There was also a noted increase in the consumption of subsidized urea, causing an
imbalance in the usage of the nutrients of  N, P & K (Nitrogen, Phosphate and Potash) and
the productivity of the soil. To remove the imbalance in consumption of fertilizers, the
Government from 2010 introduced Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy which has also not
proved very useful. Nutrient based subsidy policy has given the liberty to the manufacturers
or importers of chemical fertilizers to fix the MRP based on their cost of production or import.
Since then, the fertilizer companies had been hiking the retail price of fertilizers at will,
causing extreme hardship to farmers. There is at present no institutional mechanism under
the NBS Policy to determine the reasonableness of MRP fixed by the fertilizer companies or
any express provision for taking action against manufacturers or marketeers in this behalf.
Pricing of fertilizers being an important area of decision making which can have
longstanding impacts on the sustainability of the agricultural sector in the country, it is
imperative to withdraw the Nutrient based subsidy policy and to restore the earlier system of
fixing the maximum retail price (MRP) of fertilizers.
Hence, this Bill.
VIVEK GUPTA
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause  3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Standing Committee of Experts
with a view to examine and recommend the Central Government about the fixation of the
maximum retail price of the fertilizers. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall
reimburse the excess of cost of production over selling price of fertilizers as subsidy to the
fertilizer companies and the rate of such subsidy shall be decided by the Central Government
in consultation with the Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of  Agriculture and Departments
of Agriculture of  State Governments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expendi-
ture from the Consolidated Fund of India. The recurring and non-recurring expenditure on it
cannot be estimated at this stage, but has to be worked out by Central Government while
implementing the provisions of the Act.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character, as the
matters to be prescribed are of details only.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the fixing of maximum retail price of all fertilizers by the Central
Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1081RS(S4)—11-07-2014.