THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act  may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2)  It  shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After  PART XIV A of the  Constitution, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘PART XIV B
323C. (1) There shall  be a Central  Bureau of Investigation for prevention,
investigation and prosecution of such offences as  Parliament may by law determine.
(2) The Central  Bureau of Investigation shall consist of a Director and such
number of other officers  with such qualifications, salaries and conditions as may be
determined  by  Parliament by law.
Short title and
commencement.
Central
Bureau of
Investigation.
Bill No. XLI  of  2013
Insertion of
new article
323C.
[AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH JULY, 2014]
5
10

2
(3) The Director  shall be appointed by the President  on the recommendation of
a  Committee comprising:—
(a) the Chairman, Rajya Sabha,—Chairperson;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha,—Member;
(c) a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court to  be nominated by  the Chief
Justice of India,—Member;
(d) the Central Vigilance Commissioner,—Member; and
(e) any one from amongst the retired Directors of the  erstwhile Central
Bureau of Investigation,—Member.
(4) The superintendence  of the Central  Bureau of Investigation shall be vested
in the Committee appointed under clause (3)’’.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is the voice of the common man, political parties as well  as Hon'ble Supreme Court
that, to liberate the Central   Bureau of  Investigation from extraneous consideration, political
influence, intrusions and other interference, it should be independent, unbiased and free
from any instruction from political  executive. So, for that purpose it is necessary to  give
special Constitutional  status to the Central  Bureau of Investigation.
Successive  Parliamentary Committees have recommended replacement of the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act by an independent  Central  Bureau of Investigation  Act
keeping  in view the above  constraints and the rising challenges. The Second  Administrative
Reforms Commission in its fifth report on  Public  Order  in June 2007 recommended  that  a
new law should be enacted to govern the working of the Central  Bureau of Investigation.
This law should also stipulate  its jurisdiction including the power to  investigate the new
category of crimes.
The Bill seeks  to provide an appropriate  legal architecture and give statutory status
to  the Central  Bureau  of Investigation  and to equip it with police power to prevent,
investigate and prosecute  serious crimes  pertaining  to the security of the country, corruption
and other  crimes  having all India  and inter-State ramifications in an independent and
transparent  manner.
The Bill seeks to achieve  above objectives.
DILIPBHAI  PANDYA
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Central Bureau of Investigation
with a Director and such other officers on such salaries  and conditions as may be determined
by Parliament. The Bill, therefore, if  enacted would involve  expenditure  from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated  that a recurring expenditure  of about rupees  one hundred crore
per annum will be involved.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Dilipbhai Pandya, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1083RS(S4)—11-07-2014.