1
Bill No. XLI of 2021
THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ( AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
A
BILL
 further to amend the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases (Amendment)  Act, 2021.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 1A of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(i) after sub-section (a), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
(aa) ‘‘epidemic’’ means the occurrence in a community or region of cases
of a dangerous illness, specific health-related behaviour, or human disease that
is caused by an infectious agent or, any genetically engineered organism or a
biological toxin that poses a risk of significant harm to public health, immediate
or gradual spread to regions beyond the affected community—national or
international,  or other health-related events clearly in excess of normal expectancy.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 1A.
3 of 1897.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON  THE 4TH FEBRUARY, 2022

2
(ii)  after sub-section (b) the following sub-section shall be inserted namely:—
(bb) ‘‘patient’’ means any person who contracts a dangerous illness or a
disease as determined by scientific testing or a medical diagnosis.
3.  After section 2A of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘2C. The Central Government shall ensure supply of essential drugs and
therapeutics to citizens during the epidemic through public health facilities as well as
through outreach measures, whenever required, with priority to lower-income sections
and those covered by Government healthcare schemes for free care.
2D. The Central Government and the State Governments shall, ensure that—
(i) during the epidemic, measures taken to limit the rights of an individual
are such as are strictly necessary to resolve the crisis, and are time-bound,
proportionate, and non-discriminatory; and
(ii) guidelines for surveillance to address the pressing social need are
adopted in accordance with the law and are proportionate and the limitations on
the right to privacy are least intensive to achieve the desired result.
‘‘2 E. Every, citizen, during the epidemic, shall have the following rights, but not
limited to—
(i) right to equal treatment regardless of race, color, sex, language, religion
birth or other status;
(ii) right to free flow of  information with only reasonable restrictions on
freedom of expression;
(iii) right to receive an independent medical assessment from a medical
practitioner of  his choice;
(iv) right to emergency medical care in any Government or private hospital
without compromise on quality or safety and without having to pay full or an
advance fee to the hospital;
(v) right to have a written and transparent account of the costs incurred
for the treatment;
(vi) right to be compensated for loss, if any, caused by any isolation and
medical treatment; and
(vii) right to know information on the situation of the outbreak of the
disease, the prevention and control thereof and measures to cope therewith.
2F. Each citizen shall actively cooperate with the agencies of the Central and the
State governments that perform activities for the prevention and control of the epidemic,
such as treatment and isolation measures.
2G. (1) The Central and the State Government shall provide health services to
prison inmates during the epidemic at the same standard as are provided to communities
outside of  prison.
(2) In prisons, medical personnel shall, in emergency situations, make an
independent assessment of each patient's condition and shall refer suitable cases to
specialized treatment in or outside the prison facility."
Insertion of
new sections
2C, 2D, 2E,
2F and 2G .
Supply of
essential drugs
and
therapeutics.
Responsibilities
of the
Government
while taking
measures
during the
epidemic.
Rights of
citizens during
the epidemic.
Responsibility
of citizens.
Health
facilities to
prison inmates
during the
epidemic.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The advent of the Coronavirus exposed lacunas in existing legislation to effectively
tackle public health emergencies in India. Currently, it does not have a single consolidated
law to deal with public health emergencies. Two major laws, the epidemic Diseases Act, 1897
and the Disaster Management Act, 2005 were invoked to deal with COVID 19 preparedness
and response. However, the centurial old Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 lacks comprehensive
guidelines for governance and responsible authorities, accountability, and a rights-based
approach. Further, the Disaster Management Act is more suited to deal with disasters rather
than epidemics.
2. Even the recent amendment in the Epidemic Diseases, 1897 Act in 2020 only listed
punitive actions for offences against the healthcare service personnel, but included no
rights of the individuals. The definition clause in the Act defines various offences but
excludes the most essential terms of ‘‘epidemic’’ and ‘‘patient’’. The Act in the current form
lays down no mechanism for the dissemination of drugs, availability of medical facilities or
quarantine period. While providing itself powers to take special measures and prescribe
regulations during an epidemic, the State establishes no responsibilities to undertake for
itself.
3. During the Coronavirus pandemic, the country witnessed a surge in deaths owing to
the lack of emergency medical healthcare. It intensified the pressure across a wide range of
fundamental rights, a key pillar of the rule of law. The Supreme Court of India in the case of
Bandhua Mukti Morcha v Union of India & Ors (1984) interpreted the right to health under
Article 21 of the Constitution of India which guarantees the right to life.
4. The significance of clear and consistent public health emergency law cannot be
denied. However, the current legal ecosystem falls short in ensuring a modern legal framework
to ensure stability  in an epidemic.
Hence, this Bill.
PRIYANKA  CHATURVEDI
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill inter alia provides that the Central Government shall ensure
supply of essential drugs and therapeutics to citizens during the epidemic. It also provides
that the Central Government shall ensure for evey citizen, emergency medical care in any
Government or private hospital without having to pay full or an advanced fee to the hospital
and citizen who is isolated and medically treated due to an infectious disease shall be
compensated for any damage caused by such isolation and medical treatment.
2. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure form the Consolidated Fund of India.
However, it is not possible to access the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at
this stage.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897
(3 OF 1897)
* * * *
1A. In this, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘act of violence’’ includes any of the following acts committed by any person
against a healthcare service personnel serving during an epidemic, which causes or
may cause—
(i) harassment impacting the living or working conditions  of such
healthcare service personnel and preventing him from discharging his duties;
(ii) harm, injury, hurt, intimidation or danger to the life of such healthcare
service personnel, either within the premises of a clinical establishment or
otherwise;
(iii) obstruction or hindrace to such healthcare service personnel in the
discharge of his duties, either within the premises of a clinical establishment or
otherwise; or
(iv) loss or damage to any property or documents in the custody of, or in
relation to, such healthcare service personnel;
(b) ‘‘healthcare service personnel’’ means a person who while carrying out his
duties in relation to epidemic related responsibilities, may come in direct contact with
affected patients and thereby is at the risk of being impacted by such diseasse, and
includes—
(i) any public and clinical healthcare provider such as doctor, nurse,
paramedical worker and community health worker;
(ii) any other person empowered under the Act to take measures to prevent
the outbreak of the disease or spread thereof; and
(iii) any person declared as such by the State Government, by notification
in the Official Gazette;
(c) ‘‘property’’ includes—
(i) a clinical establishment as defined in the Clinical Establishments
(registration and regulation) Act,  2010;
(ii) any facility identified for quarantine and isolation of patients during an
epidemic;
(iii) a mobile medical unit; and
(iv) any other property in which a healthcare service personnel has direct
interest in relating to the epidemic;
(d) the words and expressions used herein and not difined, but defined in
the Indian Ports, Act, 1908 the Aircraft Act, 1934 or the Land Ports Authority of India
Act, 2010, as the case may be, shall have the same meaning as assisgned to them in the
Act.
Definitions.
5
23 of 2010.
15 of 1908.
22 of 1934.
31 of 2010.

6
2. (1) When at any time the State Government is satisfied that the State or any part
thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the
State Government, if it thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in
force are insufficient for the purpose, may take, or require or empower any person to take,
such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary regulations to be observed
by the public or by any person or class of persons as it shall deem necessary to prevent the
outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by
whom any expenses incurred (including compensation if any) shall be defrayed.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the State Government may take measures and prescribe regualtions for the inspection of
persons travelling by railway or otherwise, and the segregation, in hospital, temporary
accommodation or otherwise, of persons  suspected by the inspecting officer of being
infected with any such disease.
2A. When the Central Government is satisifed that India or any part thereof if visited
by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease and that the ordinary
provisions of the law for the time being  in force are insufficient to prevent the outbreak of
such disease or the spread thereof, 8 [the Central Government may take such measures, as it
deems fit and prescribe regulations for the inspection of any bus or train or goods vehicle or
ship or vessel or aircraft leaving or arriving at any land port or aerodrome, as the case may be,
in the territories to which this Act extends and for such detention thereof, or of any person
intending to travel therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary.
2B. No person shall indulge in any act of  violence against a healthcare service personnel
or cause any damage or loss to any property during an epidemic.
* * * * *
Power to take
special
measures and
prescribe
regulations as
to dangerous
epidemic
disease.
Powers of
Central
Government.
Prohibition of
violence
against
healthcare
serivce
personnel and
damage to
property.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Epidemic Diseases  Act, 1897.
————
(Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2020RS(S3)—07-02-2022.