AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XLI of 2025 
THE RIGHT TO READ BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to guarantee free access to libraries within the country to all citizens in a 
non-discriminatory manner and develop and maintain a comprehensive 
public library system within the country to cater to the general 
and specialised needs of the members of the community 
and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS, it is necessary to guarantee equitable access to reading 
infrastructure for all citizens, above and beyond educational facilities, to empower 
all citizens by providing life -long learning resources to support creativity, 
innovation, research and development, allowing them to satisfy intellectual 
curiosities for self -improvement and social progress to drive the sustenance of 
Indian democracy; 
AND WHEREAS, a public library, in particular, a physical public library 
space that is freely accessible to all citizens, as the living force for education, 
culture and information, is an indispensable institution to achieve the above -
mentioned multi-faceted and interconnected objectives; 

2 
AND WHEREAS, large sections of the citizens in the country, oppressed 
historically by caste as well as by other intersecting inequalities, have been 
excluded from resources and opportunities for reading, education, life-long self-
improvement and self -expression  as also opportunities to be connected in a 
community cutting across identities, and establishment of a public library 
institution can play a crucial role in challenging such historic exclusion and 
inhumane division of society as well as promote research, innovation, and 
economic progress; 
AND WHEREAS, several States have varying public library systems without 
any common definition of a public library or interconnection between such public 
libraries, it is desirable to provide a common minimum framework for 
establishment and operation of an extensive and expansive public library system 
across the country that is responsive to the evolving needs of the public, while 
ensuring a degree of autonomy to the States in establishing their own public library 
institutions; 
AND WHEREAS, the current support provided by the Union as well as the 
State Governments for existing libraries in the country and respective States,  needs 
to be augmented to support the aspirations of the public, especially in providing 
financial support, permanent library staff, dynamically tracking changes in reading 
habits and pertinent transformations in the culture of the society in the wake of 
technological changes, maintaining and publishing official statistics on libraries, 
and enabling an equitable and freely accessible system of exchange of library 
services with libraries, both within and outside India.  
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title and 
commencement. 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Read Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aided library” means libraries receiving grant -in-aid from the
appropriate Government/ local authority according  to prescribed rules and 
includes libraries receiving aid in the form of subsidised access to resources 
including land, book s, other library services of institutions which are 
established or maintained or run directly or indirectly, or funded wholly or 
partially by the appropriate Government or by any local authority. 
(b) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Union Government; 
(c) “citizen” means any person living within the territory of India with
Indian citizenship according to the laws in this regard for the time being in 
force; 
(d) “District Authority” means the authority of a revenue District;
(e) “extension service” means activities pertaining to preservation and
promotion of cultural heritage and includes activities which seek  to 
encourage the intellectual, literary, historic, scientific and social sci entific 
character of the community; 
(f) “government public library” means all public libraries that are funded
wholly, whether directly or indirectly, and/or entirely controlled by the local 
authority or the appropriate Government  or any one of its authorities or 
institutions; 
10 
15 
20 
25 

3 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(g) “library” means any centre within the territory of India, whether
virtual or   physical, which maintains a collection of books or permits deposit 
of books, and provides library service or extension service, and includes a  
mobile library/ library-on-wheels; 
(h) “Library Fund” means the State Public Library Fund constituted
under section 16; 
(i) “library service” means and includes providing reading facilities and
lending out books to the users and/ or assisting the users to procure a book  
including providing relevant information to them to enable them to know, 
locate and consult books and other materials and to secure from such 
books and materials information relevant to their purpose;  
(j) “local authority” means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal
Council or Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat or Gram Panchayat, by 
whatever name called and includes such other authority or body having 
administrative control or empowered by, or under any law for the time being 
in force, to function as a local authority in any city, town or village; 
(k) “outlier library” means any library that is not a part of the public
library system; 
(l) “public library” means any library established or maintained or run
directly or indirectly, or funded wholly or partially by t he appropriate 
Government or by any local authority, and includes 
(i) an aided library; and/or
(ii) any library that is notified by the appropriate Government
as per rules prescribed, as a public library. 
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(n) “public library system” means an organic interlinking of all
libraries in the  country into a network to facilitate library and/ or extension 
services in a systematic and organised manner; and 
Explanation.- All public libraries within the State shall 
automatically be considered part of the public library system. 
CHAPTER II 
RIGHT OF FREE ACCESS TO PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND LIBRARY SERVICES 
3. Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the time
being in force –
Right to 
free and 
inclusive 
libraries. 
35 (1) Every citizen shall have the right of free access to a public
library and its services in a non-discriminatory manner. 
40 
Explanation 1.- No public library shall charge from any citizen, 
any kind of fee or charges or expenses in any form such as 
registration fee, membership fees, security deposit or maintenance 
fees, or otherwise in lieu of such right of access. 
45 
Explanation 2. - No public library shall practice any kind of 
segregation in giving access to its library services on the grounds of 
caste, gender, class and/or income group, disability, sexuality, religion, 
ethnicity, age, race or any other identity, meaning thereby that every 
citizen shall have the right to access the library and its library services 
and/ or extension services in a non -discriminatory and integrated 
manner: 

4 
 
   Provided that, nothing stated in Explanation 2  shall preclude a 
public library from holding special library services / programs for: 
  
   (a) women and/ or children for their educational, social or 
personal development; 
(b) serving the cultural and educational needs of minorities 
to conserve their language, script, or culture; or 
(c) serving the cultural and educational needs of socially 
and/or economically disadvantaged communities. 
5 
 
   (2) Every citizen shall have the right  to be a member of any public library 
situated anywhere within the territory of India. 10 
 
   (3) Every citizen shall have the right to a public library within reasonable 
distance from their place of ordinary residence. 
  
Membership 
criteria not to be 
onerous. 
 4.  No citizen shall be required to provide any documentation in order to 
become a member of or enjoy free access to a public library and its services, 
other than documentation that allows the public library to reasonably 
identify and contact the user: 
         Provided that, no citizen shall be denied access to a public library and 
its services which are provided within the physical premises of such library, 
only on the ground that such documentation has not been furnished. 
15 
 
   CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS 
20  
State 
enforcement 
mechanism. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Every State Government, and where the context otherwise requires, the local 
authority, shall – 
(1) formulate a State Public Library Policy for application to its own 
State, which shall provide for all aspects necessary to support the 
establishment of public library institutions within the State, and shall 
include, but may not be limited to the following – 
(a) establishment of library institutions to contribute to the 
personal development and improvement of social opportunities of 
the citizens, which shall include, but may not be limited to the 
following – 
(i) making knowledge and information available; 
(ii) providing opportunities for development and 
education; 
(iii) promoting reading and introducing first -generation 
or first-time readers to literature; 
(iv) organizing meetings and debates; and 
(v) providing opportunities for exploration, 
preservation and promotion of art and culture; 
(b) establishment of a networked public library system such 
that the resources and services of each public library within the 
State may be accessible to all citizens from any public library 
within the State and maintain a regularly updated database of all 
libraries including outlier libraries within the State and 
separately for those which are part of the public library system, 
along with the resources and facilities available therein, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
 

5 
 
5 
(c) establishment of a tiered system of libraries including a 
State Public Library, along with its regional branches, if any, 
District Public Library and village/ panchayat level public 
library, with their own powers, functions and responsibilities for 
maintaining public library institutions in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(d) prescribing standards of library facilities and services of 
public libraries, depending on the type of library and the needs 
of the community that the public library serves; and 
 10  Explanation - Needs of communities shall include needs 
of local communities affected by factors such as but not 
limited to diversity of terrain, extent of accessible road 
networks and availability of public transport, culture, density 
of population, and evolving climatic conditions. 
  
 15  (e) developing programs for teaching and training of 
personnel in library and information science towards building 
library professionals and researchers in order to meet the needs 
of public library institutions of the State; 
  
 
20 
 (2) constitute, by notification in the Official Gazette, a State 
Library Directorate, which shall be a department of the State 
Government with adequate staff with such salary and allowances and 
other terms and conditions of service similar to those of other State 
Government Departments and to be recruited in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 
  
 25 
30 
35 
40 
 (3) constitute, by notification in the Official Gazette, a State 
advisory body, by whatever name called, on matters concerning the 
management and development of public library system including public 
library institutions and library and/or extensions services in the State, 
formulation of policies, including training policies, and programmes in 
relation to such system and such other matters relating thereto, in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the membership of such a State advisory body shall 
necessarily include persons having life experience in respect of writing 
or publishing or promoting literature, science, art and/ or social sciences 
or having special knowledge of these subjects, eminent scholars, library 
science experts, representatives of libraries of eminent institutions, 
representatives from other public libraries, organic intellectuals, 
eminent journalists, reader members of such public libraries and such 
other persons, as may be prescribed; 
 Provided further that, eminence in scholarship or expertise in any 
of the above matters or subjects shall be determined in a holistic manner 
and shall not be determined solely by formal modes of recognition and 
similar signifiers of social capital; 
  
 
45 
50 
 (4)  ensure that all government public libraries are staffed with 
adequately qualified and trained full-time public library employees and 
lay down the qualifications, the manner of recruitment and other terms 
and conditions of service for such employees, including rules of 
reservation for socially and economically disadvantaged sections of the 
society, which shall be similar to those of the employees of other 
Government Departments; 
  
   (5)  prepare and publish, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, the following reports and/ or plans – 
(a) annual, short -term and/or long -term plans for the 
development of libraries within the State; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
(b) a regularly updated database of all libraries, including
outlier libraries, within the State, and separately for those which 
are part of the public library system, along with the resources and 
facilities available therein;  
(c) descriptive and statistical reports on the working of all
public libraries within the State; and 
5 
(6) ensure that all government public libraries are equipped with
adequate facilities and provisions for reading materials, entertainment, 
and audio-visual materials, in physical and digital form, computers and 
network access with requisite cyber security i nfrastructure, and 
adequate seating for free use of their members including special 
provisions for persons with disabilities. 
10 
Autonomy of 
State 
Governments. 
6. Except where stated otherwise in any other provision in this Act, every State
Government shall have complete autonomy in developing its own public
library policy and establishing, managing and supervising its own public
library institutions.
15 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
Constitution of a 
National level 
Advisory Body 
to promote a 
comprehensive 
public library 
institution in the 
country. 
7. (1) The  Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a national -level advisory body, by whatever name
called, for the purposes of promoting a comprehensive public library
institution in  the country, advising various Departments and Ministries
and ensuring necessary coordination amongst them for  strengthening
the establishment of a comprehensive public library institution,
including for the purposes of assessing and addressing the general and
special learning needs of the community, enabling access to libraries
situated outside the territory of India, and facilitating a networked
system of public libraries across all States, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
20 
25 
(2) The membership of the national-level advisory body shall comprise: 30 
(a) one representative each to be nominated by each State from
amongst persons having life experience in library activism or 
library profession, library science experts, representatives of 
libraries of eminent institutions, and representatives from other 
public libraries and such other persons, in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 
35 
(b) five persons to be nominated by the Central Government,
from the fields of art, literature, library activism, library science 
research and social work, in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Chairperson of the body shall be elected by 
the members annually and every member shall have the right to be elected 
as the Chairperson; 
Provided further that experience in the profession or expertise in 
any of the above subjects shall be determined in a holistic manner and 
shall not be determined solely by formal modes of recognition and 
similar signifiers of social capital. 
(3) The term of office, the salary and allowances payable to and other
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the
national-level advisory body shall be such as may be prescribed.
40 
45 
Integrated 
Public Library 
System. 
8. (1) The Central Government shall establish a mechanism to enable
libraries situated within the territory of India to have access to libraries
and services of libraries situated outside the territory of India, whether
on the basis of reciprocity or any international exchange agreements or
otherwise.
50 

7 
(2) The Central Government shall facilitate interlinking of public
library systems across and within the States including providing
necessary technical infrastructure, logistical support and financial
assistance.
5 9. (1) The Central Government shall maintain database of all public
libraries in the country and ensure that the database is updated on an
annual basis and is freely accessible to the citizens.
Maintenance of 
library database. 
10 
(2) The database maintained under sub-section (1) shall include information
regarding the resources available in such libraries, and the library services
provided therein.
15 
10. (1) The Central Government shall prepare and publish an Annual Report on
the implementation of the Act, working of public libraries included in the
database under section 9 and  working of the public libraries established
across the States, including therein the audited accounts of State Public
Library Funds under section 17, in  such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) A copy of the Annual Report under sub -section (1) shall be laid before
each House of Parliament.
Annual Report. 
20 
CHAPTER V 
POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT 
25 
30 
35 
40 
11. For implementing the provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government
shall––
(i) notify any library within its territorial jurisdiction, whether
established or maintained or run directly or indirectly or funded wholly 
or partially by the appropriate library  or an aided library or any other 
library, as deemed fit, as a public library; and 
(ii) where the number of public libraries in any area or limits
of neighborhood under its territorial jurisdiction is found 
insufficient to meet the needs of the community,  establish, by 
notification in the Official Gazette,  within such area or limits of 
neighborhood under its territorial jurisdiction, such number of 
free and inclusive public libraries, as per a time-bound action plan 
in such manner as may be prescribed:   
Provided that any outlier library that is open to the public and 
ensures free access to its library and extensions services to such public, 
may apply to the appropriate Government to be notified as a public 
library, in such form and manner as may be prescribed; 
Provided further that the appropriate Government, may out of its 
own accord or on receipt of such application and after following such 
due procedure as may be prescribed, notify an outlier library as a public 
library. 
Notification of 
libraries as 
public libraries. 
45 
50 
12. (1) A public library notified under section 11 may be required to adhere to
such conditions as may be prescribed;
Provided that, any condition prescribed under this sub-section shall be 
limited to enable the appropriate Government to ensure that such notified  
public library:- 
(a) allows free access to the citizens to itself and its services;
(b) is enabled to be integrated into the public library system; and
(c) is not in violation of any provisions of this law or any other
law in force: 
Autonomy of 
notified 
public 
libraries to 
remain intact. 

8 
Provided further that, any condition prescribed under this sub -
section shall not have the effect of requiring such notified public library 
to give up autonomy in ownership and decision -making of the running 
of the library, including constitution of management and a ppointment 
of staff, nature of library and/or extension services, book collection, 
mode of acquisition, curriculum, etc. 
(2) A public library notified under section 11 shall be entitled to receive
funds in such manner and for such purposes as may be prescribed;
 Provided that the receiving of funds shall not be subject to the condition 
that the public library shall have to give up autonomy in ownership and 
decision-making of the running of the library, including constitution of 
management and appointment of  staff, nature of library and/or extension 
services, book collection, mode of acquisition, curriculum, etc. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude a notified public library from
receiving gifts, donations or funds from any other source, including
individuals, charities, or Corporate Social Responsibility initiatives, to
further enhance their library and/or extension services.
5 
10 
15 
Incubation of 
public libraries. 
13. (1) The appropriate Government shall facilitate development of
libraries into free and inclusive public libraries through an enabling
system of training programmes, guidance notes on establishing libraries,
access to other public libraries within the public l ibrary system, access
to eminent library specialists, creating linkages with universities or
colleges offering library and/or information science courses, financial
assistance and such other programmes, as may be prescribed, as part of
such an enabling system.
(2) It shall be open to any library to apply to the appropriate Government
for access to such an enabling system as mentioned in sub -section (1), in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.
20 
25 
 Safeguard 
against 
discrimination. 
14. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government shall
ensure that no public library shall practice any form of discrimination and/
or segregation on the grounds of caste, gender, class and/or income group,
disability, sexuality, religion, ethnicity, age , race or any other identity, in
provision of its services.
30 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCING AND AUDITING OF ACCOUNTS OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 35 
Sharing of 
financial 
responsibilities. 
15. (1) The Central Government and the State Governments shall have
concurrent responsibility for providing funds for implementing the
provisions of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and
recurring expenditure for the imp lementation of the provisions of the
Act.
(3) The Central Government shall provide to the State Governments, as
grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure referred to in
sub-section (2) as it may determine, from time to time, in consultation
with the State Governments.
(4) The State Governments shall, after taking into consideration, the
sums provided by the Central Government and its other resources, be
responsible to provide funds for implementation of the provisions of this
Act.
40 
45 
State Public 
Library Fund. 
16. (1) Every State Government shall constitute a fund, to be called the State
Public Library Fund, for establishment of public libraries at the State, District
and Village level.
50 

9 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(2) There shall be credited into the Library Fund:-
(a) amounts provided by the St ate Government, District
Authority, and/or local authority for development, improvement and 
maintenance of public library institutions in the State; 
(b) funds received from the Central Government;
(c) any special grant, which the Central or a State Government
may make for any specific purposes; 
(d) any amounts diverted from other funds available with the
Central or State Government or District Authorities and/or local 
authority, especially where such funds are earmarked for purposes 
intrinsically connected to public libraries including education, 
promotion of science, arts, language, culture, technology, 
infrastructure and setting up of innovation labs and/or incubation of 
start-ups; 
(e) any amount received as gift, contribution or endowment for
the development of public libraries in the State including from public 
sector enterprises, private sector, philanthropist organisations, 
foundations or international bodies; 
(f) any loans that the State Government, District Authority
or local authority may raise; 
(g) any income from investment of the amounts received by the
Library Fund; and 
(h) such other sources as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the unutilised sums of money, if any, in the Library Fund shall not
be diverted for any purposes other than the purposes of achieving the
objectives of this Act.
(4) The State Government and or/ local authority, as the case may be, shall
make appropriate arrangements to ensure investment of unutilised amounts
in the Library Fund to further enhance the functioning of public libraries.
35 
40 
45 
17. (1) The accounts of the Library Fund shall be maintained in the prescribed
form and manner.
(2) The accounts of the  Library Fund shall be audited annually by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India or by any such officer or authority
as may be  appointed by him in this behalf and a copy of the audit report, as
certified by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India or any other person
appointed by him, shall be submitted to the State Government in the
prescribed manner, who shall cause it to be laid be fore each House of the
State Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
(3) The sanction, allocation and utilization, whether by the Central or State
Government or local authority, of all funds, grants, or any other financial
arrangements meant for the purposes of establishing public library
institutions, shall be made available to the public in real-time in an accessible
format, by the appropriate Gov ernment and/or local authority, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
Accounts and 
Audit of 
Accounts of the 
Library Fund. 
CHAPTER VII  
POWER TO MAKE RULES 
50 
18. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government
may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Power of 
appropriate 
Government to 
make rules. 

10 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may be made to provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the eligibility, procedure for application and conditions for
grant-in-aid to aided libraries; 
(b) the manner of establishment of a tiered system of libraries
along with their constitution, func tions and powers under clause (c) 
of sub-section (1) of section 5; 
(c) the manner of constitution of the State Library Directorate,
the posts and job descriptions therein, the specific functions of the 
Directorate and its offices, the strength, qualification, training, 
manner of appointment, and terms and conditions of service of its 
staff, including conditions of absorption of existing staff under sub -
section (2) of section 5;  
(d) the manner of  constitution of the State  advisory body,
membership and designation of members thereof, their term of office, 
procedure for filling in vacancies, its functions, holding of meetings and 
the procedure to be observed therein under sub-section (3) of section 5;  
(e) the manner of establishment of and nomination of the
Chairperson and members of the national -level advisory body, their 
term of office, the salary and allowances payable to them and their 
other terms and conditions of service, procedure for filling in 
vacancies, its functions, holding of meetings and the procedure to be 
observed therein under section 7; 
(f) the manner of establishment of public libraries in any area or
limits of neighborhood and the form and manner of application as 
well as the procedure for notification of an outlier library as a public 
library under section 11; 
(g) the conditions and the manner of grant of funds and the
purposes for which such grant is made to a library notified as a public 
library under section 12; 
(h) the form and manner of incubation of public libraries under
section 13; 
(i) the sources from which funds may be credited into the
Library Fund under section 16; 
(j) the form and manner of maintenance and audit of the
accounts of the Library Fund and submission of audit report to the 
State Government as well as the manner o f making available to the 
general public information pertaining to the sanction, allocation and 
utilization by the State Government or local authority, of all funds, 
grants, or any other financial arrangements meant for the purposes of 
establishing public library institutions under Section 17; 
(k) the procedure for establishment of a networked public library
system, including the coordination or centralisation of technical work 
in the public library system of the State and manner of maintenance 
of database of all libraries in the State under clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) of section 5,
(l) the form and manner of preparation and publication of annual
reports and/or plans on the development and functioning of public 
libraries under sub-section (5) of section 5; and  
(m) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under
this Act, or is deemed necessary by the appropriate Government to 
discharge its functions under and implement the provisions of this 
Act. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

11 
5 
10 
19. Every rule made by the  Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session in which it is so laid or the successive session aforesaid, the
House agrees in making any modification in the rules or the House agrees
the rules should not be made, they shall thereafter have effect only  in such
modified form or be no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such
modification or amendment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under this rules.
Rules made by 
Central 
Government to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 
20. Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one
House, before that House.
 Rules made by 
State 
Government to 
be laid before 
the State 
Legislature. 
15 
20 
21. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
    Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
22. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 

12 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Historians tell us that his insatiable quest for books led Dr. 
Ambedkar during his New York days, away from Manhattan down to 42 nd 
street on Fifth Avenue in the city.  During his stay in New York in the early 
1900s, the imposing beaux-arts styled New York Public Library had recently 
opened its doors, and opened them to all – importantly, including to black 
people and to women.  Historical record shows that Dr. Ambedkar was 
extremely impressed with the public library. Later, upon learning of the death 
of Sir Pherozeshah Mehta in Bombay, and the Bombay municipality’s plan 
to prominently erect his statue, Dr. Ambedkar wrote for the Bombay 
Chronicle, the English-language weekly that Mehta had himself launched in 
1910, that the city should build a Public Library and not a statue. 
Ambedkar is said to have argued in his letter that erecting a public library 
in Bombay instead of a ‘trivial and unbecoming’ statue would be more 
appropriate than wasting resources on statues: 
“...It is unfortunate that we have no t as yet realized the value of the 
library as an institution in the growth and advancement of a society. 
But this is not the place to dilate upon its virtues. That an enlightened 
public as that of Bombay should have suffered so long to be without 
an up-to-date public library is nothing short of disgrace and the earlier 
we make amends for it the better. There are some private libraries in 
Bombay operating independently by themselves. If these ill-managed 
concerns be mobilized into one building, built out of the Sir P.M. 
Mehta memorial fund and called after him, the city of Bombay shall 
have achieved both these purposes…” 
Bombay Chronicle, Tuesday, 28th March, 1916. 
No person can be a full participant in political democracy unless they are also 
a participant in social and educational democracy. The ability to read, to think, and 
to inquire—these are not mere ornaments of the privileged; they are the instruments 
by which liberty, equality, and fraternity are made real for all. In the Constitution 
of India, the framers affirmed the Freedom of Speech and Expression under Article 
19(1)(a). They affirmed the Right to Life and Dignity under Article 21. We have 
the Right to Education under Article 21A. But the exercise of these rights requires 
certain preconditions. An d predominant among them is the availability of 
institutions where the people—all the people—may access knowledge, culture, and 
community. That institution is the public library. 
It is a proven fact that public libraries serve not only as supportive third space 
for promoting economic growth, scientific innovation, and social mobility, they are 
essential elements of great civilizations. A nation cannot truly democratize 
opportunity without democratizing access to knowledge. 
Around the world, public libraries are recognized as essential to democratic 
life. In many democracies worldwide, public libraries are legally guaranteed, 
digitally networked, and spatially integrated with other public services. Yet, in 
India, access to libraries —those most vital of civic institutions for building and 
sustaining robust democratic societies—remains severely inadequate, unequal, and 
unguaranteed, let alone developing a country-wide interconnected system of public 
libraries. 
Current data reveals: 
● India spends a mere 7 paise per person per year on libraries.
● Many districts lack even one functional library.
● Despite our famous Digital Public Infrastructure, we have no
official statistics on our public library ecosystem.
● Only 4 State Governments have managed to put in plac e a
sustainable financial arrangement for libraries under their purview.

13 
In addition to this historical neglect, today India has among the highest 
numbers of first -generation learners in the world. It also has vast disparities in 
access to quality reading material beyond school curricula, particularly in local 
languages. Although the digital age has opened up new frontiers, it has also 
exacerbated inequalities: for every smartphone user, there are many who lack 
digital literacy, stable connectivity, or the resources to participate in the knowledge 
economy. For those who can afford smartphones and internet, without supportive 
reading communities of trained librarians and peers, they are as unlikely to take 
advantage of learning opportunities as those without. 
In any country calling itself a democracy, the means of mental uplift must be 
placed at the disposal of all. Education does not end with the school -leaving 
certificate, diploma, or a college degree. Nor is learning the sole business of the 
elite. In the villages of India, in the bastis and chawls of the cities, there are Indians 
with minds as sharp and souls as hungry for knowledge as any who sit in Parliament 
or the few of our fellow citizens who have inherited financial and social capital to 
afford personal libraries. If they are deprived of access to libraries, then they are 
deprived not only of books—but of opportunity, self-respect, and citizenship itself. 
History has shown us what happens when access to knowledge is controlled 
by the few. Such societies become pyramids of oppression—where those at the top 
read and rule, and those at the bottom are left to obey in darkness. Importantly, we 
learn that in such circumstances, even the tiny minority of elites eventually struggle 
to thrive. 
This Bill seeks to demolish that pyramid and replace it with a sphere of 
associated living: where all citizens may meet, think, learn, and grow as equals. 
As the planet hurtles through the polycrises of climate change, 
transformations in the global order of power among nations, and financial and trade 
relations, and the promises and perils of Artificial Intelligence, India as a country 
is poised to reclaim its lost glory. But this glory will not be served to us on a silver 
platter. We must mobilize the country’s demo graphic dividend to usher in a long 
period of abundance. Public Libraries are absolutely central towards meeting this 
objective. India is already 75 years late, we cannot afford to waste any more time. 
It thus follows, that in a democracy premised on justice, equality, and liberty, 
the right to read is not a luxury—it is a foundational necessity. The right to public 
libraries must therefore be secured as a fundamental civic right, and their access 
must therefore necessarily be free, as they are as basic to survival and human life 
and dignity as food, water, air, clothing and shelter. 
    Let it be said that in the 76th year of our independence, we remembered what 
the Constitution demanded: not merely freedom in theory, but equality in practice. 
By declaring access to public libraries as a legal right, this Parliament would be 
taking a historic step to ensure that the Republic of India is also a republic of 
readers. 
The objectives of the Bill are fivefold: 
● To give legislative form to a fundamental proposition - that the right
to read is intrinsic to the right to be a citizen.
● To give legislative framework to develop a well -funded,
decentralised, and inclusive public library network that is
professionally staffed, and culturally inclusive and serves as a crucial
leveller to fill the gap of public learning environments, community
resource centres, quiet civic spaces, and cultural anchors which can
nurture, strengthen, and sustain Indian democracy and economy.
● To provide legislative backing to State Government led networks  of
autonomously run public libraries through which all persons,
regardless of their background, have assured access to inclusive,
community-based, and resource -rich public libraries, supported
through a just and accountable public finance system.

14 
● To mandate the establishment of a national framework for public
library infrastructure, with minimum standards to be met by each state
and district, including libraries in local  languages and formats
accessible to persons with disabilities.
● To mandate provision of finances in annual budgets, grants by the
Central G overnment to State Governments and establishment of
specific funds to support the development and maintenance of public
libraries, particularly in historically underserved and marginalised
regions.
● To institutionalise the training and employment of library workers,
especially from Scheduled Castes, Sched uled Tribes, and Minority
communities, so that the management of knowledge becomes a task of
the people themselves.
Hence, this Bill. 
V. SIVADASAN.

15 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every citizen shall have right of free access 
to a public library and its services in a non -discriminatory manner and that no 
citizen shall be liable to pay any kind of fees or charges or expenses in lieu of such 
right of access. 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a nat ional-level 
advisory body for promoting a comprehensive public library institution in the 
country and such other functions as specified and for the membership thereof as 
well as the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and Members of the advisory body.  Clause 8 provides 
that the Central Government shall establish a mechanism to enable libraries situated 
within the territory of India to have access to libraries and services of libraries 
situated outside the territory of India and to facilitate interlinking of public library 
systems across and within the States including providing necessary technical 
infrastructure, logistical support and financial assistance.  Clause 9 provides that 
the Central Governm ent shall maintain a database of all public libraries in the 
country.  Clause 11 provides that the appropriate Government and local authority 
shall establish such number of free and inclusive public libraries within such area 
or limits of neighbourhood und er its territorial jurisdiction in accordance with a 
time-bound action plan, where the number of such libraries is found insufficient.  
Clause 13 provides that the appropriate Government shall facilitate development 
of libraries into free and inclusive pub lic libraries through an enabling system of 
training programmes, guidance notes, access to other public libraries within the 
public library system, access to eminent library specialists, creating linkages with 
universities or colleges offering library and/ or information science courses, 
financial assistance and such other programmes. Clause 15 provides that the 
Central Government and the State Government shall make available funds for 
implementing the provisions of the Bill and that the Central Government s hall 
prepare the estimates of capital and recurring expenditure and provide to the State 
Governments, as grants -in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure as it 
may determine from time to time, in consultation with State Governments. 
The Bill, ther efore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is, however, not 
possible at this stage to estimate the exact quantum of expenditure likely to be  
involved at this stage. 

16 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 18 of the Bill inter alia empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 21 of the Bill provides that the 
Central Government may, make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary for 
removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill.   
As the matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure 
and administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a 
normal character.  

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
to guarantee free access to libraries within the country to all citizens in a 
non-discriminatory manner and develop and maintain a comprehensive 
public library system within the country to cater to the general 
and specialised needs of the members of the community 
and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. 
_____________ 
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)–295–08.12.2025. 