Bill No. XLI of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES (SUB-CATEGORIZATION)
BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to develop a new method of implementing reservation policy through the weighted
indexing system, to achieve social justice and reservation benefits to the most
deserving individuals and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto .
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Other Backward Classes (Sub-Categorization)
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Chairperson" means the chairperson of the Commission for Sub-
Categorization of Other Backward Classes, appointed under sub-section (2) of section
4 of this Act;
5
10 Definitions.

2
Establsihment
of a
commission
for Sub-
Categorization
of Other
Backward
Classes.
Composition
of the
Commission.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
40
(b) "Commission" means the Commission for Sub-Categorization of Other
Backward Classes, set up under section 3 of the Act;
(c) "District Reservation Office" means the authority set up under section 11 of
the Act, which shall implement the Weighted Indexing System;
(d) "Other Backward Classes" means such backward classes of citizens other
than Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as may be prescribed by the Central
Government;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "Weighted Index Score" means the score that will be assigned to every
individual belonging to a group notified as an Other Backward Class by the Central
Government; and
(g) "Weighted Indexing System" means the formula used for determining the
Weighted Index Score, as given in sub-section (2) of section 9 of the Act.
CHAPTER II
C
OMMISSION FOR SUB-CATEGORIZA TION OF OTHER BACKW ARD CLASSES
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Commission for Sub-Categorization of Other Backward Classes, to exercise the powers
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and eight members.
(2) The Chairperson of the National Commission for Backward Classes shall also be
the Chairperson for the Commission for Sub-Categorization of Other Backward Classes.
(3)The eight members referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be appointed by
the Central Government, in consultation with the Chairperson amongst whom:—
(i) three members shall be eminent persons of ability and integrity, who have a
thorough understanding and expertise of reservation policy; and have experience of
working for the development of Other Backward Classes:
Provided that at least one such member shall be a woman; and
(ii) two members shall be eminent persons of ability and integrity, who, have a
thorough understanding and experience of working in various fields of social sciences;
and have experience of working for the development of Other Backward Classes; and
(iii) three members shall be eminent persons of ability and integrity, who, have
a thorough understanding and expertise in the fields of statistics and mathematics;
and have experience of working with and implementing different statistical measuring
techniques:
Provided that at least one such member shall be a woman.
5. (1) The Chairperson and every member of the Commission shall hold office for a
term of two years from the date on which he assumes office and shall be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided that the Chairperson or any member shall not hold office after attaining the
age of seventy years:
Provided further that the Chairperson or any member shall not be allowed to hold
office after completion of two terms.
Terms and
Conditions of
Chairperson
and members
of
Commission.

3
Removal of
Chairperson
and members
of
Commission.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
40
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Chairperson or a
member may:—
(a) resign by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less
than six months; or
(b) be removed from office in accordance with the provisions given in section 6.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
6. The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or a
member, if the Chairperson or a member:—
(a) becomes physically or mentally unable to continue in their position;
(b) is convicted of an offence under the Indian Penal Code, 1860;
(c) acquires financial or other interests which may prejudice his decisions and
functions;
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest:
Provided that the decision of the Central Government for removal of a member from
office receives approval of the Chairperson:
Provided further that the Chairperson or a member shall not be removed from office
unless the Central Government gives in writing the reasons for such removal and the
Chairperson or the member is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
7. (1) The Commission may, at any point, associate with itself any person whose
advice or assistance it may desire, in carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) A person associated with the Commission under sub-section (1) will have a right
to take part in discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not be a member for any other
purpose.
8. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary, as the Chairperson may
deem fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.
(3)The Commission shall have the autonomy to allocate and spend the funds on the
functions assigned to it under this Act.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION FOR SUB-CATEGORIZATION OF OTHER BACKW ARD CLASSES
9. (1) The primary function of the Commission for Sub-Categorization of Other
Backward Classes shall be to develop a formula, to be known as the "Weighted Indexing
System" henceforth, which shall be used to implement reservation policies across India.
(2) The Weighted Indexing System shall be a formula which shall assign a score to
every individual belonging to a group notified as an Other Backward Class by the Central
Government, and the score shall be known as the Weighted Index Score.
(3) The Weighted Index Score shall be used to provide reservation benefits to an
individual belonging to an Other Backward Class.
(4) The W eighted Index Score shall be calculated based on several parameters,
including, but not limited to, social backwardness, educational environment, family
background and gender.
Association
of persons
with
Commission.
Meeting of
Commission.
Primary
function of
the
Commission.
45 of 1860.

4
Other
functions of
the
Commission.
10. (1) The Commission shall also perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) determine the parameters to be adopted for the calculation of the Weighted
Index Score;
(ii) review, on a periodic basis, the parameters for calculating the Weighted
Index Score and revise the parameters based on the recommendations of the National
Commission for Backward Classes and their own understanding;
(iii) prescribe the necessary documents required for an individual to obtain
their Weighted Indexed Score under, sub-section (1) of section 13;
(iv) prescribe the time within which the Weighted Index Score shall be given to
an individual;
(v) prescribe the action to be taken against the District Reservation Office
under sub-section (2) of section 17;
(vi) maintain a website wherein the Weighted Index Score of every individual
notified as an Other Backward Class by the Central Government shall be stored,
which shall be accessible to the general public;
(vii) review and monitor the working of every District Reservation Office and
every Grievance Redressal Office;
(viii) ensure coordination among every District Reservation Office and Grievance
Redressal Office;
(ix) submit an annual report to the Central Government, within such time as
prescribed by the Central Government, giving a full and detailed account of the
activities undertaken by them in the previous year, and the Central Government shall
cause every such report to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(x) make suggestions to the Central Government on the required financial support
to implement the Weighted Indexing System and to fulfill the other functions assigned
to it under this Act.
CHAPTER IV
I
MPLEMENTA TION OF THE WEIGHTED INDEXING SYSTEM
11. The Commission shall set up at least one District Reservation Office in every
district to implement the Weighted Indexing System:
Provided that the Commission may set up more than one District Reservation Office
in a district if it deems necessary.
12. (1) The Commission shall appoint a District Reservation Officer in every District
Reservation Office who shall be responsible for fulfilling the functions assigned to it under
this Act, and any other functions as may be prescribed by the Commission.
(2) The District Reservation Officer may, with the approval of the Commission,
determine the number and nature of officers and employees required by him in the discharge
of the functions of District Reservation Office.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the District Officer and other employees shall be such as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
13. (1) Any individual belonging to Other Backward Class may approach the District
Reservation Office in his district with the necessary documents, as prescribed by the
Commission under clause (iv) of section 10 to obtain the Weighted Index Score.
(2) The District Reservation Office in each district shall be responsible for collecting,
processing and storing the documents of every individual.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
40
Appointment
and functions
of District
Reservation
Officer.
Establishment
of District
Reservation
Office.
Functions of
District
Reservation
Office.
45

5
(3) The District Reservation Office shall provide a Weighted Index Score Card to
every individual who produces the necessary documents, which shall have his Weighted
Indexed Score stored on it, within such time as prescribed by the Commission under
clause (v) of section 10.
CHAPTER V
G
RIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
14. The Commission shall establish at least one Grievance Redressal Office in
every district of the country:
Provided that the Commission may establish more than one Grievance Redressal
Office in a district if it deems necessary.
15. (1) The Commission shall appoint a Grievance Redressal Officer in every Grievance
Redressal Office who shall be responsible for fulfilling the functions assigned to it under
this Act, and any other functions as may be prescribed by the Commission.
(2) The Grievance Redressal Officer may, with the approval of the Commission,
determine the number and nature of officers and employees required by him in the discharge
of the functions of the Grievance Redressal Office.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Grievance Redressal Officer and other employees shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
16. (1) Any individual belonging to Other Backward Class may file a complaint with
the Grievance Redressal Office in his district, within a period of thirty days from the date the
grievance has occurred, for either of the following reasons,:—
(a) non-receipt from the District Reservation Office of the Weighted Index
Score Card within the time prescribed by the Commission; and
(b) discrimination or denial of benefits based on the Weighted Indexed Score:
Provided that the Grievance Redressal Office may admit the complaint after thirty
days if it is satisfied that the complainant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
complaint in time.
17. If the Grievance Redressal Office determines that the complainant has been treated
unfairly, it shall,:—
(a) direct the concerned office where the complainant sought employment, to
immediately provide remedial measures to the complainant; and
(b) take action against the concerned office or company, as prescribed by the
Commission under clause (vi) of section 10.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
18. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
19. The provisions of this Act or the rules made there under shall be in addition and
not in derogation of any other legislation, rules, orders or instructions which provides any
entitlement or benefit to individuals of Other Backward Classes.
20. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
40
Establishment
of Grievance
Redressal
Office.
Appointment
and functions
of Grievance
Redressal
Officer.
Functions of
Grievance
Redressal
Office.
Remedial
measures to
the
complainant.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
to the
Commission.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

6
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Historically, there have been certain castes and groups that have faced exclusion
from the mainstream due to their backwardness. The basic purpose of reservation is to
provide equal opportunities to these socially and educationally backward classes, so that
they can progress and be accepted in the general public. Reservation systems favoring
certain castes and communities had existed in various forms in India even before
independence. For example, Shahu, the Maharaja of Kolhapur had introduced reservations
for backward classes, which came into force in 1902. After independence, there were policies
implemented to advance the interests of Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes. In 1978,
the Mandal Commission was set up by the then government to assess the situation of
socially and educationally backward classes. The Commission recommended that a quota
for Other Backward Classes of 27 per cent should apply in respect of services and in public
sector bodies operated by the Union Government. The recommendations were implemented
in 1992.
However, even after almost three decades, the reality is that reservation policy has
not achieved its basic purpose. We have not achieved social justice and reservation benefits
have not reached the most backward people. In the current system, we are facing some
major challenges. Firstly, there are a few socially, educationally and economically strong
castes that take almost the entire advantage of reservation. This means that the weaker
backward castes barely get any reservation benefits as they are unable to compete. Similarly,
there are also some families within the castes that enjoy most benefits. Another major flaw
with the current system is that it assumes every individual who is entitled to get a share of
the 27 per cent reservation is equally backward. Treating unequals as equals is a problem
this Bill seeks to address. Importantly, we must not forget that OBC stands for Other
Backward Classes not caste. This means that castes were taken into account only for ease
of identification and implementation when reservation benefits were given to them. This Bill
addresses the problem of identifying the social and educational backwardness of a person
who is in greater need of affirmative action or benefits of reservation.
To solve this issue, this Bill proposes a new method to implement reservations to
deserving individuals, the Weighted Indexing System. This method will assign a score to
every individual who belongs to an OBC group, and will be available to the public through
digital means, including a centrally maintained website. The Weighted Index Score will be
calculated based on several parameters, including, but not limited to, social backwardness,
educational environment, family background and gender. This can be explained through a
few examples. A student studying in a Zilha Parishad school is at a disadvantage compared
to a private school student, and so the former will be given some minus marks in his/her
Weighted Index Score. Another important criteria is the educational environment the
individual grew up in. For example, if the parents are illiterate, it might be the case that the
conditions at home will not be conducive for education, and so, some minus marks will be
given to prioritize the child of illiterate parents in availing affirmative action or benefits of
reservation. The decision for what will be the final criteria for assessing social and educational
backwardness, and the weightage to be assigned to each criteria will be taken by the
Commission. On the basis of this score, people will be given reservation benefits. The score
must be developed in such a manner that a low score indicates greater backwardness and
hence, higher priority will be given to a lower score in availing reservation benefits. In this
system, no one is excluded from reservation benefits, unlike in the creamy layer system. The
system does not change the percentage of the OBC quota. There is no reduction of quotas
or seats remaining vacant because of non-availability of eligible candidates. This system
will reduce the inter-caste strain, as the deserving people will get the benefit. The general
public will also not oppose deserving individuals availing benefits  and will not develop
hatred when reservation benefits are given to right people and individuals. This system will
7

8
help in taking reservation benefits to the most deserving people and achieved the basic
purpose of reservation.
Hence, this bill.
DR. VIKAS MAHATME

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Commission for the Sub-
Categorization of Other Backward Classes Clause 4 provides for composition of the
Commission Clause 5 provides for the payment of salary and allowances to the eight members
of the Commission. Clause 11 provides for setting up a District Reservation Office in every
district. Clasue 12 provides for the composition of the District Reservation Office. It also
provides for the salary and allowances payable to the District Reservation Officer and other
employees. Clause 14 provides for setting up a Grievance Redressal Office in every district.
Clasue 15 provides for the composition of the Grievance Redressal  Office. It also provides
for  the salary and allowances payable to the Grievance Redressal Officer and other
employees. Clause 18 provides that the Central Government shall grant funds to the
Commission. The Bill, therefore, if anacted is likely to involve expenditure out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees three
hundred crore would be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expendiure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
9

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Clause 5 empowers the Central Government to make regulations for
salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the Chairperson and
other members of the Commission. Clause 12 empowers the Central Government to make
regulations for salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
District Reservation Officer and other employees of the District Reservation Office.
Clause 15 empowers the Central Government to make regulations for salary and allowances
payable to and other terms and conditions of the Grievance Redressal Officer and other
members of the Grievance Redressal Office. As the rules and regulations will relate to
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
10

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to develop a new method of implementing reservation policy through the weighted
indexing system, to achieve social justice and reservation benefits to the most
deserving individuals and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
.
————
(Dr. Vikas Mahatme, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—839RS(S3)—24-06-2019.