15

As INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

Bill No. XLI of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

88 it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. In article 124 of the Constitution, to clause (/) the following proviso shall be
added, namely:—

“Provided that the President shall, within a period of two years from the
commencement of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000, set up as many Benches
of the Supreme Court and at such places in the country, as the President deem necessary
for providing timely justice to the citizens, and for reducing the arrears of cases
pending before that Court.”

3. To article 214 of the Constitution the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—

“Provided that the President shall, within a period of two years from the
commencement of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000 set up benches and additional
benches of High Court in each State keeping in view the area and population of each State
and the cases pending in the High Court of such State.”

Short title and
commence-
ment.

Amendment of
article 124.

Amendment of
article 214.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Ours is the largest democracy in the world and wedded to the ideals of a welfare
State. In the Preamble to the Constitution the people of the country have resolved to
secure to ail citizens justice,—social, economic and political. Thus the Constitution and
various other laws protect the citizen's fundamental and other rights and also the right to
seek legal redress to achieve the goals of a welfare State. However despite the laudable
goals set out in the Constitution the arrears of cases pending before the Supreme Court
and various High Courts are enormous.

Similar is the case with the lower courts. Millions of cases are lingering for years
together therein. The citizens have to wait for years together, in some cases decades to get
justice. It is said that “Justice delayed is justice denied”. If this is true then in our country
Justice is denied in almost every case because delayed Justice is routine in every case.
Thus the arrears of cases in the courts and time consuming litigation is all set to defeat the
ideals of welare State in our country.

In such a grave situation in the judicial front and considering the vastness of the
country, the poverty of its people, the high cost of litigation it is the need of the hour to
consider measures to provide easy, quick, cheap and timely justice to the people. This is
all the more important with regard to the people living in far flung rural areas who are
away from the national and State capitals where Supreme Court and High Courts are
located. This factor obviously denies the poor man to seek legal redress particularly in the
Supreme Court and High Courts which involves considerable expenses and inconvenience.
The agonies of a litigant travelling right from Madras, Thiruvananthapuram, Goa,
Pondicherry or North Eastern part of the country to New Delhi to attend a case at Supreme
Court can be imagined when he finds that his case only has been adjourned for the next
date. He does not get justice even after travelling for days together spending lot of money,
wasting lot of time, incurring losses if he runs a business establishment and loses his crops
if he is a farmer even if he is affluent one. In some cases the litigation is prolonged to
generations together.

Thus to mitigate the sufferings of poor litigant citizens it is felt that benches of the
Supreme Court should be established at various places in the country particularly in the
Eastern, North Eastern, Western and Southern parts of the country. Similarly more benches
of High Courts should be established at easily accessible places. Such a step will certainly
reduce the ever increasing number of pending cases in the Supreme Court and High Courts.
It would also break the monopoly of expensive advocates of the Supreme Court and High
Courts. It will be a step in the right direction to provide easy, quick, cheap and timely
justice to the people and to achieve the goals of Welfare State.

Hence this Bill.

S. S. AHLUWALIA


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up benches of Supreme Court, Clause 3
provides for setting up benches of High Courts in the States. In that case more judges have
10 be appointed which will incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two crores is likely to be
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees three crores is also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *
CHAPTER IV—THE UNION JUDICIARY
Establishment 124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of
and India and, Until Parliament by law prescribes a large number, of not more than twenty-
Seneme of five other judges.
ipreme
Court. * * * * *
CHAPTER V—THE HIGH COURTS IN THE STATES
High Courts 214. There shall be a High Court for each State.
for States.

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri S. S. Ahluwalia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2020RS—-27.07.2000.