1
Bill No. XLI of  2023
THE ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA (REFORMS) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to provide for qualifications, method of appointment and other conditions of service of
the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election
Commissioners establishment of a permanent Secretariat and staff for
the Election Commission of India and expenses of the
Commission and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Election Commission of India (Reforms) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Selection Committee;
(b) "Chief Election Commissioner" means the Chief Election Commissioner
appointed under clause (2) of article 324 of the Constitution;
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
5 Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
10

2
(c) "Commission" or "Election Commission" means the Election Commission of
India established under clause (1) of article 324 of the Constitution;
(d) "Eastern Regional Zone" means the zone consisting of the States of
West Bengal, Bihar, Odisha, Jharkhand, Assam, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and the Union Territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands;
(e) "Election Commissioner" means the Election Commissioner appointed under
clause (2) of article 324 of the Constitution;
(f) "Notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression "notify" shall be construed accordingly;
(g) "Northern Regional Zone" means the zone consisting of the States of
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and the
Union Territories of Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Delhi and Chandigarh;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(i) "Regional Election Commissioner" means a Regional Election Commissioner
appointed under clause (4) of article 324 of the Constitution;
(j) "Selection Committee" means the Committee constituted under section 5 of
this Act;
(k) "Southern Regional Zone" means the zone consisting of the States of
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and the Union Territories
of Puducherry and Lakshadweep; and
(l) "Western Regional Zone" means the zone consisting of the States of
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa and the Union Territory of
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.
CHAPTER II
A
PPOINTMENT OF CHIEF ELECTION COMMISSIONER, ELECTION COMMISSIONERS AND REGIONAL
ELECTION COMMISSIONERS
3. (1) The Election Commission of India established under clause (1) of article 324 of
the Constitution shall comprise of a Chief Election Commissioner and two or more Election
Commissioner(s) in even number.
(2) There shall be appointed one or more Regional Election Commissioner(s) for each
of the regional zones, namely, the Northern Regional Zone, Southern Regional Zone, Eastern
Regional Zone and Western Regional Zone, under clause (4) of article 324 of the Constitution.
4. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Chief Election Commissioner,
Election Commissioner or Regional Election Commissioner unless, he or she—
(a) is a citizen of India;
(b) has attained the age of thirty-five years;
(c) is, in the opinion of the Selection Committee, established under section 5 of
this Act, a person of impeccable integrity; and
(d) has, in the opinion of the Selection Committee, outstanding ability in matters
of election, law or public administration:
Provided that at least one of the Election Commissioners shall be a person
who has practised law for not less than ten years before any High Court or the
Supreme Court of India, or is in the opinion of the Selection Committee, an
eminent jurist.
Appointment
of Chief
Election
Commissioner,
Election
Commissioners
and Regional
Election
Commissioners.
Qualifications
and
disqualifications
for
appointment
as Chief
Election
Commissioner,
Election
Commissioners
and Regional
Election
Commissioners.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) A person shall not be eligible for appointment as Chief Election Commissioner,
Election Commissioner or Regional Election Commissioner, if he or she—
(a) has attained the age of sixty-two years; or
(b) is or has been a Member of Parliament, Legislative Assembly or Legislative
Council of a State or any local authority; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(d) is an undischarged insolvent or has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent
and such application is pending; or
(e) charges have been framed against him or her by a Court, for any offence
involving a punishment of one year or more; or
(f) is facing any criminal investigation for election related offences; or
(g) has been in the employment of the Central or State Government or any
Central or State owned undertaking or body or corporation or agency, or any local
authority for the preceding five years; or
(h) has been a Judge of any court in the preceding five years; or
(i) is or was an office bearer of any registered political party.
5. (1) The Chief  Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election
Commissioners shall be appointed by the President in accordance with the recommendations
of a Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson;
(b) the Union Minister for Law and Justice—Member;
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—Member;
Provided that in case, there is no such Leader of Opposition, the leader of the
party having the largest numerical strength amongst the opposition parties in the
House of the People;
(d) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by
him—Member;
(e) one eminent person from the civil society, as recommended by the Chairperson
and Members referred to in clauses (a) to (d) above, to be nominated by the President—
Member.
(2) The Selection Committee shall constitute a Search Committee consisting of
at least seven persons of impeccable integrity and having special knowledge and expertise 
in matters relating to public administration, election, vigilance, finance, law, or in any 
other matter which, in the opinion of the Selection Committee, may be useful in selecting 
candidates for the posts of Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner and 
Regional Election Commissioner.
(3) The Search Committee constituted under sub-section (2) shall call for applications 
and draw up a panel of persons eligible for  appointment to the posts o f Chief Election 
Commissioner, Election Commissioner and Regional Election Commissioner.
(4) The Selection Committee shall, on the basis of a majority vote, select and recommend 
names out of the panel drawn up by the Search Committee to the President for appointment 
to the posts of Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner and Regional Election 
Commissioner.
(5) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure.
(6) The Selection Committee shall also recommend to the President the number of
Election Commissioners or Regional Election Commissioners to be appointed, from time to
time.
Selection
committee to
recommend
appointment
of Chief
Election
Commissioner,
Election
Comissioners
and Regional
Election
Commissioners.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(7) The term of the Search Committee referred to in sub-section (2), the fees and
allowances payable to its members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Selection
Committee, by rules made under this Act.
6. The President shall take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for the appointment
of a Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner(s) or Regional Election
Commissioner(s) at least six months before the arising of a vacancy in accordance with the
procedure laid down in this Act.
7. The Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election
Commissioners shall, on the recommendations of the Selection Committee, be appointed by
the President by warrant under his or her hand and seal and hold office as such for a term of
three years from the date on which he or she enters upon the office or until he or she attains
the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier:
Provided that he or she may—
(a) by writing under his or her hand addressed to the President resign his
or her office; or
(b) be removed from his or her office in the manner provided under
clause (5) of article 324 of the Constitution.
Explanation.—For the Purpose of this section, the term of three years in respect
of the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner or a Regional Election
Commissioner holding office before the commencement of this Act, shall be computed
from the date on which he or she had assumed office.
8. (1) The functions of the Election Commission of India shall be vested with the
Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners.
(2) The Election Commission may, by unanimous decision, regulate the procedure for
transaction of its business as also allocation of its business amongst the Chief Election
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.
(3) Save as provided in sub-section (2), all business of the Election Commission shall,
as far as possible, be transacted unanimously:
Provided that if the Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners
differ in opinion on any matter, such matter shall be decided according to the opinion
of the majority.
(4) The Election Commission shall carry out its functions in accordance with the
provisions of the Constitution, Representation of the People Act, 1950, the Representation
of the People Act, 1951 and all applicable laws.
(5) A Regional Election Commissioner shall assist and aid the Election Commission in
the discharge of its functions within his or her regional zone by performing such tasks as
may be assigned to him or her from time to time by the Commission, implementing the orders
of the Commission and submitting such reports as he or she deems fit pertaining to the
conduct of elections within his or her regional zone.
(6) A Regional Election Commissioner shall be bound by the orders of the Election
Commission.
(7) The Election Commission shall exercise complete superintendence and control
over the Chief Electoral officers, District Election Officers, Returning Officers, Polling Officers
and all officials appointed for the conduct of elections under the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 for the purposes of and during the conduct of elections.
Filling up of
vacancies of
Chief Election
Commissioner,
Election
Commissioner
and Regional
Election
Commissioner.
Term of
office of
Chief
Election
Commissioner,
Election
Commissioners
and Regional
Election
Commissioners.
Functions of
the Election
Commission
of India.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
43 of 1951.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(8) Subject to the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 and other applicable laws, the Election Commission
shall, before every election to the House of the People Legislative  Assembly of a State or
Legislative Council of a State having such Council, publish a Model Code of Conduct for the
candidates, political parties, Government servants, press and media and other persons,
whose conduct in the opinion of the Commission, must be regulated.
(9) The Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner and Regional Election
Commissioner shall act in good faith in order to hold free and fair elections and shall exercise
independent judgement.
9. (1) There shall be paid to the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election
Commissioners a salary which is equal to the salary of a Judge of the Supreme Court:
Provided that if a person who, before the date of assuming office as the Chief
Election Commissioner or, as the case may be, an Election Commissioner, was in
receipt of, or being eligible so to do, had election to draw, a pension (other than a
disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government
of the Union or under the Government of a State, subject to the provisions of
clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section of this Act, his or her salary in respect of
service as the Chief Election Commissioner or as the case may be, an Election
Commissioner shall be reduced—
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he or she had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion  
of the pension due to him or her in respect of such previous service, the  
commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension.
(2) There shall be paid to the Regional Election Commissioner a salary which is equal
to the salary of a Judge of the High Court:
Provided that if a person who, before the date of assuming office as the Regional
Election Commissioner was in receipt of, or being eligible so to do, had election to
draw, a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous
service under the Government of the Union or under the Government of a State,
subject to the provisions of clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section of this Act, his or
her salary in respect of service as the Regional Election Commissioner shall be
reduced—
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he or she had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion  
of the pension due to him or her in respect o f such previous service, the  
commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension.
10. (1) Any other person who is appointed as the Chief Election Commissioner or an
Election Commissioner or a Regional Election Commissioner may be granted leave in
accordance with such rules as are for the time being applicable to a member of the Indian
Administrative Service.
(2) The power to grant or refuse leave to the Chief Election Commissioner or an
Election Commissioner or a Regional Election Commissioner and to revoke or curtail leave
granted to him or her, shall vest in the President.
11. (1) Where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner demits
office in any manner as specified under section 7 of this Act, he or she shall, on such
demission be entitled to—
(a) a pension which is equal to the pension payable to a Judge of the Supreme
Court in accordance with the provisions of Part III of the Schedule to the Supreme
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958, as amended from time to time; and
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
Salaries and
allowances.
Leave.
Pension
payable to
Election
Commissioners.
41 of 1958.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(b) such pension (including commutation of pension), family pension and gratuity
as are admissible to a Judge of the Supreme Court under the said Act and the rules
made thereunder, as amended from time to time.
(2) Where the Regional Election Commissioner demits office, he or she shall, on
such demission be entitled to—
(a) a pension which is equal to the pension payable to a Judge of the High Court
in accordance with the provisions of Part III of the Schedule to the High Court Judges
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, as amended from time to time; and
(b) such pension (including commutation of pension), family pension and gratuity
as are admissible to a Judge of the High Court under the said Act and the rules made
thereunder, as amended from time to time.
(3) Except where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner or a
Regional Election Commissioner demits office by resignation, he or she shall be deemed, for
the purposes of this Act, to have demitted his or her office if, and only if,—
(a) he or she has completed the term of office specified in section 7, or
(b) he or she has attained the age of sixty-five years, or
(c) his or her demission of office is medically certified to be necessitated by
ill-health.
12. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the conditions of service relating to
travelling allowance, provision of rent-free residence and exemption from payment of income-
tax on the value of such rent-free residence, conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance,
medical facilities and such other conditions of service for—
(i) The Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners shall be as
applicable to a Judge of the Supreme Court under Chapter IV of the Supreme Court
Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 and the rules made thereunder, as amended
from time to time; and
(ii) for a Regional Election Commissioner shall be as applicable to a Judge of a
High Court under Chapter IV of the High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of
Service) Act, 1954 and rules made thereunder, as amended from time to time.
13. (1) The Election Commission shall have a permanent Secretariat comprising of
such number and categories of officers and other employees as may be determined by the
Commission in consultation with the Central Government to assist the Commission in the
discharge of its functions by rules made under this Act.
(2) The recruitment of the officers and other employees of the Commission shall be
made by the Commission in accordance with rules that may be prescribed by the Commission
under this Act in consultation with the Central Government.
(3) The officers and other employees of the Commission shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence, control and direction of the Commission.
(4) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and
other employees of the Commission shall be prescribed by rules framed by the Commission
in consultation with the Central Government.
(5) Subject to sub-section ( 3), the Chief Election Commissioner shall exercise
administrative control over the officers and other employees of the Commission.
14. (1) The expenses of the Election Commission of India including the salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to the Chief Election Commissioner, Election
Commissioners, Regional Election Commissioners and the officers and other employees of
the Commission shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
Other
conditions of
service.
41 of 1958.
28 of 1954.
Permanent
Secretariat and
staff of the
Commission.
Expenses of
the Election
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
28 of 1954.

7
(2) The Election Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an Annual Statement of Accounts in such form as may be prescribed and shall
submit it to the President, who shall cause it to be laid before each House of Parliament within
such time frame as may be prescribed.
15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Chief Election
Commissioner, Election Commissioner, Regional Election Commissioner or any officer or
employee of the Election Commission in respect of anything which is in good faith or intended
to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
16. The Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner, Regional Election
Commissioner, officers and other employees of the Election Commission shall be deemed,
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
17. With effect from the date of this Act coming into force, no civil court shall have
jurisdiction to entertain any suit, petition or appeal in respect of any order or decision of the
Election Commission.
18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force other than this Act or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any such law other than this Act.
19. (1) The Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners
and Transaction of Business) Act, 1991 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Act shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this
Act.
20. (1) The Election Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Members and
staff of
Election
Commission
to be public
servants.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Repeal and
savings.
Power to
make rules.
11 of 1991.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The words 'democratic republic' are the cornerstones of the Constitution of India.
A democracy requires that there should be periodic, free and fair elections, so that people
are in a position to elect representatives of their choice, as an effective instrument of
ascertaining popular will. The concept of a 'republic' envisages a State in which the people
are supreme, there is no privileged class and all public offices are open to every citizen
without discrimination.
2. Free and fair elections are the most important facets of democracy. They are meant
to ascertain true popular will and are not mere rituals to generate an illusion of choice.
Article 324 of the Constitution entrusts the power to conduct elections, to an independent
body, viz., the Election Commission of India (ECI). Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, in one of his debates,
articulated that the election machinery be outside the control of the Executive Government.
The Constituent Assembly, from the very beginning, was keen to entrust the job of conducting
elections to an independent body and therefore, expected a Parliamentary Law under clause
(2) of article 324 relating to appointments of the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) and the
other Election Commissioners (ECs). Thus, the Constitution-makers wanted to keep the
posts of the Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners outside the sole
control of the Executive Government. However, the Hon'ble President of India continues to
appoint the CEC and the ECs solely on the basis of aid and advice of the Council of
Ministers, thus defeating the objective envisaged by the Constitution makers.
3. Institutions shall remain strong only so long as the public have faith in them.
Considering the sensitive nature of the Election Commission's task, if the public perceive
the institution as corrupt, partisan or biased, it loses its vitality. Therefore, it is imperative
that the ECI is manned by officers who are impartial, independent, and possess impeccable
integrity. In order to avoid appointing career bureaucrats, and to facilitate appointment of
independent members of civil society as heads of the ECI so as to protect the institutional
integrity of the ECI, the mode of appointment qualifications and disqualifications, term of
office and other conditions of service of the CEC and ECs are set out in the Bill.
4. There is also a dire need to appoint Regional Election Commissioners who are
conversant with the affairs of the States. India is the 7th largest country in the world in
terms of area and the largest democracy in the world. Our country is the most linguistically
diverse country in the world, having a total of 456 languages. For such a large democracy,
it is a herculean task for the three Election Commissioners sitting in Delhi to handle elections
across the length and breadth of the country and decide on all the election related issues
that crop up from time to time. In order to make the functioning of the ECI more inclusive and
broad based, it is high time that Regional Election Commissioners are appointed so that
they bring more perspective into the functioning of the ECI. Appointment of Regional
Election Commissioners would ensure that the ECI takes into consideration the needs of
the population at the grass root level.
5. The appointments of the Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners
have to be insulated from political whims and fancies and therefore, must be on the basis of
the recommendations of a high powered Selection Committee similar to the Selection
Committee constituted for the appointment of the CBI Director, Lokpal and Lokayuktas.
Only by ensuring that the appointment of the CEC and the ECs is transparent, objective and
non-partisan, can we expect the ECI to be a neutral body.
6. Under clause ( 2) of article 324, the drafters of the Constitution bestowed upon
Parliament, the power to enact a law pertaining to the appointment of the Chief Election
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners. However, no such law has been enacted.
8

9
7. Another aspect is that the ECI cannot be truly impartial unless it has a permanent
Secretariat, staff and its expenditure is charged from the Consolidated Fund of India. Only
this will truly liberate the ECI and ensure its independence. Since, there has to be some
mechanism to check its expenditure and excesses, the ECI can be made responsible to both
Houses of Parliament in so far as its expenditure is concerned.
8. Recently, in a judgment, the Supreme Court of India has held that till such time,
Parliament makes a law in this regard, appointments to the posts of Chief Election
Commissioner and the Election Commissioners shall be done by the President of India on
the basis of the advice tendered by a Committee consisting of the Prime Minister of India,
the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha and, in case, there is no such Leader, the
Leader of the party having the largest numerical strength amongst the parties in opposition
in the Lok Sabha and the Chief Justice of India. The Court has also requested the Union
Government to consider bringing in laws to ensure that the ECI gets a permanent Secretariat
and staff and is not dependent on the Union Government for its funding.
9. That apart, one of the fundamental flaws of the ECI is that it does not have a legal
member, though it adjudicates disputes having civil consequences. It is well settled that
any Tribunal or Commission that performs adjudicatory functions must have a legal member.
In the absence of such a legal mind, often, binding judgments of the Constitutional Courts
are ignored by the Commission in passing orders leading to further litigation.
10. It is, therefore, proposed to introduced a Bill to provide for a comprehensive law
for establishing the procedure for appointing the Chief Election Commissioner, Election
Commissioners and the Regional Election Commissioners in four Regional Zones, namely,
Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western.
The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.
P. WILSON.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (2) of Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Search Committee
for calling applications and drawing up a panel of persons eligible for appointment as
Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election Commissioners
and sub-clause (7) of Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the fees and allowances of members
of the Search Committee. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the salaries and allowances of the
Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election Commissioners
and Clause 11 for their pensions. Clause 13 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a
permanent Secretariat for the Election Commission with such number and category of officers
and other employees to assist the Commission in the discharge of its functions and Clause 12
of the Bill provides for other conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner,
Election Commissioners, Regional Election Commissioners, officers and other employees
of the Commission. Clause 14 of the Bill provides that the all expenses of the Election
Commission of India shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
Therefore, the Bill if enacted, is likely to involve an expenditure, both of recurring and
non-recurring nature, of about One thousand Crore rupees annually from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
10

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Election Commission of India, in consultation with
the Central Government, to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules
will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of normal character.
11

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for qualifications, method of appointment and other conditions of service of
the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioners and Regional Election
Commissioners establishment of a permanent Secretariat and staff for
the Election Commission of India and expenses of the
Commission and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri P . Wilson, M.P .)
RS–P&PS–PMB(E )–077–12.12.2023.