qos INTRODUCED IN Rasya SABHA

Bill No. XLI of 1999

THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS OF GOODS (REGISTRA-
TION AND PROTECTION) BILL, 1999

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

Causes
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions and interpretation.

CHAPTER II

‘THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION

3. Registrar of Geographical Indications.
4. Power of Registrar to withdraw or transfer cases, etc.
5. Geographical Indications Registry and offices thereof.
6. Register of Geographical Indications.
7. Part A and Part B of the register.
8. Registration to be in respect of particular goods and area,
9. Prohibition of registration of certain geographical indications.
10. Registration of homonymous geographical indications.

CHAPTER II

PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION

11. Application for registration.
12. Withdrawal of acceptance.
13, Advertisement of application.
14. Opposition to registration.
15. Correction and amendment.
16. Registration.
17. Application for registration as authorised user.
18. Duration, renewal, removal and restoration of registration.
19. Effect of removal from register for fatlure to pay fee for renewal.

CHAPTER IV

EFFECT OF REGISTRATION

20. No action for infringement of unregistered geographical indication.
21. Rights conferred by registration.
22, Infringement of registered geographical indications.
23. Registration to be prima facie evidence of validity.
24, Prohibition of assignment or transmission, etc.


Gi)
CHAPTER V
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO TRADE MARKS AND PRIOR USERS
CLausEs
25. Prohibition of registration of geographical indication as trade mark.
26. Protection to certain trade marks.
CHAPTER VI
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER
27. Power to cancel or vary registration and to rectify the register.
28. Correction of register.
29. Alteration of registered geographical indications.
30. Adaptation of entries in register to amend or substitute classification of goods.
CHAPTER शा
APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE BOARD
31. Appeals to the Appellate Board.
32. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc.
33. Procedure of the Appellate Board.
34. Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellate Board.
35. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings.
36. Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Appellate Board.
CHAPTER VIII
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
37. Meaning of applying geographical indications.
38. Falsifying and falsely applying geographical indications.
39. Penalty for applying false geographical indications.
40. Penalty for selling goods to which false geographical indication is applied.
41, Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction.
42. Penalty for falsely representing a geographical indication as registered.

43. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connected with the
Geographical Indications Registry.

44, Penalty for falsification of entries in the register.

45. No offence in certain cases.

46. Forfeiture of goods.

47. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business.
48. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused.
49. Offences by companies.

50. Cognizance of certain offences and the powers of police officer for search and
seizure.

51. Costs of defence of prosecution.

52. Limitation of prosecution.

53. Information as to cornmission of offence.

54, Punishment for abaternent in India of acts done out of India.


(ii)
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
CLAUSES:
55. Protection of action taken in good faith.
56. Certain persons to be public servants.

57. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the geographical indication
is questioned, etc.

58. Application for rectification of register to be made to Appellate Board in certain
cases.

59, Implied warranty on sale of indicated goods.

60. Powers of Registrar.

61. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar.

62. Evidence before Registrar.

63. Death of party to a proceeding.

64. Extension of time.

65. Abandonment.

66. Suit for infringement, etc., to be instituted before district court.
67. Relief in suit for infringement or for passing off.

68. Authorised user to be impleaded in certain proceedings.

69. Evidence of entries in register, etc., and things done by the Registrar.
70. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register, etc.
71. Power to require goods to show indication of origin.

72, Certificate of validity.

73. Groundless threats of legal proceedings.

74, Address for service.

15, Trade usages, etc., to be taken into consideration.

76. Agents.

77, Indexes.

78. Documents open to public inspection.

79. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament.

80. Fees and surcharge.

81. Savings in respect of certain matters in Chapter VIII.

82. Declarations as to title of geographical indication not registrable under the Registration
Act, 1908.

83. Government to be bound.

84. Special provisions relating to applications for registration from citizens of convention
countries.

85. Provision as to reciprocity.
86. Powers of Central Government to remove difficulties.
87. Power to make rules.


1०

To BE INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XLI of 1999

THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS OF GOODS
(REGISTRATION AND PROTECTION) BILL, 1999

A
BILL

to provide for the registration and better protection of geographical indications relating
to goods.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration
and Protection) Act, 1999.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of
that provision.

Short title,
extent and


Definitions and
interpretation.

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(@ “Appellate Board” means the Appellate Board established under section
83 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999;

(8) “authorised user” means the authorised user of a geographical indication
registered under section 17;

(c) “deceptively similar” A geographical indication shall be deemed to be
deceptively similar to another geographical indication if it so nearly resembles that
other geographical indication as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion;

(4) “district court” has the meaning assigned to it in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908;

(€) “geographical indication”, in relation to goods, means an indication which
identifies such goods as agricultural goods, natural goods or manufactured goods
as originating, or manufactured in the territory of a country, or a region or locality

, in that territory, where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of such

goods is essentially attributable to its geographical origin and in case where such
goods are manufactured goods one of the activities of either the production or of
processing or preparation of the goods concerned takes place in such territory,
region or locality, as the case may be.

Explanation —For the purposes of this clause, any name which is not the
name of a country, region or locality of that country shall also be considered as the
geographical indication if it relates to a specific geographical area and is used upon
or in relation to particular goods originating from that country, region or locality,
as the case may be;

(0 “goods” means any agricultural, natural or manufactured goods or any
goods of handicraft or of industry and includes food stuff:

(g) “indication” includes any name, geographical or figurative representation
or any combination of them conveying or suggesting the geographical origin of

+ goods to which it applies;

(9) “name” includes any abbreviation of a name;

(0) “package” includes any case, box, container, covering, folder, receptacle,
vessel, casket, bottle, wrapper, label, band, ticket, reel, frame, capsule, cap, lid,
stopper and cork;

@ “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(609 “producer” in relation to goods, means any person who,—

(i) if such goods are agricultural goods, produces the goods and includes
the person who processes or packages such goods;

(i) if such goods are natural goods, exploits the goods;

(iii) if such goods are handicraft or industrial goods, makes or
manufactures the goods,

and includes any person who trades or deals in such production, exploitation, making or
manufacturing, as the case may be, of the goods;

(0) “register” means the Register of Geographical Indications referred to in
section 6;

(m) “registered” (with its grammatical variations) means registered under
this Act;

5 of 1908.


3

(n) “registered proprietor”, in relation to a geographical indication, means
any association of persons or of producer or any organisation for the time being
entered in the register as proprietor of the geographical indication;

(0) “Registrar” means the Registrar of Geographical Indications referred to
in section 3;

(p) “tribunal” means the Registrar or, as the case may be, the Appellate
Board before which the proceeding concemed is pending.

(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Trade
Marks Act, 1999 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.

» (3) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, any reference—

(a) to the use of a geographical indication shall be construed as a reference to
the use of a printed or other visual representation of the geographical indication;

(b)to the use ०६६ geographical indication in relation to goods shall be construed
as a reference to the use of the geographical indication upon, or in any physical or
in any other relation whatsoever, to such goods;

(० to a registered geographical indication shall be construed as including a
reference to a geographical indication registered in the register;

(d) to the Registrar shall be construed as including a reference to any officer
when discharging the functions of the Registrar in pursuance of sub-section (2) of
section 3;

(e) to the Geographical Indications Registry shall be construed as including a
reference to any office of the Geographical Indications Registry.

CHAPTER II
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION

3. (1) The Controller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, shall be the Registrar of
Geographical Indications.

(2) The Central Government may appoint such officers with such designations
as it thinks fit for the purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and direction
of the Registrar, such functions of the Registrar under this Act, as he may from time
to time authorise them to discharge.

4. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (2) of section
3, the Registrar may, by order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein, withdraw
any matter pending before an officer appointed under the said sub-section (2) and deal
with such matter himself either de novo or from the stage it was so withdrawn or transfer
the same to another officer so appointed who may, subject to special directions in the
order of transfer, proceed with the matter either de novo or from the stage it was so
transferred.

5. (1) For the purpose of this Act, there shall be established a Registry which
shall be known as the Geographical Indications Registry.

(2) The head office of the Geographical Indications Registry shall be at such
place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Care specify,
and for the purpose of facilitating the registrations of geographical ications, there
may be established at such places as the Central Government may think fit branch
offices of the Geographical Indications Registry.

Registrar of
Geographical
Indications.

Geographical
Indications
Registry and
offices thereof.


4

(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define the
territorial limits within which an office of the Geographical Indications Registry may
exercise its functions.

(4) There shall be a seal of the Geographical Indications Registry.

Regisies or 6. (1) For the purposes of this Act, a record called the Register of Geographical

In dictions Indications shall be kept at the head office of the Geographical Indications Registry,
wherein shall be entered all registered geographical indications with the names,
addresses and descriptions of the proprietors, the names, addresses and descriptions
of authorised user and such other matters relating to registered geographical indications
as may be prescribed and such registers may be maintained wholly or partly on
computer.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), it shall be lawful for the
Registrar to keep the records wholly or partly in computer floppies or diskettes or in any
other electronic form, subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed.

(3) Where such register is maintained wholly or partly in computer floppies or diskettes
or in any other electronic form under sub-section (1), any reference in this Act to any entry
in the register shall be construed as the reference to the entry as maintained on computer
floppies or diskettes or in the other electronic form, or the case may be.

(4) No notice of any trust, express or implied or constructive, shall be entered in the
register and no such notice shall be receivable by the Registrar.

(5) Subject to the superintendence and direction of the Central Government, the register
shall be kept under the control and management 701 the Registrar.

(6) There shall be kept at each branch of+ice of the Geographical Indications Registry
a copy of the register and such other documcnts mentioned in section 78 as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct.

Part A and 7, (1) The register referred to in section 6 shall be divided into two Parts called
Pat B of the respectively Part A and Part B.
ar (2) The particulars relating to the registration of the geographical indications shall be
incorporated and form part of Part A of the register in the prescribed manner.

(3) The particulars relating to the registration of the authorised users shall be
incorporated and form part of Part B of the register in the prescribed manner.

Registration to 8 (1) A geographical indication may be registered in respect of any or all of the
be in respect ot goods, comprised in such class of goods as may be classified by the Registrar and in respect
woods and area Of a definite territory of a country, or a region or locality in that territory, as the case may be.

(2) The Registrar shall classify the goods under sub-section (/), as far as may be, in
accordance with the International classification of goods for the purposes of registration of
Geographical indications.

(3) The Registrar may publish in the prescribed manner an alphabetical index of
classification of goods referred to in sub-section (2).

(4) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods fall or the definite area
as referred to in sub-section (/) in respect of which the geographical indication is to be
registered or where any goods are not specified in the alphabetical index of goods published
under sub-section (3) shall be determined by the Registrar whose decision in the matter shall

be final.
Prohibition of 9. A geographical indication—
reise ion of (a) the use of which would be likely to deceive or cause confusion, or
geographical (b) the use of which would be contrary to any law for the time being in force; or
indications,

(c) which comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter; or
(d) which comprises or contains any matter likely to hurt the religious
susceptibilities of any class or section of the citizens of India; or


5
(०) which would otherwise be disentitled to protection in a court; or

(0 which are determined to be generic names or indications of goods and are,
therefore, not or ceased to be protected in their country of origin, or which have
fallen into disuse in that country; or

(g) which, although literally true as to the territory, region or locality in
which the goods originate, but falsely represent to the persons that the goods originate
in another territory, region or locality, as the case may be,

shall not be registered as a geographical indication.

Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this section, “generic names or indications’,
in relation to goods, means the name of a goods which, although relates to the place or
the region where the goods was originally produced or manufactured, has lost its origional
meaning and has become the common name of such goods and serves as a designation
for or indication of the kind, nature, type or other property or characteristic of the
goods.

Explanation 2. — In determining whether the name has become generic, account
shall be taken of all factors including the existing situation in the region or place in
which the name originates and the area of consumption of the goods.

10. Subject to the provisions of section 7, a homonymous geographical indication
may be registered under this Act, if the Registrar is satisfied, after considering the
practical conditions under which the homonymous indication in question shall be
differentiated from other homonymous indication and the need to ensure equitable
treatment of the producers of the goods concemed, that the consumers of such goods
shall not be confused or misled in consequence of such registration.

CHAPTER III
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION

11. () Any association of persons or producers or any organisation or authority
established by or under any law for the time being in force representing the interest of
the producers of the concerned goods, who are desirous of registering a geographcial
indication in relation to such goods shall apply in writing to the Registrar in such form
and in such manner and accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed for the registration
of the geographical indication.

(2) The application under sub-section (1) shall contain—

(a) a statement as to how the geographical indication serves to designate the
goods as originating from the concerned territory of the country or region or
locality in the country, as the case may be, in respect of specific quality, reputation
or other characteristics of which are due exclusively or essentially to the geographical
environment, with its inherent natural and human factors, and the production,
processing or preparation of which takes place in such territory, region or locality,
as the case may be;

(b) the class of goods to which the geographical indication shall apply;

(©) the geographical map of the territory of the country or region or locality
in the country in which the goods orginate or are being manufactured;

@ the particulars regarding the apprearance of the geographical indication
as to whether it is comprised of the words or figurative elements or both;

(8) a statement containing such particulars of the producers of the concerned
goods, if any, proposed to be initially registered with the registration of the geo-
graphical indication as may be prescribed; and

(6 such other particulars as may be prescribed.

Registration of
homonymous
geographical
indications.

registration.


Withdrawal of
‘acceptance.

Advertisement
of application. -

Opposition to
registration.

6

(3) A single application may be made for registration of a geographical indication
for different classes of goods and fee payable there for shall be in respect of each such
class of goods.

(4) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be filed in the office of the
Geographcial Indications Registry within whose territorial limits, the territory of the
country or the region or locality in the country to which the geographical indication
relates is situated:

Provided that where such territory, region or locality, as the case may be, is not
situated in India, the application shall be filed in the office of the Geographical Indica-
tions Registry within whose territorial limit the place mentioned in the address for serv-
ices in India as disclosed in the application, is situated.

(5) Every applications under sub-section (1) shall, be examined by the Registrar in
such manner as may be prescribed.

(© Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse the application
or may accept it absolutely or subject to such amendments, modification, conditions or
limitations, if any, as he thinks fit.

(7) In the case of refusal or conditional acceptance of application, the Registrar
shall record in writing the grounds for such refusal or conditional acceptance and the
materials used by him in arriving at his decision.

12. Where, after the acceptance of an application for registration of a geographical
indication but before its registration, the Registrar is satisfied —

(a) that the application has been accepted in error, or

(8) that in the circumstances of the case the geographical indication should
not be registered or should be registered subject to conditions or limitations or to
conditions additional to or different from the conditions or limitations subject to
which the application has been accepted,

the Registrar may, after hearing the applicant if he so desires, withdraw the acceptance
and proceed as if the application had not been accepted.

13. (1) When an application for registration of a geographical indication has
been accepted, whether absolutely or subject to conditions or limitations, the Regis- _
trar shall, as soon as may be after acceptance, cause the application as accepted
together with the condition or limitations, if any, subject to which it has been ac-
cepted, to be advertised in such manner as may be prescribed.

(2) Where after advertisement of an application—
(a) an error in the application has been corrected; or
(b) the application has been permitted to be amended under section 15,

the Registrar may in his discretion cause the application to be advertised again or
instead of causing the application to be advertised again, notified in the prescribed
manner, the correction made in the application.

14. (1) Any person may, within three months from the date of advertisement or
readvertisement of an application for registration or within such further period, not
exceeding one month, in the aggregate, as the Registrar, on application made to him in
such manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed allows, give notice in
writing in the prescribed manner to the Registrar, of opposition to the registration.

(2) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice on the applicant for registration
and, within two months from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the notice of
opposition, the applicant shall sent to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a counter-
statement of the grounds on which he relies for his application, and if he does not do so
he shall be deemed to have abandoned his application.



7

(3) If the applicant sends such counter-statement, the Registrar shall serve a copy
thereof on the person giving notice of opposition.

(4) Any evidence upon which the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be
submitted in such manner and within the such time as may be prescribed to the Regis-
trar, and the Registrar shall give an opportunity to them to be heard, if they so desire.

(5) The Registrar shall, after hearing the parties, if so required, and considering the
evidence, decide whether and subject to what conditions or limitations, if any, the regis-
tration is to be permitted, and may take into account a ground of objection whether relied
upon by the opponent or not.

(6) Where a person giving notice of opposition or an applicant sending a counter-
statement after receipt of a copy of such notice neither resides nor carries on business in
India, the Registrar may require him to give security for the costs of proceeding before
him, and in default of such security being duly given, may treat the opposition or appli-
cation, as the case may be, as abandoned.

(7) The Registrar may, on request, permit correction of any error in, or any amend-
ment of, a notice of opposition or a counter-statement on such terms as he thinks just.

15. The Registrar may, on such terms, as he thinks just, at any time, whether
before or after acceptance of an application for registration under section 11, permit the
correction of any error or in connection with the application or permit an amendment of
the application:

Provided that if an amendment is made to a single application referred to in Sub-
section (3) of section 11 involving division of such application into two or more applica-
tions, the date of making of the initial application shall be deemed to be the date of
making of the divided applications so divided.

16. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 12, when an application for registration
of a geographical indication has been accepted and either—

(a) the application has not been opposed and the time for notice of opposition
has expired; or

(b) the application has been opposed and the opposition has been decided in
favour of the applicant, .

the Registrar shall, unless the Central Government otherwise direct register the said
geographical indication and the authorised users, if any, mentioned in the application
and the geographical indication and the authorised users when registered shall be regis-
tered as of the date of the making of the said application and that date shall, subject to the
provisions of section 83, be deemed to be the date of registration.

(2) On the registration of a geographical indication, the Registrar shall issue each
to the applicant and the authorised users, if registered with the geographical indication,
a certificate in such form as may be prescribed of the registration thereof, sealed with
the seal of the Geographical Indications Registry.

(3) Where registration of a geographical indication is not completed within twelve
months form the date of the application by reason of default on the part of the applicant,
the Registrar may, after giving notice to the applicant in the prescribed manner, treat the
application as abandoned unless it is completed within the time specified in that behalf in
the notice.

(4) The Registrar may amend the register or a certificate of registration for the
purpose of correcting a clerical error or an obvious mistake.

17. (7) Any person claiming to be the producer of the goods in respect of which a
geographical indication has been registered under section 16 may apply in writing to the
Registrar in the prescribed manner for registering him as an authorised user of such
geographical indication.

Application
for
registration as
authorised
user.


8

(2) The application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a statement and
such documents of facts as may be prescribed and required by the Registrar to determine
as to whether such person is the producer of the goods referred to in that sub-section and
such fee as may be prescribed.

(3) The provisions of this Chapter relating to—
(a the filing and examination of the application;
(0) the refusal and acceptance of registration;
(©) withdrawal of acceptance of application;
(d) advertisement of application;
(© opposition to registration;
(0 correction or error in an amendment of the application; and
(g) registration,

shall apply in respect of the application and registration of authorised users referred to in
sub-section (1) in the same manner as they apply for the application for registration and
registration of the geographical indication.

18. (1) The registration of a geographical indication shall be for a period of ten
years, but may be renewed from time to time in accordance with the provisions of this
section.

(2 The registration of an authorised user shall be for a period of ten years or for
the period till the date on which the registration of the geographical indication in respect
of which the auhorised user is registered expires, whichever is earlier.

(3) The Registrar shall, on application made in the prescribed manner, by the
registered proprietor or by the authorised user and within the prescribed period and
subject to the payment of the prescribed fee, renew the registration of the geographical
indication or authorised user, as the case may be, for a period of ten years from the date
of expiration of the original registration or of the last renewal of registration, as the case
may be (which date is in this section referred to as the expiration of the last registration).

(4) At the prescribed time before the expiration of the last registration of a geo-
graphical indication or the authorised user, as the case may be, the Registrar shall send
notice in the prescribed manner to the registered proprietor or the authorised user, as the
case may be, of the date of expiration and the conditions as to payment of fees and
otherwise upon which a renewal of registration may be obtained, and, if at the expiration
of time prescribed in that behalf those conditions have not been duly complied with, the
Registrar may remove the geographical indication or the authorised user, as the case
may be, from the register:

Provided that the Registrar shall not remove the geographical indication or the
authorised user, as the case may be, from the register, if an application is made in the
prescribed form and the prescribed fee and surcharge is paid within six months from the
expiration of the last registration of the geographical indication or the authorised user,
as the case may be, and shall renew the registration of geographical indication or the
authorised user, as the case may be, for a period of ten years under sub-section (3).

(5) Where a geographical indication or authorised user, as the case may be, has
been removed from the register for non-payment of the prescribed fee, the Registrar
shall, after six months and within one year from the expiration of the last registration of
the geographical indication or the authorised user, as the case may be, on receipt of an
application in the prescribed form and on payment of the prescribed fee, if satisfied that
it is just so to do, restore the geographical indication or the authorised user, as the case


9

may be, to the register and renew registration of the geographical indication or authorised
user, as the case may be, either generally or subject to such condition or limitation as he
thinks fit to impose, for a period of ten years from the expiration of the last registration.

19, Where a geographical indication has been removed from the register for failure
to pay the fee for renewal, it shall nevertheless, for the purpose of any application for the
registration of another geographical indication during one year, next after the date of
removal, be deemed to be a geographical indication already on the register, unless the
tribunal is satisfied either—

(a) that there has been no bona fide trade use of the geographical indication
which has been removed within the two years immediately preceding its removal;
or

(6) that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise from the use of the
geographical indication which is the subject of the application for registration by
reason of any previous use of the geographical indication which has been removed.

CHAPTER IV
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION

20. (1) No person shall be entitled to institute any proceeding to prevent, or to
recover damages for, the infringement of an unregistered geographical indication.

(2 Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect rights of action against any person
for passing off goods as the goods of another person or the remedies in respect thereof.

21. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the registration of a geographical
indication shall, if valid, give,—

(a) to the registered proprietor of the geographical indication and the authorised
user or users thereof to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the geographical
indication in the manner provided by this Act;

(0) to the authorised user thereof the exclusive right to the use of the
geographical indication in relation to the goods in respect of which the geographical
indication is registered.

(2 The exclusive right to the use of a geographical indication given under clause
(b) of sub-section (1) shall be subject to any condition and limitation to which the
registration is subject.

(3) Where two or more persons are authorised users of geographical indications,
which are identical with or nearly resemble each other, the exclusive right to the use of
any of those geographical indications shall not (except so far as their respective rights
are subject to any conditions or limitations entered on the register) be deemed to have
been acquired by anyone of those persons as against any other of those persons merely
by registration of the geographical indications, but each of those persons has otherwise
the same rights as against other persons as he would have if he were the sole authorised
user. हे

22, (1) A registered geographical indication is infringed by a person who, not
being an authorised user thereof,—

(a) uses such geographical indication by any means in the designations or
presentation of goods that indicates or suggests that such goods originate in a
geographical area other than the true place of origin of such goods in a manner
which misleads the persons as to the geographical origin of such goods; or

(8) uses any geographical indication in such manner which constitutes an act
of unfair competition including passing off in respect of registered geographical
indication.

Effect of

register for
failure to pay
fee for
renewal.

geographical
indication.

Rights
conferred by
registration.

Infringement
or registered
geographical
indications.


Registration to
be prima facie
evidence of
validity.

Prohibition of
assignment or
transmission,
ete.

10

Explanation 1—For the purposes of this clause, “act of unfair competition’’
means any act of competition contrary to honest practices in industrial or commercial
matters.

Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the
following acts shall be deemed to be acts of unfair competition, namely:—

(i) all acts of such a nature as to create confusion by any means
whatsoever with the establishment, the goods or the industrial or commercial
activities, of a competitor;

(il false allegations in the course of trade of such a nature as to discredit
the establishment, the goods or the industrial or commercial activities, of a
competitor;

(iii) geographical indications, the use of which in the course of trade is
liable to mislead the persons as to the nature, the manufacturing process, the
characteristics, the suitability for their purpose, or the quantity, of the goods;

(०) uses another geographical indication to the goods which, although literally
true as to the territory, region or locality in which the goods originate, falsely
represents to the persons that the goods originate in the territory, region or locality
in respect of which such registered geographical indication relates.

(2) The Central Government may, if it thinks necessary so to do for providing
additional protection to certain goods or classes of goods under sub-section (3), by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify such goods or class or classes of goods, for
the purposes of such protection.

(3) Any person who is not an authorised user of a geographical indication registered
under this Act in respect of the goods or any class or classes of goods notified under sub-
section (2), uses any other geographical indication to such goods or class or classes of
goods not originating in the place indicated by such other geographical indication or uses
such other geographical indication to such goods or class or classes of goods even indicating
the true origin of such goods or uses such other geographical indication to such goods or
class or classes of goods in translation of the true place of origin or accompanied by
expression such as “kind’’, “style’’, “imitation’’ or the like expression, shall infringe
such registered geographical indication.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the goods in respect
of which a geographical indication has been registered are lawfully acquired by a person
other than the authorised user of such geographical indication, further dealings in those
goods by such person including processing or packaging, shall not constitute an
infringement of such geographical indication, except where the condition of goods is
impaired after they have been put in the market.

23. (1) In all legal proceedings relating to a geographical indication, the certificate
of registration granted in this regard by the Registrar under this Act, being a copy of the
entry in the register under the seal of the Geographical Indications Registry, shall be
prima facie evidence of the validity thereof and be admissible in all courts and before the
Appellate Board without further proof or production of the original.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be affect the right of action in respect
of an unregistered geographical indication.

24. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, any
right to a registered geographical indication shall not be the subject matter of assignment,
transmission, licensing, pledge, mortgage or any such other agreement:

Provided that on the death of an authorised user his right in a registered geographical
indication shall devolve on his successor in title under the law for the time. being in
force.


lu
CHAPTER V
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO TRADE MARKS AND Prion USERS

25. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Trade Marks Act, 1999, the Registrar
of Trade Marks referred to in section 3 of that Act, shall, suo moto or at the request of
an interested party, refuse or invalidate the registration of a trade mark which—

(@ contains or consists of a geographical indication with respect to the goods
or class or classes of goods not originating in the territory of a country, or a region
or locality in that territory which such geographical indication indicates, if use of
such geographical indications in the trade mark for such goods, is of such a nature
as to confuse or mislead the persons as to the true place of origin of such goods or
class or classes of goods;

(b) contains or consists of a geographical indication identifying goods or
class or classes of goods notified under sub-section (2) of section 22.

26. (1) Where a trade mark contains or consists of a geographical indication and
has been applied for or registered in good faith under the law relating to trade marks for
the time being in force, or where rights to such trade mark have been acquired through
use in good faith either—

(a) before the commencement of this Act; or

(09) before the date of filing the application for registration of such geographical
maication under this Act,

nothing contained in this Act shall prejudice the registrability or the validity of the
registration of such trade mark under the law relating to the trade marks for the time
being in force, or the right to use such trade mark, on the ground that such trade mark is
identical with or similar to such geographical indication.

(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply in respect of a geographical indication
with respect to goods or class or classes of goods for which such geographical indication
is identical with the term customary in common language as the common name of such
goods in any part of India on or before the Ist day of January, 1995.

(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall in any way prejudice the right of any person
to use, in the course of trade, that person’s name or the name of that person’s predecessor
in business, except where such name is used in such a manner as to confuse or mislead
the people.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Trade Marks Act, 1999 or in this
Act, no action in connection with the use or registration of a trade mark shall be taken
after the expiry of five years from the date on which such use or registration infringes
any geographical indication registered under this Act has become known to the registered
proprietor or authorised user registered in respect of such geographical indication under
this Act or after the date of registration of the trade mark under the said Trade Marks
Act subject to the condition that the trade mark has, been published under the provisions
of the said Trade Marks Act, 1999 or the rules made thereunder by that date, if such date
is earlier than the date on which such infringement became known to such proprietor or
authorised user and such geographical indication is not used or registered in bad faith.

CHAPTER V1
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER

27. (1) On application made in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to
the Registrar by any person aggrieved, the tribunal may make such order as it may think
fit for cancelling or varying the registration of a geographical indication or authorised
user on the ground of any contravention, or failure to observe the condition entered on
the register in relation thereto.

Prohibition of
registration of
geographical
indication as
trade mark.

Protection to
certain trade
marks.

Power to
cancel or vary
registration and
to rectify the
register.


Correction of
register.

Alteration of
registered
geographical
indications.

‘Adaptation of
entries in
register to
amend or
substitute
classification

of goods.

12

(2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any
entry, or by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause, or by any entry
wrongly remaining on the register, or by any error or defect in any entry in the register,
may apply in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, and the
tibunal may make such order for making, expunging or varying the entry as it may

ink fit.

(3) The tribunal may in any proceeding under this section decide any question that
may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the rectification of the
register.

(4) The tribunal, of its own motion, may, after giving notice in the prescribed
manner to the parties concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard,
make any order referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2).

(5) Any order of the Appellate Board rectifying the register shall direct that notice
of the rectification shall be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who shall
upon receipt of such notice rectify the register accordingly.

28. The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner by the
registered proprietor or the authorised user,—

(a) correct any error in the name, address or description of the registered
proprietor or the authorised user, as the case may be, of a geographical indication,
or any other entry relating to the geographical indication on the register;

(5) enter any change in the name, address or description of the association of
persons or of producers or any ogranisafion or authority, as the case may be, who
is registered as proprietor of a geographical indication on the register;

(©) cancel the entry of a geographical indication on the register;

(d) strike out any goods or class or classes of goods from those in respect of
which a geographical indication is registered from the register,

and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of registration,
and for that purpose, may require the certificate of registration to be produced to him.

29. (1) The registered proprietor of a geographical indication may apply in the
prescribed manner to the Registrar for leave to add to or alter the grographical indication
in any manner not substantially affecting the identity thereof, and the Registrar may
refuse leave or may grant it on such terms and subject to such limitations as he may think
fit.

(2) The Registrar may cause an application under this section to be advertised in
the prescribed manner in any case where it appears to him that it is expedient so to do,
and where he does so, if within the prescribed time from the date of the advertisement
any person gives notice to the Registrar in the prescribed manner of the opposition to the
application, the Registrar shall, after hearing the parties if so required, decide the matter.

(3) Where: leave is granted under this section, the geographical indication as altered
shall be advertised in the prescribed manner, unless the application has already been
advertised under sub-section (2).

30. (1) The Registrar shall not make any amendment of the register which would
have the effect of adding any goods or classes of goods to those in respect of which a
geographical indication is registered (whether in one or more classes) immediately before
the amendment is to be made or antedating the registration of a geographical indication
in respect of any goods:

Provided that this sub-section, shall not apply when the Registrar is satisfied that
compliance therewith would involve complexity and that the addition or antedating, as


13

the case may be, would not affect any substantial quantity of goods and would not
substantially prejudice the rights of any person.

(2) A proposal so to amend the register shall be brought to the notice of the registered
proprietor and every authorisd user of the geographical indication affected and advertised
in the prescribed manner, and may be opposed before the Registrar by any person
aggrieved on the ground that the proposed amendment contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1)

CHAPTER VII
APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE BOARD

31. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar under this
Act, or the rules made thereunder, may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Board within
three months from the date on which the order or decision sought to be appealed against
is communicated to such person preferring the appeal.

(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period
specified under sub-section (1):

Provided that an appeal may be admitted atter the expiry of the period specified
therefor, it the appellant satisfies the Appellate Board that he had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within the specified period.

(3) An.appeal to the Appellate Board shall be in the prescribed form and shall be
verified in the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or
decision appealed against and such fees as may be prescribed.

32. No court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, exercise any jurisdiction,
powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub-section (1) of section 31.

33. The provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (5), (6) of section 84, section 87,
section 92, section 95 and section 96 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, shall apply to the
Appellate Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the
discharge of its functions under the Trade Marks Act, 1999.

34. (1) An application for rectification of the register made to the Appellate Board
under section 27 shall be in such form as may be prescribed.

(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating to
a registered geographical indication under this Act shall be communicated to the Registrar
by the Appellate Board and the Registrar shall give effect to the order of the Board and
shall, when so directed, amend the éntries in, or rectify, the register in accordance with
such order. .

35. (1) The Registrar shall have the right to appear and be heard—

(a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the relief
sought includes alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question
relating to the practice of the Geographical Indications Registry is raised;

(8) in any appeal to the Board from an order of the Registrar on an application
for registration of a geographical indication or authorised user—

(0 which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the

Registrar or is accepted by him subject to any amendments, modifications,

conditions or limitations, or

(ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers that his
appearance is necessary in the public interest,

and the Registrar shall appear in any case if so directed by the Board.

Appeals to the
Appellate
Board.

Bar of
jurisdiction of
courts, etc.
Procedure of
the Appel
Board.

Procedure for
application for
“tification,
etc., before
Appellate
Board.

‘Appearance of
Registrar in
legal
proceedings.


14

(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Registrar may, in lieu of
appearing, submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he
thinks proper of the proceedings before him relating to the matter in issue or of the
grounds of any decision given by him affecting it, or of the practice of the Geographical
Indications Registry in like cases, or of other matters relevant to the issues and within his
knowledge as Registrar, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.

Costs of | 36. In all proceedings under this Act before the Appellate Board the costs of the
Registrar in Registrar shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the Registrar shall not be ordered to
proceedings ay the costs of any of the parties,

before
Appellate
Beard. CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
Meaning of 37. (1) A person shall be deemed to apply a geographical indication to goods
applying who—
geographical .
indications. (a) applies it to the goods themselves; or

(0) applies it to any package in or with which the goods are sold, or exposed
for sale, or had in possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture; or

(०) places, encloses or annexes any goods which are sold, or exposed for
sale, or had in possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture, in or
with any package or other thing to which a geographical indication has been applied;
or

(d) uses a geographical indication in any manner reasonably likely to lead to
the belief that the goods in connection with which it is used are designated or
described by that geographical indication; or

(e) in relation to the goods uses a geographical indication in any sign,
advertisement, invoice, catalogue, business letter, business paper, price list or
other commercial documents and goods are delivered to a person in pursuance of
a request or order made by reference to the geographical indication as so used.

(2) A geographical indication shall be deemed to be applied to goods whether it is
woven in, impressed on, or otherwise worked into, or annexed or affixed to, the goods
or to any package or other thing.

Falsifying and 38. (DA person shall be deemed to falsify a geographical indication who, either,—
falsel lyii . + Pare

geometphical (a) without the assent of the authorised user of the geographical indication
indications. makes that geographical indication or deceptively similar geographical indication;

or

(b) falsifies any genuine geographical indication, whether by alteration,
addition, effacement or otherwise.

(2) A person shall be deemed to falsely apply to goods a geographical indication
who, without the assent of the authorised user of the geographical indication,—

(a) applies such geographical indication or a deceptively similar geographical
indication to goods or any package containing goods;

(b) uses any package bearing a geographical indication which is identical
with or deceptively similar to the geographical indication of such authorised user,
for the purpose of packing, filling or wrapping therein any goods other than the
genuine goods of the authorised user of the geographical indication.

(3) Any geographical indication falsified as mentioned in sub-section (J) or falsely
applied as mentioned in sub-section (2), is in this Act referred to as a false-geographical
indication.


15

(4 In any prosecution for falsifying a geographical indication or falsely applying a
geographical indication to goods, the burden of proving the assent of proprietor shall lie
on the accused.

39. Any person who,—
(a) falsifies any geographical indication; or
(0) falsely applies to goods any geographical indication; or

(०) makes, disposes of, or has in his possession, any die, block, machine,
plate or other instrument for the purpose of falsifying or of being used for falsifying,
a geographical indication; or

(d) applies to any goods to which an indication of the country or place in
which they were made or produced or the name and the address of the manufacturer
or person for whom the goods are manufactured is required to be applied under
section 71, a false indication of such country, place, name or address; or

(e) tampers with, alters or effaces an indication of origin which has been
applied to any goods to which it is required to be applied under section 71; or

(2) causes any of the things above-mentioned in this section to be done,

shall, unless he proves that he acted, without intent to defraud, be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to
three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which
may extend to two lakh rupees:

Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in
the judgment, impose 2 sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a
fine of less than fifty thousand rupees.

40. Any person who sells, lets for hire or exposes for sale, or hires or has in his
possession for sale, goods or things to which any false geographical indication is applied
or which, being required under section 71 to have applied to them an indication of the
country or place in which they were made or produced or the name and address of the
manufacturer, or person for whom the goods are manufactured or without the indica-
tions so required, shall, unless he proves,—

(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an of-
fence against this section, he had at the time of commission of the alleged offence
no reason to suspect the genuineness of the geographical indication or that any
offence had been committed in respect of the goods; or

(b) that, on demand by or ‘on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the infor-
mation in his power with respect to the person from whom he obtained such goods
or things; or

(०0) that otherwise he had acted innocently,

be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shalt not be less than six months but
which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:

Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in
the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a
fine of less than fifty thousand rupees.

41. Whoever having already been convicted of an offence under section 39 or
section 40 is again convicted of any such offence shall be punishable for the second and
for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than
one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:

Penalty for
applying false
geographical
indications.

Penalty for
selling goods to
which false
geographical
indication is
applied.

Enhanced
penalty on

> second or

subsequent

conviction.


Penalty for
falsely
representing a
geographical
indication as
registered.

Penalty for
improperly
describing a
place of
business as
connected with
the
Geographical
Indications
Registry.

Penalty for
falsification of
entries in the
register.

No offence in
certain cases,

16

Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reason to be mentioned in
the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year or a
fine of less than one lakh rupees:

Provided further that for the purposes of this section, no cognizance shall be taken
of any conviction made before the commencement of this Act.

42. (1) No person shall make any representation—

(a) with respect to a geographical indication, not being a registered geo-
graphical indication, the effect that it is a registered geographical indication; or

(0) to the effect that a registered geographical indication is registered in
respect of any goods in respect of which it is not in fact registered; or

(0 to the effect that registration of a geographical indication gives an exclu-
sive right to the use thereof in any circumstances in which having regard to limita-
tion entered on the register, the registration does not in fact give that right.

(2) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both.

(3) For the purposes of this section the use in India in relation to a geographical
indication of the words “registered” geographical indication or any other expression,
symbol or sign like “R.G.I.” referring whether expressly or impliedly to registration,
shall be deemed to import a reference to registration in the register, except—-

(a) Where that word or other expression, symbol or sign is used in direct
association with other words delineated in characters at least as large as those in
which that word or other expression, symbol or sign is delineated and indicating
that the reference to registration as a geographical indication under the law of a
country outside India being a country under the law of which the registration
referred to is in fact in force; or

(89) where that other expression, symbol or sign is of itself such as to indicate
that the reference is to such registration as mentioned in clause (a); or

(c) where that word is used in relation to a geographical indication registered
under the law of a country outside India and in relation solely to goods to be
exported to that country for use in that country.

43. If any person uses on his place of business, or on any document issued by him,
or otherwise, words which would reasonably lead to the belief that his place of business
is, or is officially connected with, the Geographical Indications Registry, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

44, If any person makes, or causes to be made, a false entry in the register, or a
writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in the register, or produces or tenders
or causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing, knowing the entry or
writing to be false, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

45. The provisions of sections 39, 40 and 41 shall in relation to a registered
geographical indication or authorised user of such geographical indication, be subject to
the rights created or recognised by this Act and no act or omission shall be deemed to be
an offence under the aforesaid sections if,— .

(a) the alleged offence relates to a registered geographical indication and the
act or omission is permitted under this Act; and


17

(b) the alleged offence relates to a registered geographical indication and the
act or omission is permitted under any other law for the time being in force.

46. (1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under section 39 or section 40
or section 41 or is acquitted of an offence under section 39 or section 40 on proof that he
acted without intend or defraud, or under section 40 on proof of the matters specified in
clause (a) or clause (0) or clause (c) of that section, the court convicting or acquitting
him may direct the forfeiture to Government of all goods and things by means of, or in
telation to, which the offence has been committed, or but for such proof as aforesaid
would have been committed.

(2) When a foreiture is directed on a conviction and an appeal lies against the
conviction, an appeal shall lic against the forfeiture also.

(3) When, a forfeiture is directed on acquittal and the goods or things to which the
direction relates are of value exceeding fifty rupees, an appeal against the forfeiture may
be preferred, within thirty days from the date of the direction, to the court to which in
appealable cases appeal lie from sentences of the court which directed the forfeiture.

(4) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction, the court, before whom the
person is convicted, may order any forfeited articles to be destroyed or otherwise dis-
posed of as the court thinks fit.

47, Where a person accused of an offence under section 39 proves,—

(a) that in the ordinary course of his business he is employed on behalf of
other persons to apply geographical indications, or as the case may be, to make
dies, blocks, machines, plates, or other instruments for making, or being used in
making, geographical indications;

(0) that in the case which is the subject of the charge he was so employed,
and was not interested in the goods or other thing by way of profit or commission
depend on the sale of such goods;

(c) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing the
offence charged, he had, at the time of the commission of the alleged offence, no
reason to.suspect the genuineness of the geographical indication; and

(d) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the
information in his power with respect to the persons on whose behalf the geographical
indication was applied,

he shall be acquitted.

48. (1) Where the offence charged under section 39 or section 40 or section 41 is in
selation to a registered geographical indication and the accused pleads that the registration
of the geographical indication is invalid, the following procedure shall be followed:—

(a) if the court is satisfied that such defence is prima facie tenable, it shall
not proceed with the charge but shall adjourn the proceeding for three months
from the date on which the plea of the accused is recorded to enable the accused to
file an application before the Appellate Board under this Act, for the rectification of
the register on the ground that the registration is invalid;

(0) if the accused proves to the court that he has made such application
within the time so limited or within such further time as the court may for suffi-
cient cause allow, the further proceedings in the prosecution shall stand stayed till
the disposal of such application for rectification;

(c) if within a period of three months or within such extended time as may be
allowed by the court the accused fails to apply to the Appellate Board for rectifica-
tion of the register, the court shall proceed with the case as if the registration were
invalid.

Forfeiture of
goods,

Exemption of
certain persons
employed in
ordinary
course of
busifess.

Procedure
where
invalidity of
registration is
pleaded by the
accused.


Offences by
companies,

Cognizance of
certain offences
and the powers
of police officer

for search and _

seizure.

18

(2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred to in sub-
section (1), any application for the rectification of the register concerning the geographical
indication in question on the ground of invalidity of the registration thereof has already
been properly made to and is pending before the tribunal, the court shall stay the further
proceedings in the prosecution pending the disposal of the application aforesaid and shall
determine the charge against the accused in conformity with the result of the application
for rectification in so far as the complainant relies upon the registration of his geographical
indication.

49. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the
company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the
conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.

Explanation.—-For the purposes of this section—

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and

(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

50. (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 42 or section 43
or section 44 except on complaint in writing made by the Registrar or any officer authorised
by him in writing:

Provided that in relation to clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 42, a court shall
take a cognizance of an offence on the basis of a certificate issued by the Registrar to the
effect that a registered geographical indication has been represented as registered in
respect of any goods in respect of which it is not in fact registered.

(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of
the first class shall try an offence under this Act.

(3) The offences under section 39 or section 40 or section 41 shall be cognizable.

(4) Any police officer not below the rank of deputy superintendent of police or
equivalent, may, if he satisfied that any of the offences referred to in sub-section (3) has
been, is being, or is likely to be, committed, search and seize without warrant the goods,
die, block, machine, plate, other instruments or things involved in committing the offence,
wherever found, and all the articles so seized shall, as soon as practicable, be produced
before the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case
may be: .
Provided that the police officer, before making any search and seizure, shall obtain
the opinion of the Registrar on the facts involved in the offence relating to geographical
indication and shall abide by the opinion so obtained.

(5) Any person having an interest in any article seized under sub-section (4), may,
within fifteen days of such seizure, make an application to the Judicial Magistrate of the
first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, for such article being restored
to him and the Magistrate, after-hearing the application and the prosecution, shall make
such order on the application as he may deem fit.


45 of 18606

19

51. In any prosecution under this Act, the court may order such costs to be paid by
the accused to the complainant, or by the complainant to the accused, as the court deemed
reasonable having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the conduct of the
parties arid the costs so awarded shall be recoverable as if they were a fine.

52. No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be commenced after the
expiration of three years next after the commission of the offence charged or two years
after the discovery thereof by the prosecutor, whichever expiration first happens.

53. An officer of the Government whose duty it is to take part in the enforcement
of the provisions of this Chapter shall not be compelled in any court to say whence he got
any information as to the commission of any offence against this Act.

54, If any person, being within India, abets the commission, without India, of any
act which, if committed in India, would, under this Act, be an offence, he may be tried
for such abetment in any place in India in which he may be found, and be punished
therefor with the punishment to which he would be liable if he had himself committed in
that place the act which he abetted.

CHAPTER IX

MISCELLANEOUS

_ 55. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.

56. Every person appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

57. (1) Where in any suit for infringement of a geographical indication the defendant
pleads that registration of the geographical indication relating to plaintiff is invalid, the
court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as the court), shall,—

(a) if any proceedings for rectification of the register to the geographical
indication relating to plaintiff or defendant are pending before the Registrar or the
Appellate Board, stay the suit pending the final disposal of such proceedings;

(0) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satisfied that the plea
regarding the invalidity of the registration of the geographical indication relating
to plaintiff or defendant is prima facie tenable, raise an issue regarding the same
and adjourn the case for a period of three months from the date of the framing of
the issue in order to enable the party concerned to apply to the Appellate Board for
rectification of the register.

(2 If the party concerned proves to the court that he has made any such application
as is referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) within the time specified therein or within
such extended time as the court may for sufficient cause allow, the trial of the suit shall
svand stayed until the final disposal of the rectification proceedings.

(3) If no such application as aforesaid has been made within the time so specified or
within such extended time as the court may allow, the issue as to the validity of the
registration of the geographical indication concerned shall be deemed to have been
abandoned and the court shall proceed with the suit in regard to the other issues in the
case.

(4 The final order made in any rectification proceedings referred to in sub-section
(JD or sub-section (2) shall be binding upon the parties and the court shall dispose of the
suit conformably to such order in so far as it relates to the issue as to the validity of the
registration of the geographical indication.

Costs of
defence of
prosecution.

Limitation of
prosecution.

Information as
to commision
of offence.

Punishment
for abatement
in India of
acts done out
of India.

Protection of
action taken in
good faith,

Certain
persons to be
public servant:

Stey of
proceedings
where the
validity of
registration of
the
geographical
indication is
questioned,
etc,


Application for
rectification of
register to be
made to
Appellate
Board in
certain cases.

Implied
warranty on
sale of
indicated
goods,

Powers of
Registrar.

Exercise of
discretionary
power by
Registrar.

Evidence
before
Registrar.

Death of
party to a
proceeding.

Extension of
time.

20

(5) The stay of a suit for the infringement of a geographical indication under this
section shall not preclude the court from making any interlocutory order (including any
order granting an injunction, directing account to be kept, appointing a receiver or
attaching any property), during the period of the stay of the suit.

58. (1) Where in a suit for infringement of a registered geographical indication the
validity of the registration of the geographical indication relating to plaintiff is questioned
by the defendant or where in any such suit the plaintiff questions the validity of the
registration of the geographical indication relating to defendant, the issue as to the validity
of the registration of the geographical indication concerned shall be determined only on
an application for the rectification of the register and, notwithstanding anything contained
in section 27, such application shall be made to the Appellate Board and not to the
Registrar.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (/), where an application for rectification
of the register is made to the Registrar under section 27, the Registrar may, if he thinks
fit, refer the application at any stage of the proceedings to the Appellate Board.

59. Where a geographical indication has been applied to the goods on sale or in
the contract for sale of any goods, the seller shall be deemed to warrant that the
geographical indication is a genuine geographical indication and not falsely applied,
unless the contrary is expressed in writing signed by or on behalf of the seller and
delivered at the time of the sale of goods on contract to and accepted by thé buyer.

60. In all proceedings under this Act before the Registrar —

(a) the Registrar shall have all the powers of a civil court for the purposes of
receiving evidence, administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses,
compelling the discovery and production of documents and issuing commissions
for the examination of witnesses;

(6) the Registrar may, subject to any rules made in this behalf under section
87, make such orders as to costs as he consider reasonable, and any such order
shall be executable as a decree of a civil court;

(c) the Registrar may, on an application made in the prescribed manner,
review his own decision.

61. Subject to the provisions of section 64, the Registrar shall not exercise any
discretionary or other power vested in him by this Act or the rules made thereunder
adversely to a person applying for the exercise of that power without (if so required by
that person within the prescribed time) giving to the person an opportunity of being
heard.

62. In any proceeding under this Act before the Registrar, evidence shall be given
by affidavit:

Provided that the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, take oral evidence in lieu of, or in

addition to, such evidence by affidavit.

63. Ifa person who is a party to a proceeding under this Act (not being a proceeding
before the Appellate Board or a court) dies pending the proceeding, the Registrar may,
‘on request, and on proof to his satisfaction of the transmission of the interest of the
deceased person, substitute in the proceeding his successor in interest in his place, or, if
the Registrar is of opinion that the interest of the deceased person is sufficiently represented
by the surviving parties, permit the proceeding to continue without the substitution of his
successor in interest. :

6A. (J) If the Registrar is satisifed, on application made to him in the prescribed
manner and accompanied by the prescribed fee, that there is sufficient cause for extending
the time for doing any act (not being a time expressly provided in the Act), whether the
time so specified has expired or not, he may, subject to such conditions as he may think
fit to impose, extend the time and inform the parties accordingly.


5 of 1908

21

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to require the Registrar to hear the
parties before disposing of an application for extension of time, and no appeal shall lie
from any order of the Registrar under this section.

65. Where, in the opinion of the Registrar, an applicant is in default in the
prosecution of an application filed under this Act, the Registrar may, by notice require
the applicant to remedy the default within a time specified and after giving him, if so,
desired, an opportunity of being heard, treat the application as abandoned, unless the
default is remedied within the time specified in the notice.

66. (1) No suit,—
(a) for the infringement of a registered geographical indication; or
(8) relating to any right in a registered geographical indication; or

(c) for passing of arising out of the use by the defendant of any geographical .

indication which is indentical with or deceptively similar to the geographical
indication relating to the plaintiff, whether registered or unregistered,

shall be instituted in any court inferior to a district court having jurisdiction to try the
suit.

(2) For the purpose of clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1), a “district Court
having jurisdiction’ shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 or any other law for the time being in force, include a Distrct Court
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the time of the institution of the suit or
other proceeding, the person instituting the suit or proceeding, or, where there are more
than one such persons any of them, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business
or personally works for gain. .

Explanation.—Fot the purposes of sub-section (2), “person’’ includes the registered
proprietor and the authorised user.

67. (1) The relief which a court may grant in any suit for infringement or for
passing off referred to in section 65 includes injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as
the court thinks fit) and at the option of the plaintiff, either damages or account of
profits, together with or without any order for the delivery—“up of the infringing labels
and indications for destruction or erasure. हैं

(2) The order of injunction under sub-section (1) may include an exparte injunction
or any interlocutory order for any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) for discovery of documents;

(8) preserving of infringing goods, documents or other evidence which are
related to the subject-matter of the suit;

(c) restraining the defendant from disposing of or dealing with his assets in a
manner which may adversely affect plaintiff's ability to recover damages, costs or
other pecuniary remedies which may be finally awarded to the plaintiff.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the court shall not grant
relief by way of damages (other than nominal damages) on account of profits in any
case—

(a) where in a suit for infringement the defendant satisfies the court—

@ that at the time he commenced to use the geographical indication
complained of in the suit he was unaware and had no reasonable ground for
believing that the geographical indication of the plaintiff was on the register;
and

Abandonment.

Suit for
infringement,
ete., to be
before district
court.

Relief in suit
for infringe-
ment or for
passing off.


Authorised
user to be

certain
proceedings.

Evidence of
entries in
register, etc.,
and things
done by the
Registrar

Registrar and
other officers
not compellable
to produce

register, etc

Power to
require goods
to show
inditation of
origin.

22

(1i) that when he became aware of the existence and nature of the
plaintiff's right in the geographical indication, he forthwith ceased to use the
geographical indication in relation to good in respect of which it was
registered; or

(8) where in a suit for passing off, the defendant satisfies the court—

() that at the time he commenced to use the geographical indication
complained of in the suit he was unaware and had no reasonable ground for
believing that the geographical indication relating to the plaintiff was in use;
and

(ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature of the
geographical indication relating to the plaintiff he forthwith ceased to use the
geographical indication complained of.

68. (1) In every proceeding under Chapter VI or under section 31, every authorised
user of a geographical indication to which such proceeding relate, who is not himself an
applicant in respect of any proceeding under that Chapter or section, shall be made a
party to the proceeding.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, an authorised user so
made a party to the proceeding shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an
appearance and takes part in the proceeding.

69. (1) A copy of any entry in the register or of any document referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 78 purporting to be certified by the Registrar and sealed with the
seal of the Geographical Indications Registry shall be admitted in evidence in all courts
and in all proceedings without further proof or production of the original.

(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the Registrar as to any entry,
matter or thing that he is authorised by this Act or the rules to make or do shall be prima
facie evidence of the entry having been made, and of the contents thereof, or of the
matter or things having been done or not done.

70. The Registrar or any officer of the Geographical Indications Registry shall
not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a party, be compellable to produce the
register or any other document in his custody, the contents of which can be proved by
the production of a certified copy issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to prove
the matters therein recorded unless by order of the court made for special cause.

71. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, require
that goods of any class specified in the notification which are made or produced beyond
the limits of India and imported into India, or, which are made or produced within the
limits of India, shall, from such date as may be appointed by the notification not being
less than three months from its issue, have applied to them’an indication of the country
or place in which they were made or produced, or of the name and address of the
manufacturer of the person for whom the goods were manufactured.

(2) The notification may specify the manner in which such indication shall be applied,
that is to say, whether to goods themselves or in any other manner, and the times or
occasions on which the presence of the indication shall be necessary, that is to say,
whether on importation only, or also at the time of sale, whether by wholesale or retail or
both.

(3) No notification under this section shall be issued, unless application is made for
its issue by persons or associations substantially representing the interests of dealers in,
or manufacturers, producers, or users of, the goods concerned, or unless the Central
Government is otherwise convinced that it is necessary in the public interest to issue the
notification, with or without such inquiry, as the Central Government may consider

necessary.


10 of 1897

23

(4) The provisions of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply to the
issue of a notification under this section as they apply to the making of a rule or bye-law
the making of which is subject to the condition of previous publication.

(5) A notification under this section shall not apply to goods made or produced
beyond the limits of India and imported into India, if in respect of those goods, the
Commissioner of Customs is satisfied at the time of importation that they are intended
for exportation whether after transshipment in or transit through India or otherwise.

72. If in any legal proceedings for rectification of the register before the Appellate
Board a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor or, as the case
may be, authorised user of the geographical indication on the issue as to the validity of
the registration of the geographical indication of the authorised user, the Appellate Board
may grant a certificate to that effect, and if such a certificate is granted, then, in any
subsequent legal proceeding in which the said validity comes into question the said
proprietor or the authorised user, as the case may be, on obtaining a final order or
judgment in his favour affirming validity of the registration of the geographical indication
or the authorised user, as the case may be, shall unless the said final order or judgment
for sufficient reason directs otherwise, be entitled to his full cost charges and expenses
as between legal practitioner and client.

73. (1) Where a person, by means of circulars, advertisements or otherwise,
threatens a person with an action or proceeding for infringement of a geographical
indication which is registered, or alleged by the first-mentioned person to be registered,
or with some other like proceeding, a person aggrieved may, whether the person making
the threats is or is not the registered proprietor or the authorised user of the geographical
indication, bring a suit against the first-mentioned person and may obain a declaration to
the effect that the threats are unjustifiable, and an injunction against the continunance of
the threats and may recover such damages (if any) as he has sustained, unless the first-
mentioned person satisfies the court that the geographical indication is registered and
that the acts in respect of which the proceedings were threatened, constitute, or, if done,
would constitute, an infringement of the geographical indication.

(2) The last preceding sub-section does not apply if the registered proprietor of the
geographical indication or an authorised user thereof with due diligence commences and
prosecutes an action against the person threatened for infringement of the geographical
indication.

(3) Nothing in this section shall render a legal practitioner or a registered
geographical indications agent liable to an action under this section in respect of an act
done by him in his professional capacity on behalf of a client.

(4 A suit under sub-section (/) shall not be instituted in any court inferior to a
district court.

74. An address for service stated in an application or notice of oppusition shall, for
the purposes of the application or notice of opposition be deemed to be the address of the
applicant or opponent, as the case may be, and all documents in relation to the application
or notice of opposition may be served by leaving them at or sending them by post to the
address for service of the applicant or opponent, as the case may be.

75. In any proceeding relating to a geographical indication, the tribunal shall admit
evidence of the usages of the trade concerned and of any relevant geographical indication
legitimately used by other persons.

76. Where, by or under this Act, any act, other than the making of an affidavit, is
required to be done before the Registrar by any person, the act may, subject to the rules
made in this behalf, be done instcad of by that person himself, by a person duly authorised
in the prescribed manner, who is.

(a) a legal practitioner, or

Certificate ot
validity

Groundless
threats of legal
proceedings.

Address for
service.

Trade usages,
etc., to be
taken into con-
sideration.
Agents,


Documents

24
(b) a person registered in the prescribed manner as a geographical indications
agent, or
(©) a person in the sole and regular employment of the principal.
77. There shall be kept under the directions and supervision of the Registrar,—
(a) an index of registered geographical indications,

(0) an index of geographical indications in respect of which applications
for registration are pending.

(c) an index of the names of the proprietors of registered geographical
indications, ard

(d) an index of the names of authorised users.
78. (1) The following documents, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed,

open to public be open to public inspection at the Geographical Indications Registry, namely:—

mspection

Reports of
Registrar to be
placed before
Parliament.

Fees and
surcharge.

Savings in
respect of
certain matters
in Chapter
शा,

(a) the register and any document upon which any entry in the register 18
based;

(b) every notice of opposition to the registration of a geographical indica-
tion, application for rectification before the Registrar, counter-statement
thereto, and any affidavit or document filed by the parties in any proceedings
before the Registrar;

(०) the indexes mentioned in section 77; and

(d) such other documents as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, specify:

Provided that where such register is maintained wholly or partly on com-
puter, the inspection of such register under this section shall be made by in-
specting the computer print out of the relevant entry in the register so main-
tained on computer.

(2) Any person may, on an application to the Registrar and on payment of such
fee as may be prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register or any
document referred to in sub-section (1).

79. The Central Government shall cause to be placed before both Houses of Parlia-
ment once a year a report respecting the execution by or under this Act.

80. (1) There shall be paid in respect of applications and registrations and other
matters under this Act such fees and surcharge as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.

(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Registrar, the
Registrar shall not do that act until the fee has been paid.

(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the Geographical
Indications Registry, the document shall be deemed not to have been filed at the registry
until the fee has been paid.

81. Nothing in Chapter VIII shall—

(a) exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding which might, but
for anything in that Chapter, be brought against him, or

(0) be construed so as to render liable to any prosecution or punishment any
servant of a master resident in India who in good faith acts i. obedience to the
instructions of such master, and, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor,
has given full information as to his master and as to the instructions which he has
received from his master.


16 to 1908.

25

82. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908, no document
declaring or purporting to declare any title of a person to a geographical indication other
than a registered geographical indication shall be registered under that Act.

83, The provisions of this Act shall be binding on the Government.

84. (1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or arrangement with
any country or a country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries
or Inter-Governmental organisations outside India which affords to citizens of India
similar privileges as granted to its own citizens, the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare such country or group of countries or union
of countries or Inter-Governmental organisations to be ७ convention country of convention
countries for the purposes of this Act. हु

(2) Nothing contained in this Act or the Trade Marks Act, 1999 shall prevent a
continued and similar use of geographical indication relating to a country or a country
which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or any Inter-Governmental
organisations, as the case may be, notified under sub-section (/) identifying wines or
spirits in connection with goods by any citizen or domiciliary of such country who has
used that geographical indication in continuous manner with regard to such goods or any
goods relating to such goods, as the case may be, in any part of the territory of that
country either—

(a) for at least ten years preceding the 15th day of April, 1994; or
(b) in good faith preceding the date referred to in clause (a).

85. Where any country or a country which is a member of a group of countries or
union of countries or any Inter-Governmental organisation specified by the Central
Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette does not accord to
citizens of India the same rights in respect of the registration and protection of geographical
indications as it accords to its own nationals, no nationals of such country or a country
which is a member of a group of countries or union or countries or Inter-Governmental
organisation, as the case may be, shall be entitled—

(a) to apply for the registration of, or be registered as the proprietor of
geographcial indication;

(6) to apply for registration or be registered as an authorised user of a
geographcial indication.

86. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:

Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of tive
years from the commencement of this Act.

(2 Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.

87. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and
subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of
this Act.

Declarations
as to title of
geographical
indication not
registrable
under the
Registration
Act, 1908.
Government to
be bound.

Special provi-
sions relating
to applications
for registration
from citizens of
convention
countries,

Provision as to
reciprocity.

Powers of
Central
Government
to remove dif-
ficulties.

Power to make
rules.


26

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the matters to be included in the Register of Geographical Indications
under sub-section (1), and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of
such register in computer floppies or diskettes under sub-section (2) of section 6;

(5) the manner of incorporation of particulars relating to registration of
geographical indications in Part A under sub-section (2) and the manner of
incorporation of patticulars relating to the registration of the authorised users
under sub-section (3) of section 7;

(c) the classification of goods and the manner of publication of the alpha-
betical index of classification of goods and the definite territory or locality or
region for the purpose of registration of geographical indications under sub-
section (1) of section 8;

(d) the form in which and the manner in which an application for registra-
tion of a geographical indication may be made and the fees which may accom-
pany the application under sub-section (/) and the particulars to be made in the
statement of producers of goods who proposes to be initially registered with the
registration under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 11;

(e) the manner of publication of advertisement of accepted application, for
registration of geographical indications, etc., under sub-section (7), and the
manner of notifying the corrections or amendments made in the application
under sub-section (2) of section 13;

(0 the manner in which and the fee which may accompany an application
and the manner of giving notice under sub-section (1) and the manner of sending
counter statement under sub-section (2) and the manner of submission of evi-
dence and the time therefor under sub-section (4) of section 14;

(g) the form of certificate of registration under sub-section (2) and the
manner of giving notice to the applicant under sub-section (3) of section 16;

(h) the manner of applying for registration as an authorised user under
sub-section (1) and the manner of submitting statements and documents along
with such application and the fee which may accompany such application under
sub-section (2) of section 17;

(i) the manner of making applciation, the time within which such applica-
tion is to be made and the fee payable with each application, under sub-section
(3) and the time within which the Registrar shall send notice and the manner of
such notice under sub-section (4) and the form in which and the fee which may
accompany an application for renewal to be made under sub-section (5) of
section 18;

(0) the manner of making applications under sub-sections (1) and (2), the
manner of giving notice under sub-section (4) and the manner of service of
notice of rectification under sub- section (5) of section 27;

(10 the manner of making an application for correction, etc., under section 28;

(0) the manner of making an application under sub-section (1), the manner
of advertising an application under sub-section (1), the time and manner of no-
tice by which an application may be opposed under sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 29;

(m) the manner of advertisement under sub-section (2) of section 30;

(n) the form of making an appeal, the manner of verfication and the fee
payable under sub-section (3) of section 31;


27

(0) the form in which an application for rectification shall be made, under
sub-section (1) of section 34;

(p) the manner of making an application for review under clause (c) of
section 60;

(q) the time withm which an application 1s to be made 10 the Registrar for
exercising his. discretionary power under section 61;

(7 the manner of making an application and the fee payable thefor under
sub-section (1) of section 64;

(s) the manner of authorising any person to act and the manner of registra-
tion of a geographical indications agent under section 76;

(9 the fee and surcharge payable for applications and registrations and other
matters under sub-section (1) of section 80;

(u) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is session for
a total period of thirity days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions; and if, before the expiry of the session immediatly following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica-
tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present there is no specific law governing geographical indications of goods in the
country which could adequately protect the interests of producers of such goods Exclusion
of unauthorized persons from misusing geographical indications would serve to protect
consumers from deception, add to the economic prosperity of the producers of such goods
and also promote goods bearing Indian geographical indications in the export market
a geographical indication is protected in the country of its origin, there is no
under the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) for
other countries to extend reciprocal protection. India would, on the other hand, be required
to extend protection to goods imported from other countries which provide for such protection.

"In view of the above circumstances, it is considered necessary to have a comprehensive
legislation for registration and tor providing adequate protection for geographical indications.
Hence the Bill. ©

2. The Bill has the following salient features: —

(a) definitions of several important terms like "geographical indication", "goods",
"producers", "package", “registered proprietor", "authorized user",
etc.;

(b) provision for the establishment of a Geographical Indications Registry;

(c) provisions for the maintenance of a Register of Geographical Indications
in two Parts—Part A and Part B and use of computers, etc., for maintenance of such
registers. While Part A will contain all registered geographical indications, Part B
will contain particulars of registered authorized users;

(d) registration of geographical indications of goods in specified classes;
(०) prohibition of registration of certain geographical indications;

(f) provisions for framing of rules by Central Government for filing of application,
its contents and matters relating to substantive examination of geographical indication
applications;

(g) compulsory advertisement of all accepted geographical indication applications
and for inviting objections;

(h) registration of authorized users of registered geographical indications and
providing infringement action either by a registered proprietor or an authorized
user;

(i) provisions for the renewal, rectification and restoration of geographical
indications and authorized user;

(0) provisions for higher level of protection for notified goods;

(0 prohibition of assignment, etc., of a geographical indication as it is a public
Property;
() prohibition of registration of geographical indication as a trade mark;

(m) appeal against Registrar's decisions would lie to the Intellectual Property
Appellate Board established under the, Trade Marks legislation;

(n) provision relating to offences and penalties;

28


29

(0) provision detailing the effects of registration and the rights conferred by
registration;

(p) provisions for reciprocity, powers of the Registrar, maintenance of index,
protection of homonymous geographical indications, etc.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes on clauses explain the vari-
ous provisions of the Bill.

MURASOLI MARAN.
New 098;
The 25th November, 1999.


Notes on clauses

Clause 1.—This clause gives the short title of the Bill, the area of its operation and
the date of commencement of the Act and its various provisions. As adequate steps have
to be taken for administering the provisions of the proposed legislation, provision has
been made to bring different provisions of the Act on different dates.

Clause 2.—This clause contains defintions and interpretation. The difintions
“Appellate Board”, “authorized users”, “deceptively similar”, “geographical indication”,
“name”, “goods”, “indication”, “package”, “producers”, “register”, “registered proprietor”,
“Registrar” and “Tribunal”, etc., have been provided. The concept of a statutory protection
for geograpnhical indications being new in India it is necessary to define the same and
other associated expressions including “authorized users”, “registered proprietors”, and
“producers”. Only an authorized user of a registered geographical indication can use that
geographical indication on the goods. However, infringement action can be initiated both
by the registered proprietor and the authorized user.

Clause 3.—This clause provides for the appointment of a Registrar of Geographical
Indications and other subordinate officers. The Controller General of Patents, Designs and
Trade Marks as may be appointed under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the proposed new
trade marks legislation (which will be enacted as the Trade Marks Act, 1999) shall be the
Registrar of Geographical Indications. who will be assisted by necessary additional officers
and staff in the work relating to administration of the proposed Legislation.

Clause 4.—This clause seeks to empower the Registrar to withdraw any matter
pending before an officer by a written order and deal with such matter himself or transfer the
same ‘to another officer for reasons to be recorded therein. This provision is similar to section
4 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 which is proposed to be retained under the
Trade Marks Act, 1999. The purpose of this clause is to ensure better management of the
work in the Geographical Indications Registry and in the administration of the Act.

Clause 5.—This clause deals with the establishment of the Geographical Indications
Registry and branch offices. It corresponds to similar provisions under the Trade Marks
Act, 1999. The clause also provides for a seal of the Geographical Indications Registry.

Clause 6.—This clause provides for a record to be called the Register of Geographical
Indications which would be maintained at the Head Office and all branch offices wherein
specified material particulars would be entered. The clause also provides for maintenance
of the register on the computer or in any other electronic form. It further provides that the
Register shall be kept under the control and management of the Registrar subject to the
superintendence and directions of the Central Government. A copy of register and such
other notified documents mentioned in clause 77 shall be maintained at each of the Branch
Officer Provision has also been made to enable maintenance of register and other records in
computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form subject to such safeguards as
may be prescribed in the rules.

Clause 7.—This clause provides for the division of the Register of Geographical Indications
into two parts, namely, Part A and Part 8. In Part A of the register relevant particulars of Registered
Geographical Indications would be entered and in Part B the details of authorized users would be
maintained in the manner as may be prescribed in the rules.

Clause 8,—Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 provides that a geographical indication may
be registered in respect of any or all the goods comprised in a prescribed class of goods
and in respect of a definite territory of a country or a region or locality, as the case may be
sub-clause (2) provides that the classification shall, as far as possible, conform to the
international classification of goods. Sub-clause (5) provides that where any question arises
regarding classification of goods or the determination of the definite area it shall be
determined by the Registrar whose decision in the matter shall be final.

Clause 9.— This clause prohibits the registration of certain geographical indications.
Sub-clause (a) prohibits, in general terms, the registration of a geographical indication the

30


31

use of which is likely to deceive or cause confusion. This clause safeguards the free operation
of normal trade channels from interference so far as it seeks to protect registered geographical
indications and is incorporated for the benefit of other traders as also the public at large.
Confusion regarding geographical indication. may be visual or phonetio in nature, i.e.
contextual confusion or as to trade origin. The pruchasers should not be deceived or induced
to believe that the goods sold under the geographical indication emanates from the same
trade source, Sub-clause (b) seeks to prohibit the registration of geographical indications
which are contrary to any law for the time being in force. Where producers apply for
registration of geographical indication which are used in contravention of the provisions of
any existing statute, the application shall be refused. Sub-clause (c) seeks to prohibit
registration of geographical indications that consist or contain scandalous or obsecene matter.
Sub-caluse (d) prohibits registration of geographical indications, which are likely to hurt the
religious feeling of any class or section of citizens of India. Sub-caluse (e) prohibits registration
of geographical indication that would otherwise be disentitled to protection in a court. Sub-
clause (f) prohibits registration of a geographical indication that have become generic,
indications that have ceased to be protected in the country of origin or have fallen into
disuse in that country. Sub-clause (g) prohibits registration of geographical indications which
falsely represent to persons that the goods originate in a locality although literally true as to
the territory, region or locality of its origin.

Explanation 1 to clause 9 explains what is meant by generic names or indications
and Explantion 2 details the factors to be taken into account in determining whether the
name has become generic or not.

Clause 10,— This clause provides for the registration of homonymous geographical
indications. This refers to similar geographical indications. The Registrar in that case
would have to consider the practical question to differentiate the two homonymous
indications and avoid confusion in the market.

Clause 11.—This clause stipulates eligibilty regarding filing of applications for
registration of geographical indication. Generally the apex bodies dealing with particular
goods like the Coffee Board, Tea Board, Spices Board, etc. which look after the interests
of the producers of such goods as also the trade concerned would initiate the original
application. Therefore, provision is made for any association of persons or of producers or
any organization or authority representing the interest of the producers of the goods to file
an application for registration of a geographical indication. Sub-clause (2) provides the
requirements of making such an application. Sub-clause (3) provides for the filing of a
single application for different of goods. This will reduce paper work and expedite
processing of applications, Sub-clause (4) provides that an application for the registration
of a geographical indication shall be filed at the appropriate office of Geographical
Indications Registry. Sub-clause (5) empowers the Registrar to refuse or accept the
application either absolutely or subject to such amendment or modifications, conditions
or limitations as may be required. Sub-caluse (6) provides that where an application is
refused or accepted with conditions, the Registrar shall record in writing the reasons thereof
and the material used by him to arrive at his decision.

Clause 12.—This clause provides for withdrawl of acceptance of an application for
registration of a geographical indication, if it has been accepted in error or other
circumstances after giving an opportunity to the applicant to be heard in the matter.

Clause 13.-—This clause provides that where an application has been accepted, the
Registrar shall cause the same to be advertised in such manner as may be laid down in the
rules detailing material particulars of the application. The Registrar has been vested with
the power to re-advertise an application when an error is noticed after advertisement
under sub-clause (2).


32

Clause 14.—This clause provides that any person may, within three months from
the date of advertisement or re-advertisement of an application for registration or within
such further period not exceeding one month in the aggregate, file a notice of opposition
in writing to the Registrar. The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice so received on
the applicant and if within two months from the receipt by the applicant does not file a
counter statement of the grounds on which he relies in support of the application, the
application shall be deemed to have been abandoned. If the applicant sends a counter
statement, the Registrar shall serve a copy of it on the person giving notice of opposition.
Thereafter, the Registrar would dispose of the matter providing an opportunity of hearing
to the parties and considering the materials on record and the evidences.

Clause 15.—This clause empowers the Registrar to carry out correction of any error
and amendments in an application whether before or after acceptance, if any errors are
found in the appliation.

Clause 16.—This clause provides that when an application has been accepted
unopposed after advertisement or has been opposed but decided in favour of the applicant,
the Registrar shall, unless the Central Government directs otherwise, register the
geogrpahical indication and the authorized user, if any, mentioned in the application.
When a geographical indication is registered, the date of filing of the application shall be the
date of registration. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Registrar shall issue to each of the
applicants and the authorized user a certificate in prescribed form with the seal of the
Geographical Indications Registry. Sub-caluse (3) provides that where the registration of a
geographical indication is not completed within twelve months from the date of the application
by reasons of the applicant's defaults, the Registrar may after giving notice in the prescribed
manner treat the application as abandoned unless it is completed within the time specified in
the notice. Sub-clause (4) empowers the Registrar to amend the register or the certificate of
registration to carry out corrections of a clerical error or an obvious mistake.

Clause 17.—This clause provides that any person claiming to be the producers of the
goods in respect of which a geographical indication has been registered under clause 16,
may apply to the Registrar for registering him as an authorized user of such geographical
indication, The procedure relating to registering an authorized user of a registered
geographical indication would be similar to the procedure for the registration of a
geographical indication. The manner of making the application, statement and documents
which shall accompany the application and the fee payable shall be presribed by rules.

Clause 18.—This clause provides for the registration of a geographical indication
and the validity of registration of an authorized user for a period of ten years. Both the
registrations may be renewed from time to time. However, if the renewal is not effected
within the prescribed or extended time, the geographical indication or the authorized user,
as the case may be, is liable to be removed from the records. Provision is also made under
this clause for the restoration of registration under certain circumstances.

Clause 19.—This clause provides for the consequences of removal of a registered
geographical indication for the failure to pay the prescribed renewal fee.

Clause 20.—This clause provides that no person shall be entitled to institute any
proceeding to prevent or recover damages for the infringement of an unregistered
geographical indication. This clause only forbids the institution of proceedings for
injunctions or for damages. Sub-clause (2) provides that nothing in the proposed legislation

* shall be deemed to affect the right of action against any person for passing off goods as the
goods of another person. This is a common law action for deception which is expressly
saved by the Bill.

Clause 21.—This clause provides for the rights conferred by registration of a
geographical indication. Once registered, a geographical indication shall, if valid, give
both to the registered proprietor and all authorized users whose names have been entered
in Part A and in Part B of the register, the right to obtain relief in respect of infringement
of the geographical indication in the manner provided by this Bill. However, authorized


33

users alone shall have the exclusive right to the use of the geographical indication in
relation to the goods in respect of which the geographical indication is registered. However,
this right is sybject to the conditions and limitations to which the registration is subject.
Further sub-clause (3) provides that two or more authorised users of a registered
geographical indication shall have co- equal rights.

Clause 22.—This clause deals with infringement of registered geographical
indications. A registered geographical indication is infringed by a person who, not being
the registered proprietor or an authorized user, uses such an indication on the goods or
suggests that such goods originate in some other geographical area other than the true
place of origin of.the goods which misleads the public. Sub-clause (b) provides that a
geographical indication is also infringed by any use that constitutes an act of unfair
competition which term is elaborated in Explanatians 1 and 2. Sub-clause (iii) to
Explanation 2, for instance, states that a geographical indication the use of which in the
course of trade is liable to mislead the public as to the nature, manufacturing process, the
characteristics, suitability or quantities of the goods would also constitute an infringement.
Sub-clause (c) states that a registered geographical indication is infringed by a person
who, not being the registered proprietor or an authorized user, uses another geographical
indication to the goods which although literally true as to the territory, region or locality
in which the goods originate, falsely represent to the public that the goods originate in the
region, territory or locality in respect of which such registered geographical indication
relates. Sub-clause (2) of-this clause provides that the Central Government may by
notification in the Official Gazette provide for a higher level of protection for certain
goods or classes of goods which are notified. Under Article 23.1 of the Agreement on
Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), India is obligated to prevent the use
of a geographical, indication that identifies wines or spirits not originated in the place
indicated by the geographical indication, even where the true place of origin of the goods
is indicated or where the geographical indication is used in translation or accompanied by
expression such as “kind”,“type”, “style” “imitation” or the like. Sub-clause (3) seeks to
extend this concept to not merely wines but also to goods of national interest on a case to
«case basis. Sub-clause (4) provides that once a geographical indication is lawfully acquired
further dealing in such goods shall not constitute an infringement unless the goods are
impaired after they have been put in the market.

Clause 23.—Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a geographical indication once
registered shall prima facie be evidence of the validity of the registration and the certificate
of registration shall be admissible in all courts and before the Appellate Board without
further proof or production of the original. Sub-slause (2) provides that nothing in the said
clause shall be deemed to affect the right of action in respect of an unregistered geographical
indication. .

Clause 24.— As a geographical indication is a public property, orfe registered, this
clause prohibits any assignment licensing, mortgaging, etc., of such geographical
indication. However, on the death 0 an authorized user his sticcessor in title can be brought
‘on record.

Clause 25.—This clause prohibits the registration of a geographical indication as a
trade mark or invalidates any geographical indication registered as a trade mark as it
would lead to expropriation of a public property by an individual leading to confusion in
the market.

Clause 26.—This clause protects a trade mark which contains or consists of a
geographical indication which has been applied for or registered in good faith under the
trade marks law or where such trade marks have been used in good faith before the
commencement of the proposed legislation or before the date of filing of an application
for registration of a geographical indication. Sub-clause (2) states that this Act shall not


34

apply to geographical indication with respect to goods or class or classes of goods which
have become the common name of such goods in India on or before 1st January, 1995. Sub
clause (3) protects the right of any person to use his name or the name of his predecessor in
business except where such name is liable to cause confusion or mislead the public. Sub-
clause (4) provides that no action in connection with the use of registration of a trade mark
shall be taken after five years from the date from which such use or registration which
infringes any geographical indication registered under this Act has become known to the
registered proprietor or the authorized user.

Clause 27.—This clause empowers the Registrar or the Appellate Board to cancel or
vary the registration of a geographical indication or of an authorized user for the contravention
or failure to observe the conditions entered on the Register. Sub-clause (2) enables any
person aggrieved by the absence or omission of any entry in the register without sufficient
cause or any entry wrongly remaining on the register by any error or defect, to apply to the
Appellate Board or the Register to pass appropriate orders. Sub-clause (4) empowers both
the Registrar and the Appellate Board tosuo moto, after giving notice to the parties concerned
and hearing them, pass appropriate orders cancelling, varying or rectifying the register.

Clause 28.—This clause empowers the Registrar to carry out any correction on the
register and make such consequential amendments or- alteration in the certificate of
registration.

Clause 29.—This clause provides that the registered proprietor of a geographical
indication may apply to the Registrar for alteration of the registered geographical indication
not substantially affecting the identity thereof.For example, if “Darjeeling Tea” is registered
as geographical indication in English, a subsequent request may be made to depict the said
registered indication in Devanagri (Hindi) script according to the procedure prescribed under
this clause. पु

Clause 30.—This clause prohibits the Registrar normally from making any amendment
of the register by adding any goods or classes of goods in respect of which a
geographical indication is registered except as is provided in the proviso to sub-clause (1) of
that clause and after complying with the procedure prescribed by rules under sub-
clause (2).

Clause 31.—This clause provides for an appeal by any person aggrieved by an order
or decision of the Registrar of geographical indications to the Appellate Board.

Clause 32.—This clause bars the jurisdiction of any court or authority to exercise any
jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the matters referred 10 in sub-clause (1) of
clause 31.

Clause 33.--This clause provides that certain provisions relating to the Appellate
Board mentioned in the proposed Trade Marks Act, 1999 as enumerated therein shall apply
to the Appellate Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act.

Clause 34.—This clause deals with the procedure for processing an application for
rectification, etc., before the Appellate Board.

Clause 35.—This clause provides that the Registrar shall have a right to appear and be
heard before the Applellate Board where the relief sought includes alteration and rectification
of the register or in which any question relating to the practice of the Geographical Indications
Registry is involved. Paragraph (b) of sub-clause (1) provides for the apprearance of the
Registrar before the Appellate Board in certain circumstances. Sub-clause (2) empowers the
Registrar to submit a statement in writing to the Appellate Board, in lieu of appearance, in
matters relating to an issue or the grounds of any decision given by him or the practice of the,
Registry or of other matter relevant to the same and within his knowledge and such statement
shall be evidence in the proceeding.


35

Clause 36.—This clause deals with costs of the Registrar in proceedings before the
Appellate Board. The cost of the Registrar shall be at the discretion of the Appellate Board.
However, the Registrar shall not be ordered to pay the cost of any parties.

Clause 37.—This clause elaborates the meaning of applying a geographical indication
to the goods. This would include the applying of a geographical indication to the goods
themselves or to any package in or with which the goods are sold or exposed for sale or a
person who has in his possession for sale, trade or manufacture of such goods or uses a
geographical indication which is reasonably likely to lead to a connection between the
goods with that geographical indication and would include the use of a geographical
indication in any sign, advertisement, invoice, price list or other business paper.

Clause 38.—This clause lays down as to what amounts to falsifying or falsely applying
a geographical indication. In particular, sub-clause (3) mentions that any geographical
indication falsified under sub- clause (1) or sub-clause (2) shall be referred to as a false
geographical indication. Sub-clause (4) provides that in any prosecution for falsifying
geographical indication or falsely applying a geographical indication to goods, the burden
of proving the assent of the proprietor shall lie on the accused.

Clause 39.—This clause lays down the penalty for falsifying or falsely applying
geographical indication to goods. It provides for imprisonment of not less than six months
but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty
thousand rupees but which may extend up to two lakh rupees. However, the court may for
adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgement award a punishment lesser
than the minimum punishment.

Clause 40.—This clause lays down similar penalities as mentioned in clause 39 for
selling goods to which a false geographical indication has been applied.

Clause 41.—-This clause provides for enhanced penalty for second or subsequent
conviction. The term of imprisonment in such cases shall not be less than one year but it
may extend up to three years and fine of not less than one lakh rupees which may extend
up to two lakh rupees. Here also discretion is vested with the courts to impose a lesser
punishment than the minimum punishment after recording in the judgment adequate and
special reasons for awarding such lesser punishment. Further, no cognizance would be
taken of any conviction made before the commencement of this Act.

Clause 42.—This clause makes falsely representing a geographical indication as
registered as an offence and lays down its penalty, The punishment for the offence is
imprisonment of three years or with fine or with both,

Clause 43.—Under this clause, the use of any words which would reasonably lead
to the belief that a person’s place of business is officially connected with the Geographical
Indications Regostry is made as a punishable offence with imprisonment which may
extend to two years or with fine or with both.

Clause 44.—This clause contains provisions for similar penalties as mention in
clause 43 for falsification of entries in the Register of Geographical Indications.-

Clause 45.—Tkis clause specifically provides that in case where an alleged offence
relates to a registered geographical indication and the act, or omission is permitted under
the proposed legislation or where the alleged offence relates to a registered geographical
indication and the act or omission is permitted under any other law for the time being in
force, the provisions of clauses 39. 40 and 41 shall not be applicable. It is in the nature of
defence available to an accused.

Clause 46.—This clause empowers the court to direct the forfeiture to Government
of all the goods and things by means of or in relation to which certain offences mentioned
therein have been committed. The court may either order for the forfeited goods to be
destroyed or otherwise disposed of. Where an appeal against conviction lies, the appeal
will lie against the forfeiture.


36

Clause 47.—This clause provides for exemption of certain persons employed in the
ordinary course of business who are accused of an offence under section 39, from liability
if they can prove their innocence in the circumstances mentioned in that section and
would be acquitted accordingly.

Clause 48.—This clause provides for the procedure where invalidity of registration
is pleaded by the accused and makes provision for stay of proceedings in certain
circumstances. If the court is satisfied with the defence of invalidity of the registration, it
may adjourn the proceedings for three months to enable an application for rectification of
the register to be filed before the Appellate Board. If the accused proves that he has made
such application, further proceedings shall stand stayed till the disposal of the application
for rectification. On the other hand, if within the period allowed by the court, the accused
fails to apply for rectification before the Appellate Board, the court will proceed with the
case as if the registration is valid. Sub-clause (2) provides that where an application for
rectification is pending before the institution of the criminal proceedings, the court shall
stay the proceedings in the prosecution pending the outcome of the rectification application
and determines the charge in conformity thercof to the extend that the complaint relies on
the registration of his geographical indication.

Clause 49.—This clause contains for offences by companies. It seeks to provide
that where a person committing the offence is a company, the company as well as every
person responsible in the company for the conduct of its business will be liable. Where a
person accused proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge, he will not
be liable. However, where it is proved that an offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance or is attributable to the neglect of any Director, Manager, Secretary or any
other officer of the company, he shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence.

Clause 50.—This clause provides that no court shall take cognizance of an offence
under clause 42 or clause 43 or clause 44 except on a complaint in writing made by the
Registrar or any officer authorized by him. However, under clause 42(1)(b) a court shall
take cognizance of an offence on the basis of certificate issued by the Registrar to the
effect that a registered geographical indication has been represented as registered in respect
of any goods, for which it has not, in fact, been registered. Sub-clause (2) provides that no
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class
shall try an offence under this Act. Sub-clause (3) provides that an offence under clause 39
or clause 40 or clause 41 shall be cognizable. Sub-clause (4) provide that a police officer
not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police or equivalent, maypif he is satisfied
that any offence referred to in sub-clause (3) has been committed or is likely to be
committed, search and scize without warrant the goods, die, block, machine, parts, plates’
or other instruments or things involved in the commission of offence, and wherever found,
shall be produced before the Magistrate at the earliest. However, a Police officer before
making any such search or seizure shall obtain the opinion of the Registrar on the facts
involved in the offence relating to the geographical indication and shall abide by such
opinion. Sub-clause (5) enables a person having an interest in any article seized to file an
application to the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magistrate, as
the case may be, for restoration of such article seized under sub-clause (4).

Clause 51.—This clause empowers the court to order payment of reasonable costs
by the accused to the complainant or by the complainant to the accused, having regard to
all the circumstances of the case and conduct of the parties. Further, the costs so awarded
could be recovered as if they were a fine.

Clause 52.—This clause seeks to lay down a period of limitation for commencement
of prosecutior for an offence under the Act. It provides that no prosecution for an offence
under this Act shall be commenced after the expirty of three years following the commission
of the offence or two years after the discovery thereof by the prosecutor, whichever happens
first.


37

Clause 53.—This clause provides that any officer of the Government who is duty
bound to enforce the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Bill shall not be compelled in any
court to disclose the source of information of the commission of any offence under this
Act.

Clause 54.—This clause provides that any person in India abetting the commission of
any offence which, if committed in India should be an offence, shall be tried for such abetment
and shall be punished. ~

Clause 55.—This clause seeks to protect anything done in good faith or intended to be
done by any person under this Act.

Clause 56.—-This clause states that every person appointed under this Act shall be
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

Clause 57.—This clause deals with the circumstances in which stay of infringement
proceedings can be ordered. It also provides that a stay of a suit for infringement of a
geographical indication shall not preclude the court from making an interlocutory order
during the period of stay.

Clause 58.—-This clause provides that in certain cases, specified therein the application
for rectification of register should be made the Appellate Board.

Clause 59—This clause provides that where a geographical has been applied to the
goods on sale or in contract for sale of goods, there is an implied warranty that the
geographical indication is a genuine geographical indication and not falsely applied.

Clause 60.—This clause seeks to empower the Registrar with the powers of a civil
court, including award of reasonable costs, subject to the rules to be made in this behalf.
It is specificically provided that the Registrar shall have the power to review his own
decision.

Clause 61.—This clause provides that where the Registrar exercises any discretionary
power vested in him adverse to an applicant, such person should be given an opportunity
of being heard.

Clause 62.—This clause lays down the method of giving evidence before the
Registrar. It says that evidence before the Registrar should be normally in the form of
affidavit only and in addition to or in lieu thereof, he may take oral evidence.

Clause 63.—This clause provides that in case of death of a party to a proceeding
during the course of the proceeding, the Registrar on proof to his satsfaction may allow
substitution of successor of the party or may allow the proceeding to continue with the
surviving parties.

Clause 64.—This clause empowers the Registrar to extend the time for doing of any
act (not for the time being expressly provided in this Bill) subject to conditions.

Clause 65.—This clause provides for the absandonment of an application by
reason of default of the applicant. If the Registrar is of the opinion that the applicant has
defaulted in prosecution of his ‘application, he may by notice require the applicant to
remedy the defect within a specified time after giving him an opportunity of being heard.
He may treat the application as abandoned unless the default is remedied within the time
specified by him.

Clause 66.—This clause provides that a suit for the infringement of a geographical
indication shall be instituted only before a district court. It is proposed that the term
“district court having jurisdiction” would include a District Court within the local limits
of whose jurisdiction, the person or one of the persons instituting the suit or proceeding
actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.


38

Clause 67.—This clause provides for relief in a suit for infringement or of passing off.
Sub-clause (2) provides that an injunction order may include an ex parte injunction or any
interlocutory order including discovery of document, preserving of infringing goods,
restraining the defendant from disposing of or dealing with his assets adversely affecting
the plaintiffs ability to recover damages or other pecuniary remedies which may be finally
awarded by court. Sub-clause (3) lays down the circumstances in which the court shall not
grant relief by way of damages.(other than nominal damages) or an account of profits.

Clause 68.—This clause provides that in every proceeding under Chapter VI or under
section 31 authorised user of a geographical indication has to be impleaded.

Clause 69.—This clause provides that a certified copy of any entry in the register or
any document mentioned in sub-clause (1) of clause 77 and sealed with the seal of
Geographical Indications Registry shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and in all
proceedings without further proof or production of the original. Sub-clause (2) provides that
a certificate issued by the Registrar as to any entry, matter or thing, he is authorized to do
shall be prima facie evidence of the entry having been made and of the contents thereof.

Clause 70.—This clause provides that the Registrar and other officers shall not be
compelled to produce the register or any other document in his custody in any legal
proceedings, the content of which can be proved by the production of a certified copy issued
under this Act, or to appear as a witness to prove the matters therein recorded, unless ordered
by the court for special reasons.

Clause 711.—This clause empowers the Central Government by notification to require
goods of any class specified in the notification which are made or produced outside India
and imported into India to apply an indication of the country or place in which such goods
are made or produced with the name and address of the manufacturer. However, no such
notification shall be issued unless a substantial segment of interested dealers, manufacturers
or producers make an application to the Central Government to that effect and the
Government is convinced that it is necessary in public interest to issue such a notification.
However, such a notification would not apply to goods if the Commissioner of Customs is
satisfied that they are intended for re-export or transhipment in or transit through India.

Clause 72.—This clause empowers the Appellate Board to grant a certificate of
validity of a registered geographical indication or the authorized user in any legal
proceedings relating to rectification of the register,-and if, in any subsequent legal
proceedings as to its validity comes up the said registered proprietor or the authorized
user, as the case may be, will be entitled to recover the full cost charges and expenses as
between a legal practitioner and his client.

Clause 73.—This clause seeks to protect the persons against groundless threats of
infringement by giving them an opportunity to bring a suit against the person making such
threats and obtain a declaration that the threats are unjustifiable and an injunction against
the continuance of the threats and recovery of damages.

Clause 74,—This clause deals with address for se.vice for the purpose of this
legislation. An address for service stated in an application or notice of opposition shall be
deemed to be the address of the applicant or opponent, as the case may be:

Clause 75.—This clauses states that in any proceeding relating to geographical
indications before the tribunal, the Registrar or the Appellate Board shall admit evidences
of the usages of the trade concerned any relevant geographical indication legitimately used
by other persons.

Clause716.—This clause provides for the persons: who can appear before the Registrar
and includes persons registered as Geographical Indications Agent under the Act.


39

Clause 77.—This clause provides for the maintenance of various types of indexes by
the Registrar under this Act.

Clause 78.—This clause provides details of documents which are open to public
inspection. The Bill provides for the maintenance of the register on a computer or in any
other electronic form and an inspection of a computer print of the relevant entry to be deemed
to be inspection of the concerned document.

Clause 79.—This clause provides that the Central Government shall place before
both the Houses of Parliament once a year a report regarding the execution by or under the
Registrar of this Act.

Clause 80.—This clause provides for prescribing fees and surcharges payable for
various acts under this Act.

Clause 81.—This clause provides for savings in respect of certain matters relating
to Chapter VIII.

Clause 82.—This clause provides that no document declaring or purporting to declare
any title of a person to a geographical indication other than a registered geographical
indication shall be registered under the Registration Act, 1908.

Clause 83.—This clause provides that the provisions of this Act shall be binding on
the Government. .

Clause 84.—This clause provides for the declaration of any country, or group of
countries or union of countries or inter-Government organisations to be a convention
country by notification by the Central Government for the fulfillment of a treaty, convention
of arrangement and includes provisions relating to applications for registration from citizens
of convention countries.

Clause 85.—This Clause contains provisions as to reciprocity. If any country or
group of countries or union of countries or inter-Governmental organisations does not
accord to citizens of India the same rights as to registration and protection of a geographical
indication to its own nationals, no national of that country or country which is a member
or group of countries or union of countries or inter- governmental organisation, as the
case may be, is entitled to apply for the registration of a geographical indication.

Clause 86.—This clause provides that the Central Government be empowered to
remove any difficulties which may arise in giving effect to the provislons of this Act, by
order published in the Official Gazette, if however, it is not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act and such order shall not be’ issued after five years from the commencement of
this Act. Every such order made under this clause shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before each House of Parliament.

Clause 87.—This clause empowers the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication to make rules to
carry out the provisions of this Bill, when enacted. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various
matters in respect of which rules may be made. Sub-clause (3) seeks to provide that every
rule made under the proposed Act shall be laid as soon as after it is made before each
House of Parliament.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

In this Bill, provision has been made for providing registration and better protection
of geographical indications of goods in India ‘The term geographical indication, “refers to
any indication which defines the goods as originating in the territory of a country or a
tegion or a locality in that territory, and where a given quality, reputation or other
characteristics of the goods are essentially attributable to their geographical origin”. It is
expected that in the first year of the administration of the proposed Legislation, about 1200
applications will be filed for the registration of geographical indications. A Geographical
Indications Registry would be entrusted with the responsibility of administering the
Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Bill, 1999, Suitable
manpower and infrastructure support to handle work relating to filing of applications,
registration and search examination requests would be required. This will include creation
of the posts of a Senior Joint Registrar, a Joint Registrar/Deputy Registrar, Assistant Registrar,
Senior Examiner, Stenographer Grade ‘D’, Lower Division Clerk, Data Entry Operator and
Daftry/Peon to start with. Subseqently, depending upon the workload the same manpower
structure would be extended to branches. For this, an estimated expenditure of Rs. 74 lakhs
per annum towards salary and allowances and Rs. 50 lakhs for miscellaneous expenses
(stationery, maintenance, training, office expenses, purchase of books, etc.,) as recurring
expenditure and Rs. 125 lakhs as non-recurring expenditure towards infrastructure and other
facilities such as furniture, telecommunications, software development, PCs, xerox machines,
etc., is anticipated.

2. The Bill also provides for establishment of an Appellate Board for expeditious
disposal of appeals against the decisions of the Registrar and for development of sound
precedents and practices in this specialized branch of law. The Intellectual Property Appellate
Board proposed to be set up for disposal of appeals on the decisions of the Registrar of
Trade Marks will also handle appeals in regard to Geographical Indications cases.

3. Implementation of the provisions in clauses 3, 5, 6, 13, 77 and 78 of the Bill will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.

4. The Bill provides fcr payment of fees in respect of application and registration and
other matters under the Act.

40


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Registrar to classify goods in
accordance with the international classification of goods for the purpose of registration of
geographical indications.

2. Clause 87 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry
out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates
the matter with respect to which the rules may be made under this clause. These matters
relate, inter alia, to the matters to be included in the Register of Geographical Indications
and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of such register in computer floppies
or diskettes or in any other electronic form; the form and manner in which an application
for registration of a geographical indication may be made; the manner in which the
application for geographical indication shall be examined; the manner of publication of
advertisement of accepted applications for registration of geographical indications; the
manner in which the fee may accompany such an application; the manner of giving notice
of opposition; the manner of sending counter statement and the manner of submission of
evidence and the time thereof; the form of certificate of registration; the manner of applying
for registration as an authorized user; the manner of making an application for renewal;
the manner of making an application for rectification; the manner of making an application
for correction of the Register; the manner of making an alteration of registered geographical
indications; the form and manner of making appeals to the Appellate Board; the form in
which any application or an application for rectification shall be made before the Appellate
Board; the manner of making an application for review; the time within which an application
is to be made to the Registrar under the exercise of discretionary powers; the manner of
making application for extension of time; the manner of authorizing any person to act and
the manner of registration of geographical indications and the fee and surcharge payable
for applications and registrations. The power to make rules is, however, subject to the
condition of the rules being made after previous publication. Every rule made by the
Central Government under Clause 87 is required to be laid before Parliament.

3. The aforesaid matters relate to procedure and administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character,

41


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for registration and better protection of geographical indications relating to
goods.

(Shri Murasoli Maran, Minister of Commerce and Industry)

MGIP(PLU;MRANO—2207RS—1-12-1999.