THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following new article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“21B. Every citizen shall have the right to—
(a) safe drinking water;
(b) pollution-free environment that is not harmful to one’s health or
well-being; and
Bill No. XLI  of  2022
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON 
26TH JULY, 2024
Right to safe
drinking
water,
pollution-free
and protected
environment.

2
(c) protected environment, for the benefit of present and future generations,
so as to—
(i) prevent pollution and ecological degradation;
(ii) promote conservation; and
(iii) secure ecologically sustainable development and use of natural
resources while promoting justifiable economic and social development.”
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Justice Krishana Iyer has characterised article 21 as “the procedural Magna Carta
protective of life and liberty”. In Maneka Gandhi case vs. Union of India (1978) 1 SCC 248,
Justice Iyer stated that the spirit of man is at the root of article 21. Freedom of right to life in
its truest sense cannot be achieved without a safe healthy and clean environment. There is
a need to put this as an enforceable right against the State. United Nations Human Rights
Council, in 2021, unanimously voted to recognise, a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment as a Universal Human Right. A healthy environment is necessary for the holistic
development of humans, any violation of the same is a violation of the guarantee to life.
Environmental degradation endangers the present as well as the future generations. Thus,
there is a primary need for conservation, especially in an era of development and modernisation.
Socio-economic justice is the foundation stone of the Constitution of India. Providing a
healthy environment is also one of the elements of a welfare State. The public cannot be
assured without the State working on the improvement of public health including the
protection and improvement of the environment. This Bill seeks to promote the cause of
environmental justice and ensure the State’s obligation to protect the environment and its
resources. Expansion of article 21 should be with an objective to make life worthwhile, rather
than mere animalistic existence. The term ‘life’ is of wide amplitude and must be expanded
comprehensively to cover a variety of guarantees which go to constitute the life of a citizen.
Any deprivation of the right to life may extend to distress all the other faculties of civil and
political rights enshrined in the Constitution of India.
Hence, this Bill.
IRANNA  KADADI
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 21B to the Constitution, with a view to
making the right to safe drinking water pollution free environment, conservation of ecology
and equitable sustainable development as a fundamental right of the citizens. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India and it is
difficult to estimate the expenditure at this juncture as the same will depend upon the measures
taken by the Central Government in this regard.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Iranna Kadadi, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—168—31.07.2024