1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( i) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
1. (ii) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 31A of the Constitution in clause (1) after the second proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided also that no agricultural land shall be acquired by the State except for
public utilities such as highways, roads, bridges, dams, airports, railway lines and
stations and any acquisition of agricultural land for the purposes other than referred
herein and in particular for promoting private entrepreneur or private corporate venture
shall be void abinitio."
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of article 31A.
Bill No. XLI  of  2014
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH FEBRUARY, 2015

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Of late, the agricultural land belonging to poor farmers in various parts of the country
is being acquired by the State Governments by paying poor compensation for promoting
Special Economic Zones (SEZs) be private entrepreneurs or promoting private sector
corporate enterprises setting up power plants, manufacturing of cars, engineering goods,
etc. This has agitated the poor farmers and in some parts they have revolted and have become
violent in protest against the acquisition of their land, which is the only source of their
livelihood. In order to curb them, the State Governments have resorted to arrest, lathi charge
and even firing, killing many innocent farmers. No doubt, the State can acquire land for
public utilities like highways, roads, bridges, dams, airports, railway lines and stations but
acquiring land for private entrepreneurs is not the responsibility of the State. The private
entrepreneurs can well effort the land price and they can purchase the land directly from its
owners at agreed price. But no land should forcibly be acquired for private ventures by the
State.
Hence, this Bill.
NARENDRA KUMAR KASHYAP
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Article 31A: Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law providing for—
(a) The acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein or the
extinguishment or modification of any such rights, or
(b) The taking over of the management of any property by the State for a limited
period either in the public interest or in order to secure the proper management of the
property, or
(c) The amalgamation of two or more corporations either in the public interest
or in order to secure the proper management of any of the corporations, or
(d) The extinguishment or modification of any rights of managing agents,
secretaries and treasurers, managing directors, directors or managers of corporations,
or of any voting rights of shareholders thereof, or
(e) The extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by virtue of any
agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning, any mineral
or mineral oil, or the premature termination or cancellation of any such agreement,
lease or licence,
shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or
abridges any of the rights conferred by article 14 or article 19:
Provided that where such law is a law made by the Legislature of a State, the provisions
of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved for the consideration
of the President has received his assent:
Provided further that where any law makes any provision for the acquisition by the
State of any estate and where any land comprised therein is held by a person under his
personal cultivation, it shall not be lawful for the State to acquire any portion of such land as
is within the ceiling limit applicable to him under any law for the time being in force or any
building or structure standing thereon or appurtenant thereto, unless the law relating to the
acquisition of such land, building or structure, provides for payment of compensation at a
rate which shall not be less than the market value thereof.
** ** ** ** **
3

GMGIPMRND—4853RS(S-3)—27.02.2015.
RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap, M.P.)