AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
THE PREVENTION OF UNSOLICITED TELEPHONIC CALLS AND
PROTECTION OF PRIVACY BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to prohibit unsolicited telephone calls by business promoters or individuals to persons
not desirous of receiving such calls and for the protection of individual privacy of
citizens and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Unsolicited Telephonic Calls and
Protection of Privacy Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(b) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Information Technology
Act, 2000 shall have the same meaning as is respectively assigned to them in those
Acts.
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No. XLI of 2006
Definitions.
45 of 1860.
13 of 1885.
21 of 2000.
5
10

3. (1) The making of unsolicited telephone calls for promoting business interests or for
other purposes or for harassment is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an
offence under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
licenced Mobile operators shall not pass on the information of their subscribers to any tele-
marketing service provider, Banks, Insurance Companies or such other service provider so
as to protect the subscribers from unsolicited telephone calls.
5. (1) Every person shall have the right of privacy and to lead and enjoy his personal
life without unwarranted infringement thereof and no person shall be deprived of this right
except according to procedure established by law for the time being in force.
(2) whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
6. No person shall use a cellular phone having built in camera if it does not produce a
sound of minimum sixty-five decibels and flashes a light when used to take a picture of any
object or with such other conditions as may be prescribed.
7. Subject to public order, morality and health no person with a view to blackmail the
person or for making commercial gains therefrom, shall photograph:-
(a) any part or whole of a human body whether nude or semi-nude or otherwise
without the consent of the person concerned; and
(b) any part or whole of a human body at a public place without the consent of
the person concerned.
8. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of,—
(i) Section 3 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than two years but may extend to four years and also with fine which may extend
to two lakh rupees;
(ii) Section 5 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than five years but may extend to seven years and also with fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees;
(iii) Section 6 shall be punishable with imprisonment for six months or with fine
which may extend to two lakh rupees or with both.
(2) Any mobile company which contravenes the provisions of section 4 shall be
punished with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and suspension of its licence for a
period of one year.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 every
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
10. The provision of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Prohibition of
making
unsolicited
telephone
calls.
Mobile
operators not
to pass on
information
of subscribers.
Right to
privacy.
2
Restriction on
use of
cellphone
camera.
Restrictions
of
photography
violating
privacy.
Penalty.
Offences to
be cognizable.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Of late, telephone subscribers, both mobile phones and land line phones, are facing
the problem of unsolicited calls from Tele marketing Service Providers, Private Banks,
Insurance Companies and money lenders offering loans, credit cards, motor vehicles and so
on and so forth offering various incentives, schemes and gift offers in order to promote their
business interest. Many a time these calls are very irritating particularly when someone is
very busy in meetings, official work, family functions etc. and when received at odd hours.
To get rid of this menace a petition has also been filed in the Supreme Court of India. As
regards land line phones MTNL or BSNL publish telephone directories but in case of cellular
mobile phones the information can be given generally by the mobile phone operating
companies. The menace of unsolicited phone calls needs to be stopped by providing deterrent
punishment through legislation.
Similarly, the much publicised Multi Media Messaging Service (MMS) episode of a
Public School in Delhi, the case of a Pune based landlord intruding on the privacy of his
female tenants, videography of unsuspecting newly wed couples on honeymoon in a five
star hotel, have put question marks on citizens’ right to privacy. With increasing
commercialization of sex, people use phone cameras to secretly capture private images of
girls and women and then blackmail them and embarrass them. These cameras are used to
take up close photographs of private parts of unwary girls and women in gyms, beauty
parlours, swimming pools, hotel room, bathrooms, etc. or even in busy public places. This
shows how the unscrupulous elements are misusing and exploiting the new advancement in
technology. Hence it becomes the uppermost duty of the State to protect its citizens and the
society as well. In order to control this virtual lawlessness a new law has become necessary
to provide deterrent action against the  defaulters.
Hence this Bill.
B. J. PANDA

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit unsolicited telephone calls by business promoters or individuals to persons not
desirous of receiving such calls and for the protection of individual privacy of citizens
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri B. J. Panda, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—512RS(S5)—12.05.2006.