4
Bill No. XLIII-F of  2010
ORIGINAL
THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
(RESERV ATION IN ADMISSION) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJY A SABHA  ON 27TH APRIL , 2012
LOK SABHA ON 16TH MAY, 2012)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 19 JUNE, 2012
ACT NO. 31 OF 2012

1
THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  (RESERV ATION
IN ADMISSION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
Admission) Amendment Act, 2012.
2.  In  section 2 of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (i), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ia) “specified north-eastern region” means the area comprising of the States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and the
tribal areas of Assam referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution;
(ib) “State seats”, in relation to a Central Educational Institution, means such
seats, if any, out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty as
Short title.
Amendment
of section 2.5 of 2007.
Bill No. XLIII-F of 2010

2
are earmarked to be filled from amongst the eligible students of the State in which such
institution is situated;’.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the State seats, if any, in a Central Educational Institution situated
in the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall be governed
by such reservation policy for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Other Backward Classes, as may be specified, by notification in the Official Gazette, by
the Government of the State where such institution is situated:
Provided further that if there are no State seats in a Central Educational Institution
and the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes exceed the percentage specified
under clause (i) or the seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes exceed the percentage
specified under clause ( ii) or the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes taken together exceed the sum of  percentages specified under
clauses (i) and (ii), but such seats are—
(a) less than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date
immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, the total
percentage of  the seats required to be reserved for the Other Backward Classes
under clause ( iii) shall be restricted to the extent such sum of percentages
specified under clauses ( i) and ( ii) falls short of fifty per cent. of the annual
permitted strength;
(b) more than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date
immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, in that case no
seat shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes under clause ( iii) but
the extent of the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes shall not be reduced in respect of Central Educational Institutions in the
specified north-eastern region.”.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, clause (a) shall be omitted.
5. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "number of such seats available", the words
"number of such seats available or actually filled, whichever be less," shall be
substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "three years", the words "six years" shall be
substituted.
6. In section 6 of the principal Act, for the figures "2007", the figures "2008" shall be
substituted.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006.
————
(As passed by the Houses of  Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—1619LS(S3)—22-06-2012.