AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XLII of 2024 
THE SURROGACY LAWS (AMENDMENT) B ILL, 2024 
 A 
 BILL 
 to amend the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021  and the A ssisted 
Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Act, 2021.
 
     BE it  enacted by  Parliament  in  the Seventy- fifth Year of  the  Republic 
of     India  as follows:– 
5 1. 
CHAPTER I 
       PRELIMINARY 
(1) This Ac
t may be called the Surrogacy Laws (Amendment)Act, 2024.
(2)This
 Act shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
CHAPTER II 
 AMENDMENTS TO THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) ACT, 2021 
Amendment of 
section 2. 2. In the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 2,—
(a) claus
e (h) shall be omitted;
(b) for clause (r), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely—
“(r) “intending person(s)” means person(s), who due to
medical or biological reasons cannot undergo pregnancy and
intends to become parent(s) through surrogacy.
Expla
nation— For the purposes of this clause, the
expression “intending person(s)” shall include:—
(i) same se
x couples between the age of twenty-six
years to fifty-five years in the case of males, and
between the age of twenty-three years to fifty years
in the case of females;
(ii) heterosexual married couples, where the male is
between the age of twenty-six years to fifty-five
years and the female is between the age of twenty-
three years to fifty years; and
(iii) sing
le males and single females between the age of
twenty-five years to fifty years.”.
(c) clau
se (s) shall be omitted.
5 
10 
 
15 
20 
47 of 2021. 
Amendment 
of section 4. 
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in clause (ii), sub-clause(a), after the word
“medical”, the words “or biological” shall be inserted. 25 
Amendment 
of section 17. 
4. In section 17of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (f), sub-clause (iv),
after the words “women welfare organizations”, the words “and organizations
working for the welfare of LGBTQIA communities” shall be inserted.
  CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY(REGULATION) 
ACT, 2021 
30 
Amendment 
of section 2. 
5. In  the  Assisted Reproductive Technology (Regulation)  Act, 2021,  in
section 2, –
(a) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely—
“(e)“commissioning person(s)” means infertile person(s), who 
approach an assisted reproductive technology clinic or assisted 
reproductive technology bank for obtaining the services 
authorized of the said clinic or bank; 
35 
42 of 2021. 

3 
5 
10 
15 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the expression 
“commissioning person(s)” shall include:— 
(i) same sex couples between the age of twenty-six
years to fifty-five years in the case of males, and
between the age of twenty-three years to fifty years in
the case of females;
(ii) heteros
exual married couples, where the male is
between the age of twenty-six to fifty-five years and the
female is between the age of twenty-three to fifty years;
and
(iv) single m
ale and single females between the age of
twenty-five to fifty years.”
(b) in clause (
j), for the words “medical condition preventing a couple”,
the words “medical or biological condition preventing person(s)” shall
be inserted.

4 
STATE
MENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
   The S
urrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021 and The Assisted Reproductive 
Technology (Regulation) Act, 2021 are heteronormative, patriarchal and 
exclusionary. They inadvertently perpetuate gender norms and societal 
structures that do not adequately address the diverse range of familial 
arrangements and reproductive choices present in our complex social 
landscape. Under the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021, surrogacy is made 
available only for infertile heterosexual married couples or single women, 
who are either widowed or divorced, completely omitting the LGBTQIA+ 
community and single unmarried women.  It is not in the interest of the 
progressive growth of the society in not acknowledging the reproductive 
autonomy of women, as well as the right s of LGBTQIA + individuals to 
found a family.  Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and 
Article 10 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights recognise the universal right to parenthood.  Additionally, 
recognition of ‘atypical families’ or ‘chosen families’ beyond the 
constraints of marriage, blood or adoption is required in consonance with 
Articles 14, 15, 19 and 21 of the Constitution.  
    The Indian judiciary, conscious of this, regards the right to 
procreate as a fundamental one. The Andhra Pradesh High Court 
recognized the civil rights to rightly include the freedom to reproduce and 
affirmed that "the right to reproductive autonomy" is inclusive under the 
"right to privacy" in B. K. Parthasarthi v. Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
In  Navtej Singh Johar  v. The Union of India, the LGBTQIA+ community 
was assured to be entitled to equal legal rights and to be treated equally in 
society without experiencing any stigma. In Supriyo v. Union of India, the 
Supreme Court held that the  Parliament should fill the v acuum in 
legislation. 
    Therefore, by extending surrogacy rights, the Parliament would be 
taking a progressive step towards inclusivity that mirrors the aspirations of 
the population, fostering a society that respects the autonomy of individuals 
and refl ects the principles of equality and human rights  enshrined in the 
Indian Constitution and other international covenants and documents. 
   Embracing the principles of equality and non- discrimination, this Bill 
strives to reform surrogacy laws, thus breaking down barriers for 
individuals of diverse sexual orientations and gender identities. It 
champions inclusivity and ensures that surrogacy becomes an accessible 
and affirming avenue for all, irrespective of their sexual orientation or 
marital status, to build families with dignity and equality.  
  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE. 

5 
  ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) ACT, 2021 
(47 OF 2021) 
* *         * *          * * *
(h) “couple” means the legally married Indian man and woman above the
age of 21 years and 18 years respectively;
* *          * *           * * *
(r) “intending couple” means a couple who have a medical indication
necessitating gestational surrogacy and who intend to become parents
through surrogacy;
* *         * *          * * *
(s) “intending woman” means an Indian woman who is a widow or
divorcee between the age of 35 to 45 years and who intends to avail the
surrogacy
* *         * *          * * *
4. Regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures. — On and from the
date of commencement of this Act, —
(i) no place including a surrogacy clinic shall be used or cause to be
used by any person for conducting surrogacy or surrogacy
procedures, except for the purposes specified in clause (ii) and after
satisfying all the conditions specified in clause (iii);
(ii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted,
undertaken, performed or availed of, except for the following
purposes, namely:
(a) when an intending couple has a medical indication
necessitating  gestational surrogacy:
     Provided that a couple of Indian origin or an intending woman who 
intends to avail surrogacy, shall obtain a certificate of recommendation 
from the Board on an application made by the said persons in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed.  
* *         * *          * * *

6 
17. Constitution of National Assisted Reproductive Technology and
Surrogacy Board.— (1) The Central Government shall, by notification,
constitute a Board to be known as t he National Assisted Reproductive
Technology and Surrogacy Board to exercise the powers and perform the
functions conferred on the Board under this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
* *          * *           * * *
(f)
ten expert Members to be appointed by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed and two each from amongst—
(i) eminent medical geneticists or embryologists;
(ii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians;
(iii) eminent social scientists;
(iv) representatives of women welfare organisations; and
(v) representatives from civil society working on women's health and
child issues,
possessing such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed; 
* *         * *          * * *

7 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE 
TECHNOLOGY (REGULATION) AC
T, 2021 
(42 OF 2021) 
* *    * *  * * *
(e) “commissioning coup le” means an infertile married couple
who approach 
an assisted reproductive technology clinic
or assisted reproductive technology bank for obtaining the
services authorised of the said clinic or bank;
* *    * *  * * *
(j) “infertility” means the inability to conceive after one
year of unprotected coitus or other proven medical condition
preventing a couple from conception
* *    * *  * * *

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021 and the Assisted 
Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Act, 2021. 
_______ 
(Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)–247–08.12.2025 