AS INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

Bill No. XLII of 2001

THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BLL
further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2001.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
68 of 1986. 5 2. In the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 2, in sub-section (/),— .
(a) in clause (9), after sub-clause (iv), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(v) in case of death of a consumer, his legal heir or representative;”;
(b) in clause (c),—

(i) in sub-clause (i), for the words “any trader”, the words “any trader or
service provider” shall be substituted;

(ii) for sub-clauses (iv) and (v), the following sub-clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—

Short title and
commencement.

Amendment of
section 2.


2

“(iv) a trader or the service provider, as the case may be, has charged
for the goods or for the services mentioned in the complaint, a price in
excess of the price—

(a) fixed by or under any law for the time being in force;

(9) displayed on the goods or any package containing such
goods;

(c) displayed on the price list exhibited by him by or under any
law for the time being in force;

(d) agreed between the parties;

(0) goods which will be hazardous to life and safety when used or
being offered for sale to the public,—

(A) in contravention of any standards relating to safety of
such goods as required to be complied with, by or under any law for
the time being in force;

(B) if the trader could have known with due diligence that the
goods so offered are unsafe to the public;

(vi) services which are hazardous or likely to be hazardous to life
and safety of the public when used, are being offered by the service
provider which such person could have known with due diligence to be
injurious to life and safety;”;

(c) in clause (d),—

(i) in sub-clause (ii), the following words shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—

“but does not include a person who avails of such services for any
commercial purpose”;

(ii) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted,
namely:—

‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “commercial
purpose” does not include use by a person of goods bought and used by
him and services availed by him exclusively for the purposes of earning
his livelihood by means of self-employment;’;

(d) for clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —

“@) “manufacturer” means a person who—

(i) makes or manufactures any goods or part thereof; or

(ii) does not make or manufacture any goods but assembles parts
thereof made or manufactured by others; or

(iti) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any goods made or
manufactured by any other manufacturer’;

(e) for clause (nn), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—

‘(nn) “regulation” means the regulations made by the National Commission
under this Act;’;

(nnn) “restrictive trade practice” means a trade practice which tends to
bring about manipulation of price or its conditions of delivery or to affect flow of
supplies in the market relating to goods or services in such a manner as to
impose on the consumers unjustified costs or restrictions and shall include—

(a) delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader in supply of such
goods or in providing the services which has led or is likely to lead to rise
in the price;

(b) any trade practice which requires a consumer to buy, hire or avail
of any goods or, as the case may be, services as condition precedent to
buying, hiring or availing of other goods or services;’;

5

Q0

25

30

उठा

५०

५५

5o


3

(f) in clause (0), for the words “users and includes the provision of”, the
words “users and includes, but not limited to, the provision of” shall be
substituted;

(g) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

‘(00) “spurious goods and services” mean such goods and services which
are claimed to be genuine but they are actually not so;’;
(A) in clause (r),—

(i) after sub-clause (3), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(3A) withholding from the participants of any scheme offering
gifts, prizes or other items free of charge, on its closure the information
about final results of the scheme.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause, the participants
of a scheme shall be deemed to have been informed of the final results of
the scheme where such results are within a reasonable time, published,
prominently in the same newspapers in which the scheme was originally
advertised;”;

(ii) after sub-clause (5), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely: —

“(6) manufacture of spurious goods or offering such goods for sale
or adopting deceptive practices in the provision of services.”.

3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:——-__ substitution of

new section for
section 3.

“3, The provisions of this Act shall apply to all claims except claims in respect of Application of
which corresponding remedies of judicial nature are available under any special law for the Act
the time being in force.”
4, In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “The Central Amendment of
Government may”, the words “The Central Government shall” shall be substituted. section 4.
5. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— Amendment of
(a) in the opening portion, for the words “The State Government may”, the section 7.
words “The State Government shall” shall be substituted;
3 (9) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(c) such number of other official or non-official members, not exceeding
ten, as may be nominated by the Central Government.”.

6. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:— __Insertion of new
sections 8A and

20

a5

8B.
“8A. (1) The State Government shall establish for every district, by notification, The District
35 acouncil to be known as the District Consumer Protection Council with effectfrom | Consumer
such date as it may specify in such notification. Protection

(2) The District Consumer Protection Council (hereinafter referred to as the
District Council) shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Collector of the district (by whatever nate called), who shall be its
Chairman; and
(6) such number of other official and non-official members representing,
such interests as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(3) The District Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two
meetings shall be held every year.
as (4) The District Council shall meet at such time and place within the district as
the Chairman may think fit and shall obserye such procedure in regard to the transaction
of its business as may be prescribed by the State Government.

५०


4

Objects of the 8B. The objects of every District Council shall be to promote and protect within
District Council. the district the rights of the consumers laid down in clauses (a) to () of section 6.”.
Amendment of 7.1 section 10 of the principal Act,—
section 10.
(a) in sub-section (1), for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—

-“(b) two other members, one of whom shail be a woman, who shall have
the following qualifications, namely:—

(i) be not less than thirty-five years of age,

(ii) possess a bachelor's degree from a recognised university,

(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate
knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems
relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public affairs
or administration:
Provided that a person shall be disqualified for appointment as a member

ifhe—

(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which, in the opinion of the State Government involves moral turpitude; or

(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or

(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the

Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by the Government;
or

(e) has, in the opinion of the State Government, such financial or
other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his
functions as a member; or

(0 has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the
‘State Government;”;

(b) in sub-section (/A), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason
of absence or otherwise, unable to act as Chairman of the Selection Committee,
the State Government may refer the matter to the Chief Justice of the High Court
for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Court to act as Chairman.”;

(c) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2)Every member of the District Forum shall hold office for a term of five
years or up to the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier:

Provided that a member shall*be eligible for re-appointment for another
term of five years or up to the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, subject
to the condition that he fulfills the qualifications and other conditions for
appointment mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (1) and such re-appointment
is also made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee:

Provided further that a member may resign his office in writing under his
hand addressed to the State Government and on such resignation being
accepted, his office shall become vacant and may be filled by appointment of a
person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub-section (J) in
relation to the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the
provisions of sub-section (14) in place of the person who has resigned:

1s

go

5

3०

35

40

as


Us

३०

५०

1 of 1956.

प्र

5

Provided also that a person appointed as the President or as a member,
before the commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2001,
shall continue to hold such office as President or member, as the case may be, till
the completion of his term.”;

(d) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that the appointment of a member on whole-time basis shall
be made by the State Government on the recommendation of the President of
the State Commission taking into consideration such factors as may be
prescribed including the work load of the District Forum.”.

8. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “does not exceed
Tupees five lakhs”, the words “does not exceed rupees twenty lakhs” shall be substituted.

9. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,

12. (1) Acomplaint in relation to any goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold

or delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided may be filed with a
District Forum by—

.(@) the consumer to whom such goods are sold or delivered or agreed to
be sold or delivered or such service provided or agred to be provided;

(6) any recognised consumer association whether the consumer to whom
the goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or service provided
or agreed to be provided is a member of such association or not;

(c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having
the same interest, with the permission of the District Forum, on behalf of, or for
the benefit of, all consumers so interested; or

(d) the Central or the State Government.

(2) Every complaint filed under sub-section (/) shall be accompanied with
such amount of fee and payable in such manner as may be prescribed.

(3) On receipt of a complaint made under sub-section (/), the District
Forum may, by order, allow the complaint to be proceeded with or rejected:

Provided that a complaint shall not be rejected under this sub-section
unless an opportunity of being heard has been given to the complainant:

Provided further that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be
decided within twenty-one days from the date on which the complaint was
received.

(4) Where a complaint is allowed to be proceeded with under sub-section
(3), the District Forum may proceed with the complaint in the manner provided
under this Act:

Provided that where a complaint kas been admitted by the District Forum,
it shall not be transferred to any other court or tribunal or any authority set up by
or under any other law for the time being in force.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "recognised consumer
association” means any voluntary consumer association régistered under the
Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force.’.

10. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),—

(a) in the marginal heading, for the words "Procedure on receipt of complaint.",

the words "Procedure on admission of complaint." shall be substituted;

(9) in sub-section (/),—

(i in the opening portion, for the words "on receipt of a complaint", the
words “on admission of a complaint" shall be substituted;

Amendment of
section 11.

Substitution of
new section for
section 12,

Manner in
which complaint
shall be made.

Amendment of
section 13.


6
(ii) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(a) refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within twenty-one days
from the date of its admission to the opposite party mentioned in the
complaint directing him to give his version of the case within a period of
thirty days or such extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may be»
granted by the District Forum;";

(c) in sub-section (2),—

(i) in the opening portion, for the words "complaint received", the words
“complaint admitted" shall be substituted;

(ii) in clause (6), in sub-clause (ii), for the words "on the basis of evidence", 10
the words "ex parte on the basis of evidence" shall be substituted;

(iii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(c) where the complainant fails to appear on the date of hearing
before the District Forum, the District Forum may either dismiss the
complaint for default or decide it on merits."; 1S

(वी) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: —

“(3A) Every complaint shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and
endeavour shall be made to decide the complaint within a period of three months
from the date of receipt of notice by opposite party where the complaint does
not require analysis or testing of commodities and within five months ifitrequires 2०
analysis or testing of commodities:

Provided that no adjournment shall be ordinarily granted by the District
Forum unless sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment
have been recorded in writing by the Forum:

Provided further that the District Forum shall make such orders as to the 25"
costs occasioned by the adjournment as may be provided in the regulations
made under this Act.

(3B) Where during the pendency of any proceeding before the District
Forum, it appears to it necessary, it may pass such interim order as is just and
proper in the facts and circumstances of the case."; 30
(९) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

"(7) In the event of death of a complainant who is a consumer or of the
opposite party against whom the complaint has been filed, the provisions of
Order XXII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply 5 of 1908.
subject to the modification that every reference therein to the plaintiff and the 35°
defendant shall be construed as reference to a complainant or the opposite
party, as the case may be.”.

Amendment of 11. In section 14 of the principal Act,—
section 14. (a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (d), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: — yo

"Provided that the District Forum shall have the power to grant
punitive damages in such circumstances as it deems fit;";
(ii) in clause (e), for the words "remove the defects", the words "remove
the defects in goods" shall be substituted;
(iii) after clause (A), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— पड़ा
“(ha) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from
offering services which are hazardous in nature;
(hb) to pay such sum as may be determined by it if itis of the opinion
that loss or injury has been suffered by a large number of consumers who
are not identifiable conveniently: 5D


7

Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be
less than five per cent. of the value of such defective goods sold or
service provided, as the case may be, to such consumers:

Provided further that the amount so obtained shall be credited in
favour of such person and utilized in such manner as may be prescribed;

(he) to issue corrective advertisement to neutralize the effect of
misleading advertisement at the cost of the opposite party responsible for
issuing such misleading advertisement;”;

(6) in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—

“Provided that where a member, for any reason, is unable to conduct a
proceeding till it is completed, the President and the other member shall continue
the proceeding from the stage at which it was last heard by the previous member.”.

12. In section 15 of the principal Act, after the first proviso, the following proviso shall

(S be inserted, namely:—

20

aa

30

35

yo

us

“Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount
in terms of an order of the District Forum, shall be entertained by the State Commission
unidss the appellant has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of that
amount or twenty-five thousand rupees, whichever is less:".

13. In section 16 of the principal Act,— *

(a) in sub-section (/), for clause (b) and the proviso thereunder, the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(b) not less than two, and not more than such number of members, as
may be prescribed, and one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have the
following qualifications, namely: —

(i) be not less than thirty-five years of age;

(ii) possess a bachelor's degree from a recognised university; and

(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate
knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems
relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public affairs
or administration:

Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members shall be from
amongst persons having a judicial background.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression "persons
having judicial background" shall mean persons having knowledge and
experience for at least a period of ten years as a presiding officer at the district
level court or any tribunal at equivalent level:

Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment as a
member if he—

(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an
offence which, in the opinion of the State Government, involves moral
turpitude; or

(b)is an undischarged insolvent; or

(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court; or

Amendment of
section 15.

Amendment of
section 16.


8

(4) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the
Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by the Government;
or
(¢) has, in the opinion of the State Government, such financial or
other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by himof 5
his functions as a member; or
(185 such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the
State Government.";
(6) after sub-section (/), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Every appointment under sub-section (1) shall be made by the State so
Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of the
following members, namely:—.
(i President of the State Commission...
(ii) Secretary of the Law Department of कि
(iii) Secretary incharge of the Department dealing 15
with Consumer Affairs in the State . Member:
Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason
of absence or otherwise, unable to act as Chairman of the Selection Committee,
the State Government may refer the matter to the Chief Justice of the High Court
for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Court to act as Chairman. ge
(1B) (i) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the State Commission
may be exercised by Benches thereof.
(ii) A Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more members
as the President may deem fit.
(iti) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points 25°
shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority,
but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the point or points on
which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall either hear the
point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by
one or more or the other members and such point or points shall be decided ३०
according to the opinion of the majority of the members who have heard the
case, including those who first heard it.";
(c) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the appointment of a member on whole-time basis shall be
made by the State Government on the recommendation of the President of the 257
State Commission taking into consideration such factors as may be prescribed
including the work load of the State Commission.”;
(d) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(3) Every member of the State Commission shall hold office foratermof ५०
five years or up to the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier:

Provided that a member shall be eligible for re-appointment for another
term of five years or up to the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier,
subject to the condition that he fulfills the qualifications and other conditions
for appointment mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (/) and such 1९- Ys~
appointment is made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection
Committee:

Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the State
Commission shall also be eligible for re-appointment in the manner provided in
clause (a) of sub-section (३4) of this section: 50

Provided also that a member may resign his office in writing under his
hand addressed to the State Government and on such resignation being accepted,



9

his office shall become vacant and may be filled by appointment of a person
possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub-section (1) in relation to
the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the provisions
of sub-section (/A) in place of the person who has resigned.

s (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), a person
appointed as the President or as a member, before the commencement of the
Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2001, shall continue to hold such
office as President or member, ‘as the case may be, till the completion of his
term.".
to 14. Section 17 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (/) and in sub-
section (/) as so renumbered,—

(a) in clause (a), in sub-clause (४), for the words "exceeds rupees five lakhs but
does not exceed rupees twenty lakhs", the words "exceeds rupees twenty lakhs but
does not exceed rupees one crore" shall be substituted;

is (89) after sub-section (/) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(2) A complaint shall be instituted in a State Commission within the

Aimits of whose jurisdiction —

(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where
ae there are more than one, at the time of the institution of the complaint,
actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or has a branch
office or personally works for gain; or
(09) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at
the time of the institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides,
as or carries on business or has a branch office or personally works for
gain, provided that in such case either the permission of the State
Commission is given or the opposite parties who do not reside or carry
‘on business or have a branch office or personally work for gain, as the
case may be, acquiesce in such institution; or
3० (©) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.”.
15. After section 17 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“17A. On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the State
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, transfer any complaint pending
35 _ before the District Forum to another District Forum within the State if the interest of
justice so requires.

17B. The State Commission shall ordinarily function in the State Capital but may
perform its functions at such other place as the State Government may, in consultation
with the State Commission, notify in the Official Gazette, from time to time.".

५० 16. Section 184 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
17. In section 19 of the principal Act, after the first proviso, the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—

“Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any
amount in terms of an order of the State Commission, shall be entertained by the

फट National Commission unless the appellant has deposited in the prescribed manner

fifty per cent. of the amount or rupees thirty-five thousand, whichever is less:".
18, After section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

namely:—

Amendment of
section 17.

Insertion of new
sections 17A and
17B.

Transfer of
cases.

Circuit Benches.

Omission of
section 18A.

Amendment of
section 19.

Insertion of new
section 19A.


Hearing of
appeal.

Amendment of
section 20.

10

“19A. An appeal filed before the State Commission or the National Commission
shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to finally
dispose of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its admission:

Provided that no adjournment shall be ordinarily granted by the State Commission
or the National Commission, as the case may be, unless sufficient cause is shown and ६"
the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by such
Commission:

Provided further that the State Commission or the National Commission, as the
case may be, shall make such orders as to the costs occasioned by the adjournment as
may be provided in the regulations made under this Act.”. to
19. In section 20 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (/), for clause (b) and the proviso, the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—

‘(b) not less than four, and not more than such number of members, as
may be prescribed, and one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have the |c~
following qualifications, namely:—

(i) be not less than thirty-five years of age;
(ii) possess a bachelor's degree from a recognised university; and
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing and have adequate

knowledge and experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems 20

relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public affairs

or administration: मु

Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members shall be from
amongst the persons having a judicial background.

Explanation —For the purposes of this clause, the expression "persons 25”
having judicial background" shall mean persons having knowledge and
experience for at least a period of ten years as a presiding officer at the district
level court or any tribunal at equivalent level:

Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment if a
he— ०

(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude;

or

(0) is an undischarged insolvent; or

(c)is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; 357
or

(व) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the
Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by the Government;
or

(e) has in the opinion of the Central Government such financial or ५०
other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of

his functions asa member; or =~

(f has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the

Central Government :

Provided also that every appointment under this clause shall be made by the ५६४०
Central Government on the recommendation of a selection committee consisting of the
following, namely:—

(a) a person who is a Judge of the Supreme Court, — Chairman;
to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India
(b) the Secretary in the Government of Legal Affairs —Chairman; s“p

in the Government of India


20

25

11

(०) Secretary of the Department dealing with consumer — Member.';
affairs in the Government of India

(6) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

(1A) (@) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the National Commission
amay be exercised by Benches thereof.

(ii) A Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more members
as the President may deem fit.

(iii) if the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points
shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority,
but if the members are equally divided, they shall state the point or points on
which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall either hear the
point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by
one or more or the other Members and such point or points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the
case, including those who first heard it.”;

(c) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—

“(3) Every member of the National Commission shall hold office for a term
of five years or up to the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier:

Provided that a member shall be eligible for re-appointment for another
term of five years or up to the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, subject
to the condition that he fulfills the qualifications and other conditions for
appointment mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (/) and such re-appointment
is made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee:

Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the National
Commission shall also be eligible for re-appointment in the manner provided in
clause (a) of sub-section (/)

Provided also that a member may resign his office in writing under his
thand addressed to the Central Government and on such resignation being
accepted, his office shall become vacant and may be filled by appointment of a
person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub-section (/) in
relation to the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the
provisions of sub-section (JA) in place of the person who has resigned.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), a person
appointed as a President or as a member before the commencement of the
Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2001 shall continue to hold such office
as President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his

term.”.
20. In section 21 of the principal Act, in clause (a), in sub-clause (i), for the words

५० “rupees twenty lakhs”, the words “rupees one crore” shall be substituted.

21. For section 22 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,

namely:—

us

so

“22. (1) The provisions of sections 12, 13 and 14 and the rules made thereunder
for the disposal of complaints by the District Forum shall, with such modifications as
may be considered necessary by the Commission, be applicable to the disposal of
disputes by the National Commission.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (/), the National
Commission shall have the power to review any order made by it, when there is an error
apparent on the face of record.

22A. Where an order is passed by the National Commission ex parte against the
opposite party or a complainant, as the case may be, the aggrieved party may apply to
the Commission to set aside the said order in the interest of justice.

Amendment of
section 21

Substitution of
new sections for
section 22
Power and
procedure
applicable to the
National
Commission.

Power to set
aside ex parte
orders


Transfer of
cases,

Circuit Benghes.

Vacancy in the
office of the
President.

Amendment of
section 23.

Substitution of
new section for
section 25.
Enforcement of
orders of the
District Forum,
the State
Commission or
the National
Commission.

Amendment of
section 27.

12

228, On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the National
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, in the interest of justice, transfer any
complaint pending before the District Forum of one State to a District Forum of another
State or before one State Commission to another State Commission.

22C. The National Commission shall ordinarily function at New Delhi and perform ¢*
its functions at such other place as the Central Government may, in consultation with
the National Commission, notify in the Official Gazette, from time to time.

22D. When the office of President of a District Forum, State Commission, or of
the National Commission, as the case may be, is vacant or a person occupying such
office is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, to
these shall be performed by the senior-most member of the District Forum, the State
Commission or of the National Commission, as the case may be:

Provided that where a retired Judge of a High Court is a member of the National
Commission, such member or where the number of such members is more than one, the
senior-most person among such members, shall preside over the National Commission 1६7
in the absence of President of that Commission.”.

22. In section 23 of the principal Act, after the first proviso, the following proviso shall

be inserted, namely:—

“Provided further that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount
in terms of an order of the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme 2०
Court unless that person has deposited in the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of that
amount or rupees fifty thousand, whichever is less:”.

23. For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,

namely:—

“25. (1) Where an interim order made under this Act, is not complied with the २६
District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, ‘as the case may
be, may order the property of the person, not complying with such order to be
attached.

(2) No attachment made under sub-section (/) shall remain in force for more than
three months at the end of which, if the non-compliance continues, the property 3०
attached may be sold and out of the proceeds thereof, the District Forum or the State
Commission or the National Commission may award such damages as it thinks fit to
the complainant and shall pay the balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto.

(3) Where any amount is due from any person under an order made by a
District Forum, State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, 35>
the person entitled to the amount may make an application to the District Forum, the
State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, and such District
Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission may issue a certificate for
the said amount to the Collector of the district (by whatever name called) and the
Collector shall proceed to recover the amount in the same manner as arrears of land ५०
revenue.”

24. In section 27 of the principal Act,—

(a) the proviso shall be omitted;

(b) after the proviso so omitted, the existing section 27 shall be renumbered as
sub-section (1) and after sub-section (/) as so renumbered, the following sub-sections ५६०
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973, the District Forum or the State Commission or the National 2 of 1974.

Commission, as the case may be, shall have the power of a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class for the trial of offences under this Act, and on such conferment of 3०
powers, the District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission,
as the case may be, on whom the powers are so conferred, shall be deemed to be


13

a Judicial Magistrate of the first class for the purpose of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
(3) All offences under this Act may be tried summarily by the District
Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may
s be.”.

25. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“284A. (1) All notices required by this Act to be served shall be served in the
manner hereinafter mentioned in sub-section (2).

fo (2) The service of notices may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy
thereof by registered post acknowledgment due addressed to opposite party against
whom complaint is made or to the complainant by speed post or by such courier
service as are approved by the District Forum, the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, or by any other means of transmission of documents
is (incluamg FAX message).
(3) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed
by the opposite party or his agent or by the complainant is received by the District
Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, or
postal article containing the notice is received back by such District Forum, State
20 Commission or the National Commission, with an endorsement purporting to have
been made by a postal employee or by any person authorized by the courier service to
the effect that the opposite party or his agent or complainant had refused to take
delivery of the postal article containing the notice or had refused to accept the notice
by any other means specified in sub- section (2) when tendered or transmitted to him,
as the District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case
may be, shall declare that the notice had been duly served on the opposite party or to
the complainant :

Provided that where the notice was properly addressed, pre-paid and duly sent
by registered post acknowledgment due, a declaration referred to in this sub-section
zo shall be made notwithstanding the fact that the acknowledgment has been lost or
mislaid, or for any other reason, has not been received by the District Forum, the State
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, within thirty days from

the date of issue of notice.

(4) All notices required to be served on an opposite party or to complainant shall
3° be deemed to be sufficiently served, if addressed in the case of the opposite party to
the place where business or profession is carried and in case of complainant, the place
where such person actually and voluntarily resides.".
26. In section 29 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
uo “(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Consumer
Protection (Amendment) Act, 2001, the Central Government may, by order, do anything
not inconsistent with such provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2001.
ug (4) Every order made under sub-section (3) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.”. हु
27. After section 29A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“29B. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, the opposite party before
So a District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may
be, shall not be entitled, to be represented by a legal practitioner except when the
complainant—

Insertion of new
section 288.

Service of
notice, etc.

Amendment of
section 29.

Insertion of new
section 298

Right to legal
representation.


Substitution of
new section for
section 30

Power to make
rules.

Insertion of new
section 300

Power of the
National
Commission to
make regula-
tions

Substitution of
new section for
section 31

Rules and
regulation to be
lard before each
House of
Parhament

14
{@) has engaged allegal practitioner; or
(b) is himself a legal practitioner; or
(c) has no objection to the opposite party engaging a legal practitioner.
28. For section 30 of the principal Act, the fotlowing section shall be substituted,

namely:— s

“30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make niles for carrying out
the provisions contained in clause (a) of sub-section (/) of section 2, clause.(b) of sub-
section (2) of section 4, sub-section (2) of section 5, sub-section (2) of section 12,
clause (vi) of sub-section (4) of section 13, clause (hb) of sub-section (1) of section
14, section 19, clause (0) of sub-section (7) and sub-section (2) of section 20, section
22 and section 23 of this Act.

(2) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions contained in clause (b) of sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) of section 7,
clause (6) of sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) of section 8A, clause (b) of sub-
section (/) and sub-section (3) of section 10, clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 13
clause (hb) of sub-section (7) and sub-section (3) of section 14, section 15 and clause
(b) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of section 16 of this Act.”.

29. After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

०

&

namely:—

“30A. (1) The National Commission may, with the previous approval of the 20
Central Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act
to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose
of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of thie foregoing power,
‘such regulations may make provisions for the cost of adjournment of any proceeding 2 5-
before the District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the
‘case may be, which a party may be ordered to pay.”.

30. For section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“31 (1) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shali be laid, as soon ३७
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation 357
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation.

(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall’be laid as soon ५७
as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The enactment of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 was an important milestone in
the history of the consumer movement in the country. The Act was made to provide for the
better protection and promotion of consumer rights through the establishment of Consumer
Councils and quasi-judicial machinery. Under the Act, consumer disputes redressal agen-
cies have been set up throughout the country with the District Forum at the district level,
State Commission at the State level and National Commission at the National level to provide
simple, inexpensive and speedy justice to the consumers with complaints against defective
goods, deficient services and unfair and restrictive trade practices. The Act was also amended
in the years 1991 and 1993 to make it more effective and purposeful.

2. Although the consumer disputes redressal agencies have to a considerable extent,
served the purpose for which they were created, the disposal of cases has not been fast
enough. Several bottlenecks and shortcomings have also come to light in the implementa-
tion of various provisions of theAct. With a view to achieving quicker disposal of consumer
complaints by the consumer disputes redressal agencies securing effective implementation
of their orders, widening the scop of some of the provisions of the Act to make it more
effective, removing various lacunae in the Act and streamlining the procedures, amend-
ments are proposed in the Act, which, inter alia, include the following, namely: —

@ exclusion of the jurisdiction of the consumer disputes redressal Agencies in re-
spect of claims for which corresponding provisions in the special laws exist for the
protection of interests of consumers;

Gi)

provisions for creation of Benches of the National Commission and State Commis-
sions as well as holding of circuit benches of these Commissions;

(ii) prescribing the period within which complaints are to be admitted, notices are to be
issued to opposite party and the complaints are to be decided. Similar provisions
have been proposed also in respect of appeals;

(iv) no adjournment to be ordinarily allowed and allowed where, a speaking order giv-
ing reasons would be made;

)

enhancing the pecuniary limits of jurisdiction of the consumer disputes redressal
agencies so that the District Forums are unable to deal with complaints involving
value of goods or services and claims compensation up to Rs. 20 lakhs (against Rs.
5 lakhs at present), fixing the pecuniary limits of jurisdiction of State Commissions
from Rs. 20 lakhs upto Rs. 1 crore (as against above Rs. 5 lakhs upto Rs. 20 lakhs at
present) and National Commission above Rs. 1 crore (as against above Rs. 20 lakhs
at present);

(vi) enabling provision for charging of fee in respect of complaints filed before the
consumer disputes redresal agencies;

(vii). provision for depositing, either fifty per cent. of the amount of compensation or fine
or the amounts mentioned below whichever are less, before the admission of ap-
peal, namely:—

(a) Rs. 25,000 in case of appeal to a State Commission from the
District Forum;

(0)... Rs.35,000 in case of an appeal to the National Commission from
a State Commission; and

(c) २४. 50,000 in case of appeal to the Supreme Court from the
National Commission;

15


16

(viii) exclusion of services availed for commercial purposes from the purview of the
consumer disputes redressal agencies;

(ix) permitting the engagement of legal practitioner by an opposite party only if the
complainant is himself a legal practitioner or he engages a legal practitioner or he
has no objection to the opposite party engaging a legal practitioner;

(0 prescribing minimum qualifications as well as disqualifications for members of the
consumer disputes redressal agencies;

(xi) provision for re-appointment of President and Members of the District Forum, State
Commissions and the National Commission, for another term of five years;

(xii) extending the provisions of the Act to service providers indulging in unfair or
restrictive trade practices or offering services which are hazardous;

(xiii) bringing sale of spurious goods or services within the meaning of unfair trade
practices;

(xiv) expressly conferring the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class on the
consumer disputes redressal agencies with a view to trying offences under the Act;

(xv) provision for recovery of amounts ordered to be paid by the consumer disputes
redressal agencies as arrears of land revenue;

(xvi) provision for issue of interim orders by the consumer disputes redressal agencies,
in cases where it is considered necessary by such agencies;
(xvii) provision for substitution of legal heir or representative as a party to the com-
plaint in the event of the death of the complainant or the opposite party.

3. The Consumer Protection Councils at the Central and State levels are important
bodies for the promotion and protection of consumer rights. It is proposed to make the
establishment of these Councils a necessary requirement. It is also proposed to provide for
the establishment of District Consumer Protection Councils for promotion and protection of
consumer rights at the district level.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New DEL; SHANTA KUMAR.
The 20th April, 2001.


17

Notes on clauses

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 so as to define various expressions used in the Act. The scope of some
of the definitions has been broadened and some new definitions have been added.

Sub-clause (a) of clause 2 seeks to include the legal heir or representative of a con-
sumer, in case of death of the consumer within the meaning of “complainant”. Sub-clause (b)
seeks to broaden the definition of “complaint” to include allegations against service provid-
ers of adopting unfair or restrictive trade practices, or charing of excess price or offering
services which are hazardous to life and safety. Sub-clause (c) seeks to exclude from the
definition of “consumer” any person who avails of services for commercial purposes. Com-
mercial undertakings which are already excluded from approaching the redressal agencies in
respect of defective goods will thus be excluded from seeking relief from such agencies in
respect of deficient services as well. The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is intended prima-
rily to serve the interests of individual consumers. Sub-clause (d) of this clause seeks to
amend the definition of “manufacturer” to include any manufacturer who assembles goods
from parts made by others or puts his mark on any goods made or manufactured by any other
manufacturer whether he claims such goods to be manufactured by himself or not. Sub-
clause (e) of this clause seeks to enlarge the definition of “restrictive trade practice” to mean
manipulation of price or delivery or flow of supplies leading to unjustified cost and restric-
tion on the consumers and includes delay beyond the agreed period which has led or is likely
to lead to rise in the price. Sub-clause (h) of this clause also seeks to enlarge the definition of
“unfair trade practice” to include withholding of information about final results of any scheme
offering gifts, prizes, or other items free of charge, and manufacture of spurious goods and
sale of spurious goods or adoption of deceptive practices in the provision of services. Sub-
clause (g) seeks to define “spurious goods and services” as goods and services which are
claimed to be genuine but are actually not so. Sub-clause (e) seeks to define “regulation” as
regulation made by the National Commission. Sub-clause (f) further seeks to bring more.
clarity to the definition of “service” by clarifying that the services mentioned are only
illustrative.

Clause 3 seeks to substitute a new section for section 3 so as to provide that the
provisions of this Act shall not apply where a corresponding remedy of judicial nature is
available to a person under a special law.

Clauses 4 and 5 seek to amend sections 4 and 7 respectively so that establishment of
the Central Consumer Protection Council and the State Consumer Protection Council which
is in the larger interests of consumers becomes a necessary requirement. Clause 4 also seeks
to provide for inclusion of up to ten official and non-official members nominated by the
Central Government in the State Council.

Clause 6 seeks to insert new sections 8A and 8B to provide for the setting up a District
Consumer Protection Council for every district with objects similar to those of the Central
and State Councils. This will provide a forum for promoting and protecting the rights of
consumers at grass root level.

Clause’7 seeks to make amendments in section 10 to provide minimum age of thirty-
five years, minimum qualification of graduation and minimum experience of ten years for
members of the District Forum. It also seeks to provide disqualifications for the office of
member, It seeks to make a new proviso to sub-section (1A) to provide that where the
President of the State Commission is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to act as
Chairman of the Selection Committee, the State Government may refer the matter to the Chief
Justice of the High Court who shall nominate a setting Judge of that High Court to act as a
Chairman to avoid delay in selection. It also seeks to amend sub-section (2) to provide for
reappointment of Presidents and Members td enable utilisation of their experiences for a
longer period. It also seeks to provide that persons already holding office of President or
Member will continue to hold such office till the completion of their term. It further seeks to
amend sub-section (3) to provide that the State Government shall appoint a member on
whole-time basis on the recommendations of the President of the State Commission taking
into consideration the workload and other factors as may be prescribed.


18

Clause 8 seeks to amend section 11 to enhance the jurisdiction of the district forum to
entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services and the compensation claimed
does not exceed rupees twenty lakhs. This will be more convenient for the complainants and
also reduce the number of complaints filed with the State Commission and National Commission.

Clause 9 seeks to substitutes section 12 to provide that every complaint filed with the
District Forum shall be accompanied with such amount of fee as may be prescribed. It also
seeks to provide that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be decided within
twenty-one days from the date on which the complaint is received and that once admitted a
complaint shall not be transferred to any other Court or Tribunal. This will help to quicken
disposal of complaints.

Clause 10 seeks to amend section 13 to require the District Forum to refer a copy of the
admitted complaint within twenty-one days from the date of its admission to the opposite
party to give his version. It also seeks to make explicit the provision for ex-parte order, It
seeks to include a new sub-section (3A) to provide that complaint shall be heard as
expeditiously as possible and endeavour made to decide the complaints within the prescribed
period. Adjournments would ordinarily not be granted, and if granted for reasons to be
recorded in writing by the forum, an order as to the costs occasioned by the adjournment
would also be made by the forum. It further seeks to include a new sub-section (3B) to enable
the District Forum to pass interim orders where required. It also seeks to include a new sub-
section (7) for the substitution of parties in accordance with the provisions of Order XXII of
the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in the event of death of the complainant
or opposite party. These amendments will facilitate quicker disposal of cases, enable
complainants to get immediate relief where required, and streamline procedures.

Clause 11 seeks to amend section 14 to empower the District Forum if it is satisfied
that the allegations contained in the complaint are proved, also to issue orders directing the
opposite party, inter alia, to pay punitive damages, cease manufacture of hazardous goods
and desist from offering services which are hazardous in nature, pay such sum not less than
five per cent. of the value of defective goods sold or services provided where loss or injury
has been suffered by a large number of consumers who are not conveniently identifiable, and
to issue corrective advertisement to neutralise the effect of misleading advertisement. It also
seeks to amend sub-section (2) to do away with the requirement of de novo proceedings if a
member is unable to conduct the proceeding till it is completed and allow the proceeding to
continue from the stage it was last heard by the previous member. This will avoid delay in
disposal of such cases.

Clause 12 seeks to insert a new proviso in section 15 to provide that no appeal by a
person who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order of the District Forum, shall be
entertained by the State Commission unless the appellant deposits fifty per cent. of the
amount or twenty-five thousand rupees, whichever is less.

Clause 13 seeks to make amendments in section 16 to make the same provisions with
regard to qualifications and disqualifications of members, chairmanship of the Selection
Committee, re-appointment of Presidents and Members, resignation of members, completion
of term of existing members and appointment of members on whole-time basis in respect of
the State Commission as in the case of the District Forums. It also seeks to make provision to
enable appointment of more than two members in the State Commission and creation of
benches. This will facilitate quicker disposal of cases in State Commissions having a large
number of cases.

Clause 14 seeks to amend section 17 so as to clarify the jurisdiction of the State
Commission and also to raise its jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of
goods or services and compensation claimed exceed rupees twenty lakhs but does not
exceed rupees one crore. At present the jurisdiction of the State Commission is above
rupees five lakhs and up to rupees twenty lakhs. This will be convenient for the complainants
and will reduce the number of complaints filed before the National Commission.


19

Clause 15 seeks to insert a new section 17A to empowr the State Commission to
transfer a case from one District Forum to another District Forum within the State if required
for the ends of justice. It also seeks to insert another new section 17B to enable the State
Commissions to hold Circuit Benches.

Clause 16 seeks to delete section 184.

Clause 17 seeks to insert a new proviso in section 19 so that no appeal by a
person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order of the State Commission,
shall be entertained by the National Commission unless the appellant has deposited in
the manner as prescribed by the State Governments fifty per cent. of the amount or rupees
thirty-five thousand, whichever is less.

Clause 18 seeks to insert a new section 19A to provide that endeavour shall be
made to dispose of appeals filed before the State Commission or the National Commission
within ninety days from the date of admission. It also further seeks to provide that no
adjournment shall ordinarily be granted unless for sufficient reason for grant of adjournment
has been recorded in writing and costs for such adjournment have also been specified in
order.

Clause 19 seeks to make, amendments in section 20 to make the same provisions in
respect of qualifications and disqualifications for members, reappointment of the Presidents
and Members, resignation of members and completion of term of existing members with
regard to the National Commission as in the case of the State Commission and District
Forum. Clause 16 also seeks to make provision to the appointment of more than four
members and also creation of benches of the National Commission.

Clause 20 seeks to amend section 21 to provide that complaints may be filed
before the National Commission where the value of the goods or services and
compensation, if any, claimed exceeds rupees one crore. This is consequential ot changes
sought in the jurisdiction of the District Forum and State Commissions.

Clause 21 seeks to substitute section 22 so that the provisions of sections 12, 13
and 14 and the rules made thereunder for the disposal of complaints by the District
Forum, shail, with such modifications as may be considered necessary by the Commission,
be applicable to the disposal of disputes by the National Commission. It also seeks to
empower the National Commission to review any order made by it, when there is an
error apparent on the face of record. These provisions will make the powers and procedures
in respect of National Commission more explicit. It also seeks to insert new sections 22A,
22B, 22C and 22D. New section 22A empowers the National Commission to set aside
ex-parte orders against the opposite party or complainant in the interest of justice. New
section 22B empowers the National Commission to transfer any complaint pending before
the District Forum of one State to a District Forum of another State or before one State
Commission to another State Commission in the interest of justice. New section 22C enables
the National Commission to hold Circuit Benches in any part of the country. New section
22D provides for the seniormost member to preside in the absence of the President of the
District Forum, State Commission and National Commission, as the case may be, to ensure
un-interrupted functioning of the Forum or Commission. However, in the case of National
Commission, it provides that where a retired Judge of a High Court is a member or where
number of such members is more than one, the seniormost amongst them shall preside over
the Commission. These provisions will streamline the functioning of the Consumer Redressal
Forums and also reduce the number of appeals to the Supreme Court from orders of the
National Commission.

Clause 22 seeks to insert a new proviso in section 23 so that no appeal by a
person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order of the National
Commission, shall be entertained by the Supreme Court unless the appellant has desposited
in the manner as prescribed by the Central Government fifty per cent. of that amount or
rupees fifty thousand, whichever is less,


20

Clause 23 seeks to substitute section 25 to provide for attachment by the District
Forums, State Commission or National Commission, as the case may be, of the property of
a person not complying with an interim order. It also seeks to provide that on application
from any person entitled to receive any amount from another person under an order
made by a District Forum, State Commission and National Commission which remains due,
the District Forum, State Commission and National Commission, as the case may be, may
issue a certificate to the Collector for recovery of the amount as arrears of land revenue.
These new provisions are expected to overcome the delays and other difficulties faced in
execution of orders of the redressal agencies through civil courts.

Clause 24 seeks to amend section 27 to empower the District Forum, State
Commission and National Commission, as the case may be, with the powers of a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class for the summary trial of offences under the Act notwithstanding
anything contained in the code of Criminal Procedure. This is considered necessary to
clarify that the District Forums or State Commissions or National Commission can themselves
try offences under the Act and impose penalty of imprisonment. It also seeks to delete the
proviso to section 27 which empowers the redressal agencies to impose a sentence of
imprisonment or fine lesser than the minimum prescribed.

Clause 25 seeks to insert a new section 28A so that all notices required by this Act can
be served by using modern communication facilities including speed post, courier services
and FAX messages. This will help to quicken proceedings.

Clause 26 seeks to insert a new sub-section (3) in section 29 to enable the Government

to make orders to remove any difficulty with respect to the amended provisions of the Act
for a period of two years after their coming into force.

Clause 27 seeks to insert a new section 29B to restrict the engagement of a legal
practitioner by the opposite party. The opposite party cannot be represented by a legal
practitioner unless the complainant has engaged a legal practitioner; the complainant is
himself a legal practitioner, the complainant has no objection to the opposite party engaging
a legal practitioner. This is expected to reduce the possibility of protacted proceedings.

Clause 28 seeks to substitute a new section for section 30 to deal with the powers of
the Central Government and the State Governments to make rules.

Clause 29 seeks to insert a new section 30A to empower the National Commission to
make regulations with the previous approval of the Central Government where required for
the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act, and in particular to make provisions
for the cost of adjournment of any proceedings before the District Forum, the State Commission
or the National Commission, as the case may be, which a party may be ordered to pay.

Clause 30 seeks to substitute section 31 in respect of procedures for laying of rules
and regulations made under the Act before each House of Parliament or the State Legislature,
as the case may be.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 8A and 8B in the Act to provide for
the establishment of District Consumer Protection Councils at the district level. The
responsibility for the establishment of District Consumer Protection Council lies with State
Governments and Union territory administrations. It is not possible to indicate the exact
expenditure involved at this stage since the exact amount for establishment of such Councils
in the Union territories would vary depending on the size of the Council and other factors.

2. Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend section 16 of the Act with a view to enable the
State Commissions to appoint more members and for constitution of benches of the State
Commissions. It is not possible to indicate the exact expenditure involved for appointment
of additional members and for creation of benches in the Union territories as this would
depend on the actual number of additional members appointed and additional benches
constituted.

3. Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to amend section 20 of the Act with a view to enable the
National Commission to appoint additional members and for constitution of benches of
the National Commission. It is not possible to indicate the exact expenditure involved for
appointment of additional members and constitution of benches as this would depend on
the actual number of members appointed and additional benches constituted.

21


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 8A and 8B with a view to providing for
the establishment of District Consumer Protection Councils. The procedure for transaction
of business in the said Council shall be such as may be provided in the rules to be made by
the State Government.

2. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 10 of the Act to provide for disqualification
for appointment of members of the District Forums, In addition to disqualifications mentioned
in the proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (1) of that section the State Governments are
being empowered to prescribe such other disqualifications as they may deem fit.

Similar powers are being conferred on State Governments to prescribe disqualifications
for appointment of members of the State Commission.

3. Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide by amending section 12 of the Act that a
complaint filed with the District Forum shall be accompanied with an amount of fee. The
amount of fee and the manner in which such fee shall be paybale will be provided in the
tules to be made by the State Governments.

Similar provisions are being proposed in respect of complaints filed before the State
Commissions wherein the State Governments are being empowered to make rules.

In respect of complaints filed before the National Commission the amount of fee and
the manner in which such fees shall be payable will be provided in the rules to be made by
the Central Government.

4, Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend section 14 of theAct with a view to empowering
the redressal agencies to direct the opposite party to pay such sum as may be determined
by it if loss or injury has been suffered by a large number of consumers who are not
identifiable. The State Governments are being empowered to prescribe by rules the manner
in which such amount shall be credited and utilised where the District Forum or State
Commission has ordered the opposite party to pay any sum under this provision.

Similar provisions are to be made by the Central Government where an order is passed
by the National Commission in similar cases.

5. Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to provide by amending section 15 of the Act that an
appeal against an order of the District Forum shall be entertained by the State Commission
only when the appellant has deposited the amount prescribed. The State Governments are
being empowered under this provision to provide in the rules the manner in which such
money shall be deposited.

Similar provisions are being made for empowering the Central Government to make
rules where an appeal is to be preferred against an order of the State Commission to the
National Commission and from the order of the National Commission to the Supreme Court.

6. Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 30A in the Act with a view to
providing that the National Commission may make regulations with the previous approval
of the Central Government to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or
expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.

7. The aforesaid matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made are
matters of detail and it is not practicable to provide for all the matters in the aforesaid Bill
itself. Delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of normal character.

22


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986

(68 0F 1986)
* * * * *
2. (7) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.
* * * * *

(0) "complainant" means—

* * * * *

(c) “complaint” means any allegation in writing made by a complainant that—
(४) an unfair trade practice or a restrictive trade practice has been adopted

by any trader;
*

* * *

(iv) a trader has charged for the goods mentioned in the complaint a price
in excess of the price fixed by or under any law for the time being in force or
displayed on the goods or any package containing such goods;

(v) goods which will be hazardous to life and safety when used, are being
offered for sale to the public in contravention of the provisions of any law for the
time being in force requiring traders to display information in regard to the
contents, manner and effect of use of such goods;

with a view to obtaining any relief provided by or under this Act;

(व) “consumer” means any person who,—
* * * * *

(ii) hires or avails of any services for a consideration which has been paid
or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred
payment and includes any beneficiary of such services other than the person
who fures or avails of the services for consideration paid or promised, or partly
paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment, when such
services are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned persons.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-clause (i), "commercial purpose" does

not include use by a consumer of goods bought and used by him exclusively for the
purpose of earning his livelihood, by means of self-employment;
* * * * *

(j) "manufacturer" means a person who—

(i) makes or manufactures any goods or parts thereof; or

(ii) does not make or manufacture any goods but assembles parts thereof
made or manufactured by others and claims the end-product to be goods
manufactured by himself; or

(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any goods made or
manufactured by any other manufacturer and claims such goods to be goods,
made or manufactured by himself.

Explanation.—Where a manufacturer despatches any goods or part thereof to
any branch office maintained by him, such branch office shall not be deemed to be
the manufacturer even though the parts so despatched to it are assembled at such
branch office and are sold or distributed from such branch office;

B


Act not in
derogation of
any other law.

The Central
Consumer
Protection
Council.

The State
Consumer
Protection
Councils.

Composition of
the District
Forum.

a
* * * * *

(nn) “restrictive trade practice" means any trade practice which requires a
consumer to buy, hire or avail of any goods or, as the case may be, services as a
condition precedent for buying, hiring or availing of other goods or services;

(0) "service" means service of any description which is made available to potential
users and includes the provision of facilities in connection with banking, financing,
insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, board or lodging
or both, housing construction, entertainment, amusement or the purveying of news or
other information, but does not include the rendering of any service free of charge or
under a contract of personal service;

* * * * *

(0) “unfair trade practice" means a trade practice which, for the purpose of
promoting the sale, use or supply of any goods or for the provision of any service,
adopts any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice including any of the following
practices, namely:—

* * * * *

3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being force. *

CHAPTER
(ConsuMER Protection Councis

4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish with effect from such
date as it may specify in such notification, a Council to be known as the Central Consumer
Protection Council (hereinafter referred to as the Central Council).

(2) The Central Council shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Minister in charge of the Department of Food and Civil Supplies in the
Central Government, who shall be its Chairman, and
(6) such number of other official or non-official members representing such
interests as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
7. (1) The State Government may, by notification, establish with effect from such date
as it may specify in such notification, a Council to be known as the Consumer Protection
Council for (herenafter referred to as the State Council).

(2) The State Council shall consist of the following members, namely:—

(a) the Minister incharge of consumer affairs in the State Government who shall be its
Chairman;

(b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such interests
as may be prescribed by the State Government.

* *

* * *

10. (/) Each District Forum shall consist of —
* * * * *

(b) two other members, who shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing,
and have adequate knowledge or experience of, or have shown capacity in dealing
with, problems relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public
affairs or administration, one of whom shall be a woman;

* * * * *

(JA) Every appointment under sub-section (1) shall be made by the State Government
on the recommendation of a selection committee consisting of the following, namely:—

* * * * *

(2) Every member of the District Forum shall hold office for a term of five years or up to
the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier, and shall not be eligible for re-appointment:


I of 1956,

25

Provided that a member may resign his office in writing under his hand addressed to
the State Government and on such resignation being accepted, his office shall become
vacant and may be filled by the appointment of a person possessing any of the qualifications
mentioned in sub-section (/) in relation to the category of the member who has resigned.

(3) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of the members of the District Forum shall be such as may be prescribed
by the State Government.

11. (/) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the District Forum shall have
jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services and the
compensation, if any, claimed does not exceed rupees five lakhs.

* * * * *

12. A complaint in relation to any goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided may be filed with a District Forum
by—

(a) the consumer to whom such goods are sold or delivered or agreed to be sold
or delivered or such service provided or agreed to be provided;

(b) any recognised consumer association whether the consumer to whom the
goods sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or service provided or agreed
to be provided is a member of such association or not;

(c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the
same interest, with the permission of the District Forum, on behalf of, or for the benefit
of, all consumers so interested; or

(d) the Central or the State Government.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “recognised consumer association"
means any voluntary consumer, association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 or
any other law for the time being in force.

13. (/) The District Forum shall, on receipt of a complaint, if it relates to any goods,—

(a) refer a copy of the complaint to the opposite party mentioned in the complaint
directing him to give his version of the case within a period of thirty days or such
extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may be granted by the District Forum;
* * * * *

(2) The District Forum shall, if the complaint received by it under section 12 relates to
goods in respect of which the procedure specified in sub-section (/) cannot be followed, or
if the complaint relates to any services,—

* * * * *

(0७) where the opposite party, on receipt of a copy of the complaint, referred to
him under clause (a) denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or
omits or fails to take any action to represent his case within the time given by the
District Forum, the District Forum shall proceed to settle the consumer dispute,—

* * * * *

(ii) on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the complaint where
the opposite party omits or fails to take any action to represent his case within
the time given by the Forum.

14, (J) If, after the proceeding conducted under section 13, the District Forum is
satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any of the defects specified in the
complaint or that any of the allegations contained in the complaint about the services are
proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him to do one or more of the
following things, namely:—

* * * * *

Manner in which
complaint shall
be made.

Jurisdiction of
the District
Forum.

Procedure on
receipt of
complaint.

Finding of the
District Forum.


Appeal.

Composition of
the State
Commission.

Jurisdiction of
the State
Commission.

26

(to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to the consumer
for any loss or injury suffered by the consumer due to the negligence of the opposite
party;

(e) to remove the defects or deficiencies in the services in question.

(2) Every proceeding referred to in sub-section (1) shall be conducted by the President
of the District Forum and at least one member thereof sitting together.

Provided that where the member, for any reason, is unable to conduct the proceeding
till it is completed, the President and the other member shall conduct such proceeding

de novo.
* * * * *

15. Any person aggrieved by an order made by the District Forum may prefer an
appeal against such order to the State Commission within a period of thirty days from the
date of the order, in such form and manner as may be prescribed:

Provided that the State Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period.

16. (/) Each State Commission shall consist of—

* * * * *

(b) two other members, who shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing
and have adequate knowledge or experience of, or have shown capacity in dealing
with, problems relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public
affairs or administration, one of whom shall be a woman:

Provided that every appointment under this clause shall be made by the State
Government on the recommendation of a selection committee consisting of “ve following,
namely:—

@ President of the State Commission — Chairman,
ii) Secretary of the Law Department of the State — Member,
Gii) Secretary, incharge of the Department dealing with
consumer affairs in the State — Member.

(2) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms
and conditions of service of, the members of the State Commission shall be such as may
be prescribed by the State Government.

(3) Every member of the State Commission shall hold office for a term of five years or
up to the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier and shall not be eligible for re-
appointment.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained. in sub-section (3), a person appointed as a
President or as a member, before the commencement of the Consumer Protection
(Amendment) Act, 1993, shall continue to hold such office as President or member, as the
case may be, till the completion of his term.

17. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the State Commission shall have
jurisdiction—
(a) to entertain—

()complaints where the value of she gqods or seryices and gompensation,
if,any, claimed exceeds rupees five lakhs but does not exceed rupees twenty
lakhs; and

50 of 1993.


50 of 1993

27

18A. When the office of the President of the District Forum or of the State Commission,
as the case may be, is vacant or when any such President is, by reason of absence or
otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed
by such person, who is qualified to be appointed as President of the District Forum or, as the
case may be, of the State Commission, as the State Government may appoint for the purpose.

19. Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State Commission in exercise of its
powers conferred by sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of section 17 may prefer an appeal against
such order to the National Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of the
order in such form and manner as may be prescribed:

Provided that the National Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within
that period.

20. (1) The National Commission shall consist of—

* * * * *

(6) four other members who shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing
and have adequate knowledge or experience of, or have shown capacity in dealing
with, problems relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public
affairs or administration, one of whom shall be a woman:

Provided that every appointment under this clause shall be made by the Central

Government on the recommendation of a selection committee consisting of the following,

namely:—
(a) a person who is a Judge of the Supreme Court,
to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India — Chairman;
(b) the Secretary in the Department of Legal Affairs
in the Government of India — Member;
(c) Secretary of the Department dealing with consumer
affairs in the Government of India — Member.

(3) Every member of the National Commission shall hold office for a term of five years
or up to the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier and shall not be eligible for re-
appointment.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), a person appointed as a
President or as a member before the commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment)
Act, 1993, shall continue to hold such office as President or member, as the case may be, till
the completion of his term.

21. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Commission shall have
jurisdiction—

(a) to entertain—
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services and compensation,
if any, claimed exceeds rupees twenty lakhs; and

* * * * *

22. The,National Commission shall, in the disposal of any complaints or any proceedings
before it, have—

(a) the powers of a civil court as specified in sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) of

section 13;

(0) the power to issue an order tothe oppasite party girecting, hum 17 do any
one or more of the things referred to in clauses (a) to (i) of sub-section (/) of section
14,

and follow such procedure as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

Vacancy im the
office of the
President.

Appeals

Jurisdiction of
the National
Commission

Propedure
applicable to the
National
Commission.


Penalties.

Enforcement of
orders by the
Forum, the State
Commission or
the National
Commission,

Penalties.

Power to make
rules.

Laying of rules.

28

है 23. Any person, aggrieved by an order made by the National Commission in exercise
of its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of section 21, may prefer an appeal
against such order to the Supreme Court within a period of thirty days from the date of the
order:

Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period.

* * * * *

25. Every order made by the District Forum, the State Commission or the National
Commision may be enforced by the District Forum, the State Commission or the National
Commission, as the case may be, in the same manner as if it were a decree or order made by
a court in a suit pending therein and it shall be lawful for the District Forum, the State
Commission or the National Commission to send, in the event of its inability to execute it,
such order to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, —

(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of the company
is situated, or
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, the place where the person
concerned voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain, is
situated,
and thereupon, the court to which the orders is so sent, shall execute the order as if it were a
decree or order sent to it for execution.
* * * * *

27. Where a trader or a person against whom complaint is made or the complainant
fails or omits to comply with any order made by the District Forum, the State Commission or
the National Commission, as the case may be, such trader or person or the complainant shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month but which
may extend to three years, or with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both:

Provided that the District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission, as
the case may be, may, if it is satisfied that the circumstances of any case so required, impose
a sentence of imprisonment or fine, or both, for a term lesser than the minimum term and the
amount lesser than the minimum amount, specified in this section.

* * * * *

30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions contained in clause (a) of sub-section (/) of section 2, clause (b) of sub-section
(2) of section 4, sub-section (2) of section 5, clause (iv) of sub-section (4) of section 13,
section 19, sub-section (2) of section 20 and section.22 of this Act.

(2) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions
contained in clause (b) of sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) of section 7, sub-section (3) of
section 10, clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 13, sub-section (3) of section 14, section
15 and sub-section (2) of section 16.

३1. (7) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.

(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.

(Shri Shanta Kumar, Minister for Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution)

MGILP(PLU)MRND—303RS—23-04-2001.