AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XLII of 2025 
THE NATIONAL BLOOD TRANSFUSION BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to regulate the collection, testing, processing, storage, distribution, issuance, and 
transfusion of human blood and blood components, so as to ensure health 
 protection and prevention of transfusion-transmissible diseases and to 
 establish national standards for safe blood collection, transfusion 
 and management and imposing penalties for non-compliance 
 and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
      BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows,— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Blood Transfusion Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, th e
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b ) “Authority” means the National Blood Transfusion Authorit y
e
stablished under section 3; 
(c) “blood” means whole human blood collected from a donor and
intended for transfusion; 
(d ) “blood centre” means any facility engaged in collection,
testing, processing, storage, or distribution of blood or blood 
components; 
( e) “blood component” means any therapeutic constituent of blood
including red cells, white cells, platelets and plasma, separated by 
physical or mechanical means; 
( f) “hemovigilance” means surveillance of adverse effects
associated with transfusion of blood and blood components; 
(g) “ Member” means Member of the Authority established under
section 3; 
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
and 
(i) “transfusion medicine” means branch of medicine that
encompasses all aspects of the transfusion of blood and blood 
components including aspects related to hemovigilance. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Establishment of 
the National 
Blood 
Transfusion 
Authority. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute an Authority to be known as National Blood Transfusion 
Authority to exercise the powers conferred on and to perform the 
functions assigned to it, under this Act. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold an d
di
spose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall
by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Authority may, in consultation with the Central Government,
establish its office(s) at such other places within the country, as it may
deem necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(5) The Authority shall regulate its own procedure with regard to transaction
of
 its business and may, for this purpose, issue regulations.
25 
30 
35 
Composition of 
the Authority. 
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following, namely,—
(a) t he Secretary or an Additional Secretary, Union Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, so nominated on his behalf —
Chairperson, ex-officio; 
(b) the Director General of Health Services under the Union
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—President, ex-officio; 
(c) the Deputy Director General under the Union Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare—Director, ex-officio; 
40 
45 

3 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
(d) the Additional Director Ge neral of Health Services under 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, to be nominated by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed —
Secretary, ex-officio;  
(e) the National Mission Director, National Health Mission —
Member, ex-officio; 
(f) the Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser, Union 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—Member, ex-officio; 
(g) the Drugs Controller General of India—Member, ex-officio; 
 (h) an officer of the rank of the Joint Secretary, Union Ministry 
of Health a nd Family Welfare, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed —Member ex-
officio; 
(i) the Secretary, Indian Red Cross Society —Member, ex-
officio; 
(j) the Director, National Institute of Biologicals—Member, ex-
officio; 
(k) two Transfusion Medicine Experts from Government Blood 
Centres, to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed—Members; 
           (l) one Transfusion Medicine Expert from a private Blood 
Centre, to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed —Member; 
           (m) one Transfusion Medicine Expert from the Armed Forces 
Blood Centre, to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed —Member; 
           (n) one representative from the National Medical Commission 
to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed —Member; 
(o) two representatives from nation al-level Voluntary Blood 
Donor Organisations to be appointed by the Central Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed —Members; 
(p) one representative from a State Blood Transfusion Council, 
to be appointed by the State Government on rotation basis fr om 
all the States—Member; and 
(q) such other members, not exceeding three, as may be 
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed, having expertise in the field of blood transfusion or 
public health. 
(2) The term of office of, the salary and allowances payable to, and other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members, of the 
Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
45 
5. The Authority shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely: — 
(a)  lay down policies and national standards for collection, 
testing, processing, storage, distribution and transfusion of blood and 
blood components; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions of the 
Authority. 

4 
 
(b)  regulate and monitor the activities of all blood centres in the 
country and ensure compliance with safety norms and ethical standards 
and guidelines and for this purpose to conduct inspection of blood 
centres, from time to time; 
(c)  prescribe the safety norms, ethical standards and guidelines in 
donor recruitment, blood collection and transfusion practices and the 
protocols for quality assurance and internal audits; 
(d)  establish a national hemovigilance programme; 
(e) promote voluntary blood donation t hrough coordinated 
national campaigns; 
(f) oversee research and training in transfusion medicine; 
(g)  advise the appropriate Government in matters relating to 
blood transfusion services; 
(h) investigate into any adverse events related to blood transfusion 
as reported by the blood centres to determine the causes and recommend 
and implement corrective measures, in consultation with the 
appropriate Government under whose territorial jurisdiction the blood 
centre falls: 
       Provided that the information reg arding such adverse events 
shall be treated with confidentiality, ensuring the privacy of donors and 
recipients; 
 (i) investigate into the complaints regarding non- compliance or 
violation of the provisions under this Act; and 
 (j) perform such other functi ons, as may be assigned by the 
Central Government. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Authority to 
have powers of a 
Civil Court. 
 
 6. The Authority shall, while investigating any matter referred to it under 
clauses (h) and (i) of section 5, have all the powers of a Civil Court in trying 
a suit and, in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely,— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office;  
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and 
documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 
30 
35 
 
Officers and 
staff of the 
Authority. 
 7. (1) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and 
staff to the Authority, as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of 
its functions under this Act. 
(2) The method of recruitment, the salaries and allowances payable to, 
and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so 
appointed for the purpose of the Authority shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
40 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 2023. 
 8. All members, officers and staff of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting 
or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be 
public servants within the meaning of sub -section (2) of section 28 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
 
Members, 
officers and staff 
of the Authority 
to be  public 
servants. 
 
 5 
 
9. The appropriate Government shall consult the Authority on all policies  related 
to blood transfusion and related matters. 
 
 Appropriate 
Government to 
consult the 
Authority. 
  10. No person shall establish or operate any blood centre, after the commencement 
of this Act, unless such centre is registered under the provisions of this Act.  
 Prohibition on 
operation 
without 
registration. 
 
 
 
23 of 1940. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
11. (1) Every person intending to establish or operate a blood centre shall make 
an application to the Authority in such form and manner and accompanied by 
such fee as may be prescribed: 
        Provided that  all blood centres established or operating unde r a 
valid licence granted under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, before the 
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be registered under the 
provisions of this Act for a period of one year from the date of commencement 
of this Act and shall apply for  registration within one year from the date of 
commencement of this Act, failing which such blood centre shall cease to 
operate.  
(2) The Authority shall, on receipt of an application under sub- section (1), 
cause such enquiry to be made and if satisfied th at the applicant fulfils the 
prescribed standards and norms, register the blood centre and issue a 
certificate of registration in such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 
(3)  Every certificate of registration issued under sub-section (2) shall be valid 
for a period of five years from the date of issue and may, on an application 
made in that behalf in such form and manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed, be renewed for such period as may be prescribed. 
 Application for 
registration. 
 
30 
35 
40 
12. (1) The Authority may either suspend or cancel the registration of any blood 
centre, if it is satisfied on an enquiry being made and after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, that— 
(a) the centre has violated any provision of this Act or the rules  
made thereunder; or 
(b) the centre is being operated without complying with the 
standards prescribed and, in a manner, prejudicial to the health and 
safety of donors or recipients: 
Provided that in case of severe or repeated violation of the 
provisions of  this Act or the rules made thereunder, the registration 
shall be cancelled permanently, and such blood centre shall be 
prohibited from operating. 
(2) The procedure for  suspension or cancellation, the period for which 
registration may be suspended and the manner of preferring an appeal against 
such suspension or cancellation shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 Suspension and 
cancellation of 
registration. 
 
 
 
45 
13. Whoever establishes or operates a blood centre without obtaining 
registration, as provided under section 10, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both. 
 Prohibition of 
unregistered 
operations. 

6 
 
Adulteration 
or unsafe 
practices. 
 
14. Whoever knowingly collects, processes, or transfuses blood or blood 
components, which is contaminated, adulterated or unsafe, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term not less than two years but which 
may extend to five years, and with fine which shall not be less than five lakh 
rupees. 5 
 
Penalty for 
non-
compliance. 
 
 15. Any blood centre or person who contravenes any provision of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder, shall be liable to a penalty, which   shall not be less 
than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees. 
  
Offences by 
Companies. 
 16. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of 
and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
         Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves t hat 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation. – For the purposes of this section– 
(a) "company" means a body corporate, and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
 
Crediting 
sums 
realised by 
way of 
penalties to 
Consolidated 
Fund of 
India. 
 17. All sums realised by way of penalties imposed under the provisions of this 
Act, shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 30 
 
 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
 18. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the 
Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
  
Accounts and 
audit. 
 19. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by 
the Authority to the Central Government, which shall cause th e same to be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament 
35 
40 
 
Annual report.  
 
 
20. (1) The Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within such time 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report giving a 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
true and full account of its activities during the previous year and copies 
thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of 
Parliament, the annual report along with a memorandum of action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Authority and the reasons 
for non -acceptance of the recommendations, if any, within a period of one 
year from the date of receipt of such report. 
(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues connected 
with the State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the 
Governor of that State, who shall in turn, cause to be laid before the State 
legislature concerned, su ch report along with an explanatory memorandum 
concerned with the action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for not accepting any 
of the recommendations made therein, within a period of one year f rom the 
date of receipt of such report. 
 
20 
25 
30 
21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2)  The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters 
for which provision is nec essary or expedient for the purposes of 
implementing the provisions of this Act. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made 
by the Authority under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that 
the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule  
or regulation. 
 Power to make 
rules and 
regulations. 
 35 
40 
22. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or 
expedient for removing such difficulty. 
(2) Every order or direction made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 Power to remove 
difficulties. 
  23. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the 
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 
 Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
  

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
    The availability of safe and adequate blood is an essential requirement of 
any modern health system. At present, regulation of blood transfusion services is 
governed by dispersed provisions under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and 
Rules made thereun
der. In view of the growing needs for quality control, 
standardisation, voluntary donation, and oversight, it is necessary to enact a 
dedicated legislation to monitor and regulate blood transfusion services. 
    The Bill seeks to establish a National Blood  Transfusion Authority with 
statutory powers to prescribe national standards for blood collection, processing, 
storage and transfusion; to ensure quality assurance through inspections and audits; 
to promote voluntary donation; and to provide for penalties for unsafe practices. It 
also mandates the registration of all blood centres and provides for coordinated 
responsibilities of the Central and State Governments. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE. 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National 
Blood Transfusion Authority whereas Clause 4 provides for the 
composition of the Authority and the salaries and allowances payable to and 
other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of 
the Authority.  Clause 7 provides that the Central Government may appoint 
such number of officers and staff to the Authority as may be deemed 
necessary for its efficient functioning and for their salaries and allowances 
and other term s and conditions of their service.   Clause 1 8 of the Bill 
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the 
Authority as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at 
this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be 
involved. 

10 
 
  MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 21 empowers the Central Government to make rules and the National 
Blood Transfusion Authority to make regulations, with the approval of the Central 
Government, to carry out the provisions of this Bill.  Clause 22  provides that the 
Central Government may, mak e such order or give such direction, as may be 
necessary, for removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill.  
 As the rules, regulations, orders and directions will relate to matters of 
procedural and administrative details only, the delegation of legislative power is of 
a normal character. 
  
  

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
 to regulate the collection, testing, processing, storage, distribution, issuance, and 
transfusion of human blood and blood components, so as to ensure health 
protection and prevention of transfusion-transmissible diseases and to 
 establish national standards for safe blood collection, transfusion 
 and management and imposing penalties for 
 non-compliance and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS―PMB(H)―311―08.12.2025. 