1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 102 of the Constitution, after clause ( 2), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that a member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political
party who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the
Tenth Schedule shall continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years from
the date of his disqualification."
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. XLIII of 2022
Amendment
of article
102.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022

2
3. In article 191 of the Constitution, after clause ( 2), the following proviso shall be
substituted:—
"Provided that a member of the Legislative Assembly of a State or either House
of the Legislature of a State having Legislative Council belonging to any political party
who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth
Schedule shall continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years from the date
of his disqualification."
4. In Tenth Schedule to the Constitution—
(i) in paragraph 2 after clause ( a) of sub-paragraph (1), the following shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that if a member of a House fails to present himself within seven days
before the Chairman or Speaker of the House when such attendance is sought by the
party whip, he shall be deemed to have voluntarily given up his membership of such
political party."
(b) in clause (b) of sub-paragraph, after the words "if he votes or abstains
from voting", the words "in a motion of a vote of confidence or no-confidence"
shall be inserted.
(ii) for sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 4, the following shall be substituted:—
"(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger
of the original political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have
taken place if, and only if, not less than three-fourth of the members of the
legislature party concerned have agreed to such merger."
(iii) in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, after the words, "the Speaker of such
House", the following words shall be inserted, namely:—
"within a period of thirty days from the date on which the said question
arises but not later than a period of three months";
(iv) after paragraph 6, the following new paragraph shall be inserted, namely:—
"6A. If the question as to whether, a Member of a House has become
subject to disqualification under this Schedule, is not decided by the Chairman
or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such House, within the period stipulated
in paragraph 6, the disqualification proceedings against the said Member of the
House shall consider to be deemed to have been lapsed."
5
10
15
20
25
Amendment
of article 191.
Amendment
of the Tenth
Schedule.
30
Lapse of
disqualification
proceedings.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With the framing of Constitution, we adopted the Westminster System of representative
democracy followed in Britain in the formation of our Legislatures. The leader who enjoys
the majority support of the Legislature is chosen as the head of the Government. During late
1970s, our country witnessed nefarious floor crossing by legislators in total disregard of the
democratic wishes of the electorate who returned them. The elections of 1967 were a
water-shed moment in Indian political history, in that they led to the introduction of coalition
Governments in India.
2. After the failure of an attempt in 1978, the Constitution (52
nd Amendment)
Act, 1985 came into being and with it came Tenth Schedule to the Constitution. The law has
undergone many changes since then. Paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule originally recognised
a 'split' if one-third members of the legislature party decided to form or join another political
party. The 2003 amendment changed it to "at least two-thirds of the members" should agree
for merger.
3. While the anti-defection law envisaged the prevention of horse-trading of the
legislators of our country, even today, the problem is notoriously prevalent. The rampant
misuse of Tenth Schedule and instances of it being bypassed are a blot on our democracy
and the recent instances of resort politics, use of money and muscle power have initiated a
debated over the efficacy of having a Tenth Schedule which prohibits individual defection
but legalizes mass defection along with putting a limit on the freedom of expression of a
legislator on the floor of the house. The concept of a blanket whip on every voting leads to
low quality debates and inability of Members to speak their mind or express their reservations
against the policy of the Government.
4. We are an evolving democracy and the law makers should be given freedom to
express their views in the Parliament or Legislatures along with having an enforcement
mechanism which doesn't defeat the mandate given by the public.
5. The Bill aims to strengthen our democracy and help our public representatives in
becoming informed law makers rather than political party workers, who have to follow a
direction for this purpose, the Bill seeks to amend Articles 102 and 191 of the Constitution to
make it more stringent by adding a proviso which leads to a further disqualification of
six years from the date a member is disqualified under Tenth Schedule and through the
introduction of such a provision, the legislators who indulge in horse trading and dishonor
the mandate of the electorate shall be debarred from contesting a by-election and getting
re-elected for a period of six years.
6. The Bill also seeks to amend paragraph 2 of Tenth Schedule through a proviso
which clearly lays down that where a member is unable to present himself within seven days
before the Chairman or Speaker of the House when his attendance is sought by the party
whip, it shall amount to voluntarily giving up the membership of such political party. Due to
ambiguous interpretation of voluntary giving up of membership, there has been a steep
increase in cases of resort politics on the expense of the tax-payer. This provision lays down
clear criteria that will lead to disqualification, if a person doesn't reply to the notice of the
Chairman or Speaker.
7. Further, the amendment to clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2, will act as
a reformative measure whereby Members will be exempted from the whip system except in
cases of Confidence Motion or No Confidence Motion. Our country has a freedom of
expression for everyone except the elected representatives who are bound by the whip
system for discussion on legislations concerning the common man. The amendment to
paragraph 4 shall increase the existing threshold for merger from 2/3
rd to 3/4th of members of
3

4
legislature party in order to avoid disqualification. This provision is necessitated due to
growing instances of anti-defection in smaller States where the strength of the House ranges
from 30 to 70.
8. The amendment to paragraph 6 is required due to its misuse by a party in power.
The absence of a time limit to decide disqualification petition leads to political bias and at
times the delay also extends till the House is dissolved. The time limit for the same has been
proposed as thirty days, with an extension of maximum limit of three months. In addition to
this, a new paragraph 6A is proposed to be added which renders a disqualification petition
infructuous, if it is not decided or kept pending beyond three months.
Hence, this Bill.
RAGHA V  CHADHA

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
102. ( 2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of
Parliament if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.
* * * * *
191. (2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly
or Legislative Council of a State if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.
* * * * *
TENTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 102(2) and 191 (2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
* * * * *
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5, a member of a House belonging
to any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House—
(a) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party; or
(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction
issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any person or authority
authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in either case, the prior permission of
such political party, person or authority and such voting or abstention has not been
condoned by such political party, person or authority within fifteen days from the date
of such voting or abstention.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,—
(a) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to the political party,
if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member;
(b) a nominated member of a House shall,—
(i) where he is a member of any political party on the date of his nomination
as such member, be deemed to belong to such political party;
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political party of which
he becomes, or, as the case may be, first becomes, a member before the expiry of
six months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying with the
requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.
* * * * *
4. ( 2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph ( 1) of this paragraph, the merger of the
original political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and
only if, not less than two-thirds of the members of the legislature party concerned have
agreed to such merger.
* * * * *
Disqualifications
for
membership.
Disqualifications
for
membership.
Disqualifications
on ground of
defection.
Disqualification
on ground of
defection not
to apply in
case of
merger.
5

6
6. (I) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to
disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the
Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final:
Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or the
Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualification, the question shall be
referred for the decision of such member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf
and his decision shall be final.
* * * * *
Decision on
questions as to
disqualification
on ground of
defection.

MGIPMRND—873RS(S3)—08-08-2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Raghav Chadha, M.P.)