1
THE FOOD WASTE (REDUCTION) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to curb food waste by empowering and mobilizing food producers, processors and
distributors, consumers and associations and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Waste (Reduction) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in respect of matters relating to,—
(i) the Union territory without legislature, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XLIII of  2018
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019

2
(ii) the Union territory of Puducherry, the Government of that Union
territory;
(iii) the Union territory of Delhi, the Government of that Union territory;
and
(iv) the State, the State Government;
(b) "best before means the date on the label on packed food or ingredient that
indicates the end of the period in which the condition of this food, under storage, will
remain as stated;
(c) "charitable purpose" shall have the meaning ascribed to it under clause (15)
of section 2 of the Income Tax Act, 1961;
(d) "donor" means the supermarket operator or the person engaged in charitable
purpose contracted by the supermarket operator under this Act;
(e) "food" shall have the meaning ascribed to it under clause (j) of section 3 of
the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006;
(f) "ingredient" shall have the meaning ascribed to it under clause (y) of section 3
of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006;
(g) "person" includes:
(i) a company;
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated
or not; and
(iii) every artificial juridical person not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses;
(h) "personal injury" means impairment of a person's physical or mental condition;
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) "shop" means any premises where goods are sold either by retail or wholesale
and includes an office, a store-room, godown, warehouse or workhouse or work place,
whether in the same premises or otherwise, used in or in connection with such trade or
business;
(k) "supermarket operator" means any undertaking, operating for profit, whether
public or private, carrying out the activities related to storage, distribution and sale of
food or food ingredients;
(l) "unsafe food" shall have the meaning ascribed to it under clause ( zz) of
section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006;
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
a supermarket operator having a shop measuring such dimensions, as may be prescribed, by
the appropriate Government , shall donate unsold food or food ingredient suitable for human
consumption which is approaching its best before date, which would have otherwise been
binned.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the Food Safety and Standards
Act, 2006 and the rules made thereunder relating to food safety, the supermarket operators
shall not deliberately make their unsold cosumable food products unsuitable for consumption.
(3) No contractual stipulation shall prevent the donation of food or food ingredient by
a supermarket operator to a person engaged in charitable purposes.
(4)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to food or food ingredient
unfit for consumption, or, food or food ingredients that has past its use by date.
34 of 2006.
34 of 2006.
34 of 2006.
43 of 1961.
Donation of
unsold
consumable
food products
by
supermarket
operators.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45
34 of 2006.

3
4. (1) Within one year of the enactment of this Act or, within a year of opening of a
shop or the date on which the shop area exceeds the threshold limit prescribed by the
appropriate Government, every supermarket operator shall conclude an agreement specifying
the terms and conditions under which food and food ingredient shall be donated to a person
engaged in charitable purpose:
Provided that the supermarket operators that have entered into such an agreement
prior to the enactment of this Act shall be deemed to have complied with the provision of
section (1).
5. (1) A supermarket operator who fails to comply with provisions of section 4, shall be
punishable with a fine of rupees one lakh.
(2) Without prejudice to the provision of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and
the rules made thereunder relating to food safety, a supermarket operator who deliberately
renders unsold food and food ingredient unsuitable for consumption, shall be punishable
with a fine of rupees fifty thousand.
6. (1) A donor shall not incur any civil liability in respect of any death or personal injury
that results from the consumption of donated food where the food was,—
(a) donated in good faith for a charitable or benevolent purpose and with the
intention that the receipient of the food or food ingredient would not have to pay for
the food; and
(b) safe to consume at the time it left the possession or control of the donor.
(2) Where the food or food ingredient or both is of a nature that required it to be
handled in a particular way to ensure that it remained safe for consumption after leaving the
possession or control of the donor, the donor shall not incur any civil liability, if he informs
the person to whom the food is donated of the manner in which the food or food ingridient
is to be handled to ensure safety.
(3) Where the food is of a nature that it must be consumed within a particular period of
time after leaving the possession or control of the donor, the donor shall not incur any civil
liability if, he informs the person to whom the food is donated of the time within which the
food is to be consumed to ensure its safety.
7. The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, prescribed the
mechanism to be adopted by the appropriate Government for the purposes of monitoring
and review of implementation of this Act by the supermarket operators and person engaged
in charitable purposes.
8. (1) The appropriate Govt. in consultation with the Central Government, by
notification, in the Official Gagette of the State or UT make rules for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session, or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any thing previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by a State Government or the Union Territory Government with
legislative as the case may be, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of the State Legislature or the Union Territory Legislature, as the case may be.
Agreement by
supermarket
operators.
34 of 2006.
Liability of
donor in case
of death and
personal
injury.
Mechanism
for
monitoring
and review.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45
Penalties.

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Food waste and loss has been rapidly increasing in India. According to the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), every year around 1.7 billion tonnes, or
almost one third of food produced for human consumption, is lost or wasted globally.
As per the Global Hunger Index, 2017 India has a rank of 100 out of 119 countries. The
NFHS-4 (2015&16) estimated 46.8 million under five children in India are stunted and this
represents one-third of total stunted children across the globe. Food loss and waste also
amount to a major squandering of resources, including water, land, energy, labour and capital
and needlessly produce greenhouse gas emissions, contributing to global warming and
climate change.
However, at retail level, large quantities of food is wasted due to quality standards that
over-emphasize, appearance. Supermarkets bin good quality food approaching its best-
before date. The best before date is about quality and not safety. The food will be safe to eat
after this date but may not be at its best. Therefore, food past its best before date but before
its use by date is wasted. It is proposed to force supermarkets to stop throwing away
perfectly edible food remaining unsold. Supermarkets shall be required to donate their unsold
food products still suitable for consumption to authorized charities by entering into contracts
with these authorized charities. This will help combat food waste at the national level and
eradicate hunger and malnutrition in India.
Hence this Bill.
MAHESH PODDAR

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill does not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to frame rules by notification
in the Official Gazette, to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The rules to be framed by the
appropriate Government pertain to matters of administrative detail only, which cannot be
laid down in the Bill itself. The delegation is, therefore, normal in character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to curb food waste by empowering and mobilizing food producers, processors and
distributors, consumers and associations and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
.
————
(Shri Mahesh Poddar, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—825RS(S3)—25-06-2019.