AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 
5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XLIII of 2024 
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR PROTECTION OF MEDIA PERSONS BILL, 2024 
————
 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent, and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II 
      REGISTER OF MEDIA PERSONS 
CHAPTER III 
NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR PROTECTION OF MEDIA PERSONS 
5. Constitution of the National Committee for Protection of Media  Persons.
6. Objectives a
nd Functions of the Committee.
7. Committee
 to be the Authority for Registration of Media Persons
8. General Powers of the Committee.
9. Necessary Government assistance.
10. Composition of the Executive Council.
11. Terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, Members etc. of the Council.
12. Conditions
 for the appointment and continuation of Chairperson and Members:
Disqualifications, R
esignation, Removal and filling of vacancy(ies).
13. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council.
14. Meetings of
 the Council.
15. Unit for Cases and Rapid Reaction.
16. Risk Evaluation Unit.
17. Protection from Unfair Prosecution.
18. Privileged Communication.
19. Central  Government to provide adequate funds to the Committee.
20. Furnishing of annual reports, etc.
21. Power to remove difficulties.
22. Power to make rules.
3. Register of Media Persons.
4. Eligibility for Registration as Media Person.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XLIII of 2024 
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR PROTECTION OF MEDIA 
PERSONS BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a National Committee for Protection of Media 
Persons for the effective prevention of violence in cases related to arb itrary 
censorship, intimidation, assault, or risk to free speech of media 
and for matters connected t
herewith and incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the National Committee for Protection of Media 
Persons Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall 
come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notif
ication in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
45 of 2023. 
45 of 2023. 
(i) “accredited media person” means a person who is accredited by
the Central Government under prevailing accreditation rules with
a purpose to facilitate the collection of news/ information;
(ii) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
(iii) “arbitrary censorship” means the suppression, prohibition, or
control of information, communication and expression without
proper and reasonable, legal or constitutional basis;
(iv) “assault” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it under
Section 130 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(v) “Committee” means the National Committee for Protection of
Media Persons constituted under section 6 of this Act;
(vi) “Council” means the Executive Council of the Committee under
section  10 of this Act;
(vii) “intimidation” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it under
Section 130 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(viii) “media institution” includes any news paper establishment
registered under the Registrar of Newspapers for India, news
channel establishment, news -based electronic media
establishment, or news station or news portal establishment,
professionally engaged in the collection, processing, and
dissemination of information, views and opinion to the public as
well as collection and dissemination of public opinion;
(ix) “media person” means an employee or representative, of a media
institution, either whole -time or part- time and includes an editor,
writer, news editor, sub -editor, feature writer, copy -editor,
reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, digital news publisher, news -
photographer, news -videographer, copy- tester trainee media
person, news gatherer, or a freelance journalist eligible to be
accredited as freelance journalist under prevailing Central Media
Accreditation Rules;
(x) “newspaper” means a periodical of loosely folded  sheets usually
printed on newsprint and brought out daily or at least once in a
week, containing information on current events, public news or
comments on public news;
(xi) “News and current affairs content” means newly received or
noteworthy content, includi ng analysis, especially about recent
events primarily of socio- political, economic or cultural nature,
made available over newspapers, internet or computer networks,
and through any digital media, where the context, substance,
purpose, import and meaning of such information is in the nature
of news and current affairs content;
(xii) “Register” means the Register for Media Persons maintained
under Section 3 of this Act;
(xiii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(xiv) “violence” means an act which causes any harm, injury or
endangerment of life or intimidation, obstruction or harassment or
coercion or assault of criminal force or threat to journalist in
discharge of his service or duties or causes to be the reason for
damage or loss to the property or reputation of a journalist or a
media institution.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

3 
CHAPTER II 
REGISTER FOR MEDIA PERSONS 
47 of 2023. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
3. (1) The Government shall maintain a Register for media persons
(hereinafter referred to as the Register) in such form and manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) The Register shall be a public document, under section 74 of the
Bhara
tiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 and shall be published on the website
of the National Committee for Protection of Media Persons in the manner
prescribed for this purpose.
(3) Additions, deletions or alterations to the Register along with the
effective date shall be reflected on the website within thirty days from the
date of such change.
(4) Every person who is eligible under section 4 of this Act shall be eligible
for regi
stration as a media person.
(5) Every person whose application has been accepted shall be given a
registration number and the manner of assignment of such registration
numbers shall be such as may be prescribed by the Committee constituted
under section 6 of  this Act.
(6) Such registration shall be valid for a period of three years from the date
of registration, for accredited media persons and two years for non-
accredited media persons:
Provided that, after expiry of the validity of the registration period, the 
registration shall be eligible for renewal for an extended period equivalent 
to the initial period. 
(7) Registration under sub -section (1) will, however, not confer any
benefits or entitlements other than those expressly provided in this Act.
Register for 
media persons. 
30 
35 
40 
4. (1) Every person practising and having at least one year of experience in
journalism and fulfilling the below mentioned conditions shall be eligible
for registration as a media person:—
(a) at least six articles/ news and current affairs content, affiliated
to, authored, or co-authored in his or her name and published by
a Media Institution in the five months prior to the date of
application for such registration; or
(b) has received at least one payment from a Media Institution for
compilation of news in the preceding five months; or
(c) has taken photographs related to current affairs that have been
published by a Media Institution at least three times in the
preceding three months; or
(d) certified by a media institution as being employed by it as a
media person, as defined in section 2 of this Act:
 Provided that no employee of Government/ semi -Government/ 
board/corporation/ organisations  which are wholly, or partially funded by 
the Government can apply for registration as a media person on the basis of 
publication of their articles in newspapers or magazines. 
Eligibility for 
registration as a 
media person. 

4 
CHAPTER III 
NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR PROTECTION OF MEDIA PERSONS 
Constitution 
of the 
National 
Committee 
for Protection 
of Media 
Persons.  
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, with effect from such date as it may appoint, constitute a
Committee, to be known as the National Committee for Protection of
Media Persons, to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform
the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Committee shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
hav
ing perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name,
sue or be sued.
(3) The Committee shall comprise the following bodies:—
(a) Executive Council.
(b) Unit for Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction.
(c) Risk Evaluation Unit.
(4) The headquarters of the Committee shall be at such place in the
National Capital Territory of Delhi, and it shall have regional and other
offices in any other place in India as the Central Government may by
notification, specify.
(5) The Cabinet Secretary of the Union Government shall be the ex- officio
Secretary to the Committee.
(6) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and
staff including experts to the Committee, as may be required for its
efficient functioning.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Objectives 
and Functions 
of the 
Committee. 
6. The Committee shall exercise and perform the following functions: —
(a) protect the rights of media persons and media institutions guaranteed
under article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution;
(b) provide necessary protection to:
(i) media person(s) or media institution(s) who are facing arbitrary 
censorship, intimidation, violence, assault, or risk, either
physical or verbal;
(ii) partner by marriage or otherwise, any next of kin or dependents 
of the media person;
(iii) persons from the same media institution, who participate,
collaborate or associate in the same or similar activities; and
(iv) property, goods or other objects belonging to the media
person(s), group, institution.
(c) to direct, coordinate, evaluate and review specific actions that ensure 
that those media persons and media institutions, who are at risk in
the performance of their work or profession, are provided with the
necessary conditions to continue their activities;
(d) to enquire and investigate into violence upon media persons and
media institutions or threats and risks to them and pass appropriate
directions to the concerned authorities for their protection;
(e) to summon relevant authorities and call for relevant documents in
connection with enquiries and investigation, the passing of
appropriate directions of protection and prevention, and the
evaluation and review of such orders; and
(f) any other functions as assigned to it by the Central Government from 
time to time.
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

5 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
7. (1) The Committee shall serve as the designated authority for monitoring
the registration of media persons.
(2) The Committee shall be vested with the power to determine the
following matters: —
(a) all applications received for registration as a media person;
(b) all applications for renewal of registration as a media person;
(c) additions, deletions or alterations of entries in the Register,
specified under section 3 of the Act; and
(d) revocation of registration in case of non- compliance with
established rules and regulations.
(3) The Committee shall conduct annual reviews of the Register, and may,
as neces
sary, modify, update or correct entries to ensure its accuracy and
completeness.
(4) The Committee shall meet at such regular intervals, as may be
prescribed, for evaluation and determination of the applications received for
registration and renewal of registration.
(5) The Committee may, from time to time, issue guidelines or directives
to admi
nister the registration process and to ensure compliance with the 
objectives and provisions of this Act.  
(6) The Committee shall have the power to revoke the registration of a
media person and strike-off the name of such person from the Register if, it
comes to the conclusion, on the basis of an enquiry conducted thereon, that
the registration was erroneous or was done as a result of material mis -
representation, suppression of facts or fraud:
 Provided that no such action shall be taken without giving notice and 
affording a reasonable opportunity of hearing to the concerned media 
person, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
Committee to be 
the authority for 
registration of 
Media Persons. 
5 of 1908. 
30 
35 
40 
8. (1) For the purpose of performing its functions or holding any inquiry under 
this Act, the Committee shall have the same powers throughout the country
as are vested with a civil court while trial of a suit under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely: —
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and
examining them on oath;
(b) disclosure and inspection of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; and
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any office
or court;
(2) The Committee shall have the power to recommend emergency
protection measures and protection plans to the Superintendent of Police of
the district concerned, who in turn will take appropriate decision as per the
extant provisions of the prevailing Act/ Rules/ Regulations in this regard.
(3) The Committee shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
General Powers 
of the Committee. 
45 
9. (1) All Government authorities and persons employed by the appropriate
Government shall provide all information called for by the Committee
unless the information is protected from disclosure by law.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide all necessary assistance to the 
Committee in discharging its duties and functions efficiently.
Appropriate 
Government 
assistance.  

6 
Composition 
of the 
Executive 
Council. 
10. (1) The Executive Council shall be the governing body of the Committee
and shall consist of the following persons to be appointed by the President
of India by warrant under his hand and seal, namely:—
(a) a person, who has been the Chief Justice of India, - Chairperson;
(b) one person who has been a judge of the Supreme Court, - Member;
(c) Chairperson of the Press Council of India, - Member, ex-officio;
(d) Six media persons, with ten or more years of experience, out of
which at least three shall be women, - Members;
(e) two persons, who are representatives of civil society organisations
with a mandate to secure Freedom of Speech and Expression, out of
which at least one shall be a woman, - Members;
(f) one person, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government
of India, to represent the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
to be nominated by the Minister in- charge of that Ministry, -
Member, ex-officio; and
(g) one person not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government
of India, to represent the Ministry of Home Affairs, to be nominated
by the Minister in-charge of that Ministry, - Member, ex-officio.
(2) Every appointment under sub-section (1) shall be made after obtaining
the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of: —
(a) the Vice President of India and ex-officio Chairman of the Council
of States (Rajya Sabha);
(b) the Chief Justice of India;
(c) the Speaker of the House of the People (Lok Sabha);
(d) the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha)
or where there is no such Leader of the Opposition, then, the Leader
of the single largest party in opposition to the Government in the
Council of States; and
(e) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People (Lok Sabha)
or where there is no such Leader of the Opposition, then, the Leader
of the single largest party in opposition to the Government in the
House of the People:
Provided that no appointment under this sub-section shall be made in 
the absence of consensus between at least three members. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Terms and 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson, 
Members etc. 
of the 
Council.  
11. (1) A person appointed as the Chairperson of the Council shall hold office
for a term of three years from the date, he enters office or until he attains the
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
(2) A person appointed as a Member of the Council shall hold office for a
ter
m of three years from the date, he enters office or until he attains the age
of seventy years, and shall be eligible for re-appointment.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Council
as well as officers, staff and experts of the Committee shall be such as
may be prescribed.
35 
40 
12. (1) The Chairperson or any Member of the Council may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the President of India, resign from his
office.
45 

7 
5 
10 
15 
20 
(2) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent
without excuse, sufficient in the opi nion of the Committee, from three
consecutive meetings of the Committee.
(3) The Chairperson or any Member shall not be removed from office
exc
ept by an order made by the President on the ground of their proved
misbehaviour or incapacity, after an enquir y made by a Judge of the
Supreme Court in which such a Chairperson or Member has been informed
of the charges against them and given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in respect of those charges.
(4) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed and continued as the
Chairperson or a Member, if he—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent;
(b) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence,
which in the opinion of the President, on the advice of the Selection
Committee, involves moral turpitude;
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting   in such
capacity;
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, which is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions in such capacity; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest.
(5) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal or death of the
Chairperson or any other Member, or otherwise, shall be filled by fresh
appointment in accordance with the provisions of section 10.
 
Conditions for  
the appointment 
and continuation 
of Chairperson 
and Members:  
Disqualifications, 
Resignation, 
Removal, and 
filling of 
vacancy(ies). 
25 
30 
13. (1) No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalid merely by reason
of:—
(a) any vacancy, or any defect in the constitution of the Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chairperson;
or a Member; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the
merits of the case.
Vacancy, etc., not 
to invalidate 
proceedings of the 
Council.  
35 
40 
45 
14. (1) The Council shall meet not less than once in every three months in a year
at such time and place as may be determined by the Chairperson.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the Council and if, for
any reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend the meeting of the Council,
the Chairperson of the Press Council of India, shall preside over the meeting:
Provided that if, the Chairperson of the Committee and the Chairperson of 
the Press Council of India both are unable to attend the meeting, any 
member so appointed by the Chairperson of the Council shall preside over 
the meeting.  
(3) One-half of the total number of Members of the Council including the
Chairperson shall constitute the quorum and all the acts of the Committee
shall be decided by a majority of the members present.
(4) If on any matter there is an equality of voting among the members of
the Committee, the Chairperson shall have and exercise the casting vote.
(5) At all times of voting, there should be at least two representatives of
the Press as well as 2 from the Civil Society Organizations, who have 
worked in this field for at least ten years and have experience in the defence 
of freedom of speech and expression. 
Meetings of the 
Council.  

8 
Unit for 
Admitting 
Cases and 
Rapid 
Reaction.  
15. (1) The Unit for Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction shall be responsible
for:—
(a) receiving applications for consideration by the Committee, receiving 
information from the Committee on cases of which it has taken suo-
moto cognizance, and receiving information from the police where
a Media Person or Media Institution faces imminent arrest;
(b) conducting an evaluation for immediate action to determine whether
cases require Extraordinary or Ordinary Procedure; and
(c) defining and implementing urgent protection measures.
(2) Any media person or media institution facing arbitrary censorship,
intimidation, violence, assault, or risk; physical or verbal, as defined in
section 2, as a result of his or her profession, or a third party on behalf of
such a person, may apply or communicate with the Committee through the
Unit for Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction.
(3) Any criminal cases involving arrest or imprisonment of a media person
or media institution shall be placed before the Unit for Admitting Cases and
Rapid Reaction by the concerned police department:
 Provided that no arrest shall be made unless it is sanctioned by the 
Committee.  
Provided further that the evaluation as to whether the accused in a 
criminal case qualifies to be a media person or media institution shall 
be made by the Committee. 
(4) The Unit for Admitting Cases an d Rapid Reaction shall accept the
application of the Petitioner, or information forwarded to the Unit by the
Committee, and shall conduct an Evaluation for Immediate Action.
(5) In the event that it is determined, through a thorough assessment, that a
person's life, physical integrity, or liberty is in imminent danger,
Extraordinary Procedures may be employed in the case, and the Unit for
Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction shall take the following steps: —
(a) determine the Urgent Protection Measure to be used, no later than
three hours after receiving the application or the information;
(b) implement the Urgent Protection Measure no later than nine hours
after they have been determined;
(c) conduct a simultaneous evaluation of the Urgent Protection
Measure;
(d) submit a report of the evaluation and action taken to the Council;
and
(e) forward the case to the Risk Evaluation Unit for determination of the 
Protection Plan, as in Ordinary Procedures.
(6) If it is determined that there is a prima facie ass ault or a threat against a
media person or media institution, but no person's life, physical integrity, or
liberty is in imminent danger, Ordinary Procedures shall be employed, and
the Unit for Admitting Cases and Rapid Reaction shall forward the case to
the Risk Evaluation Unit.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Risk 
Evaluation 
Unit.  
16. The Risk Evaluation Unit shall be responsible for:—
(a) undertaking a Risk Assessment Study to analyse the determinants of
risk levels applicable to the applicant or a prospective beneficiary,
incorporating elements of gender- specific dangers;
(b) proposing protective and preventive measures;
(c) forwarding the findings of the study to the Executive Council no
later than ten days after receipt of the application; and 
(d) determining the Protection Plan, no later than one week after receipt 
of the study.
45 
50 

9 
5 
10 
17. (1) When the Committee is prima facie of the view that it is  expedient to
extend protection to a media person or institution in situations where: —
(a) there lies allegations or investigation against a media person or
media institution; or
(b) there is an ongoing investigation, inquiry or trial involving a media
person, or;
(c) the material produced before it requires such intervention;
shall direct the Superintendent of Police of the district concerned to 
supervise the investigation and submit a report within fifteen days. 
(2) If the district Superintendent of Police, in consultation with the District
Prosecution Officer, is of the opinion that the case is fit for withdrawal from 
prosecution, it shall rec ommend the same to the Committee, which in turn 
shall forward its report to the appropriate Government requesting to take 
necessary action for withdrawal of the prosecution. 
Protection from 
unfair 
prosecution. 
15 
20 
18. Notwithstanding any other Act currently in force, no media person or media
institution while engaged in a news -gathering capacity, shall be compelled
to disclose in any legal proceeding or trial, before any court, before the
presiding officer of any tribunal, or before any committee or elsewhere, the
sources of any information procured or obtained by him and published in
the newspaper, periodical or website, broadcast by any broadcasting station,
or televised by any television station in which he is engaged, connected with 
or employed.
25 
19. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law on this behalf, grant such sums of money to the
Committee, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Privileged 
Communication.  
30 
20. (1) The Council shall prepare once in every year, in such form, manner and
at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a full account of
the activities of the Committee during the previous year and such other
reports and returns, as may be directed, and copies of such report and returns
shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) A copy of the annual report and returns received under sub- se ction (1)
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
Central 
Government to 
provide adequate 
funds to the 
Committee. 
35 
40 
21. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act as appear 
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expi
ry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
45 
50 
22. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in  making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment sh all be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
rules.  

10 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
          Media is the fourth estate of Indian democracy. In Romesh Thapar vs  
State of Madras and Brij Bhushan vs  State of Delhi, the Supreme Court held 
that the freedom of press is an integral part of freedom of speech and expression 
guaranteed under article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution. Article 19 of  Universal 
Declaration and International Covenant on Human Rights (UDHR) and the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCR), as well as 
international standards including the Council of Europe’s Pl atform to Promote 
the Protection of Journalism and the Safety of Journalists, Organisation of 
American States, International Declaration on Protection of Journalists 
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, etc. recognize that in a 
democratic society, the media should be simultaneously free and responsible.  
 India featured in the Reporters Without Borders (RSF) list of five 
deadliest countries in December, 20 20. In 2023 , India's ranking in th e Press 
Freedom Index slipped from 140 in 2014 to 161, out of 180 countries. A study 
by Thakur Foundation shows that at least 198 serious attacks were recorded on 
press reporters between 2014 to 2019, and of these, 36 happened in 2019 alone. 
In 40 of these, journ alists were killed.  While the Government has  committed 
to creating an enabling environment for independent press, suitable steps are 
required to safeguard journalist against increased violence, threats, denigration, 
arbitrary arrests and detention. The stakes of inaction are of the gravest nature 
both in human terms - a matter of life and death, even – and in democratic terms, 
due to the chilling effect on the very voices that permit citizens to form their 
opinions and ensure accountability. While th e report of the Index Mon itoring 
Cell did nothing to address issues of censorship, intimidation by agencies, etc. 
of med ia persons, recommendatio ns of the Law Commission on journalistic 
privileges has also not been codified into law.  
Therefore, there is an urgent need fo r a uniform and centralised 
legislation to monitor threats and violen ce against med ia persons and protect 
their rights and freedoms.  
     In view of t he reasons stated, it is proposed to enact a l egislation to 
provide for: — 
(
i) a Register for Media Persons; and
(ii) a National Committee for Protection of Media Persons comprising of an
Executive Council, a Unit for admitting cases and a rapid Reaction and
a Risk Evaluation Unit- to conduct case specific evaluation, enquire and
investigate and provide necessary protection to media persons a nd
media institutions.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives
MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE. 

11 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Cla
use 3 of the Bill provides for the maintenance of a Register for Media 
Persons, while Clause 5 provides for the setting up of a National Committee for 
Protection of Media Persons and appointment of such number of officers, staff and 
experts thereto, as may be required, for the efficient discharge of its functions. Clause 
11 provides for the  salaries and allowances payable to as well as other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Council as also to the 
officers, staff and experts. Clause 19 provides that the Central Government, shall after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money 
to the Committee, as it may think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. 
Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure both of recurring 
and non- recurring nature from the  Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not 
possible at this juncture to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 

12 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make provisions 
through an  order to remove any difficu lties likely  to arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Bill, after its enactment. Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make rules for carryin g out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules and 
order(s) will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. 

RS-P& PS–PMB(E)–245 – 08.12.2025
RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a  National Committee for Protection of 
Media Persons for the effective prevention  of violence in cases related to 
arbitrary censorship, intimidation, assault, or risk to free speech  of Media 
and for matters connected therewith  and incidental thereto. 
________ 
(Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P.) 