AS INTRODUCED IN THE RasyA SABHA

Bill No. XLII of 2000

THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES
(RESERVATION FOR ADMISSION IN ALL COURSES OF STUDY
AND FACULTIES IN THE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for admission in all courses of study, higher, technical,

professional, higher learning faculties etc. in all the educational institutions in the
country to give effect to the preamble, Articles 15, 29(2), 46, 38 and 39, 51A(j) of
the Constitution of India and all other provisions incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty First Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER-I

1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reserva-
tion for admission in all courses of study and faculties in all the Educational Institutions)
Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

Short title,
extent, com-
mencement
and applica-
tion.


Definitions.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

(4) It shall apply to every educational institution maintained by the State which
includes Local bodies or instrumentalities of the State, receiving grant-in-aid from the
Union of India, a State Government, Local bodies and instrumentalities of the State, rec-
ognised by the appropriate Government or an officer authorised in that behalf, minority
(religious or linguistic) educational institution; University established by Central/State
Act or deemed university, Post Graduate Centres and affiliated educational institution
bound by any Act, Rules or instructions or orders in force issued under an Act or by the
appropriate State government or an officer or authority but not inconsistent with the Act.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(g) “academic Year” means an academic year as defined in the relevant Act,
tules, education code or Grants-in-Aid code or instructions or directions issued by
the Government of India or the concerned State Government or Union Territory,
Municipality, Nagar Palika, Municipal Corporation, Nagar Mahapalika, Zilla Parishad
or Panchayat Samithi or any statutory authority.

(c) “education” include medical education, engineering, technical education,
technology, scientific-speciality, super-specialities, higher or university education
or vocational, post-graduation, Ph.D or technical training, all professional courses,
law, instruction, strengthening of the powers of body or mind of a student, or cul-
ture, etc. in any faculty of the educational institution.

(b) “educational Institution” include every school or college, of all descrip-
tions or categories primary to post-graduate Centre, University, deemed university,
research institution, scientific or technical or technological institution, establish-
ment or organisation, teaching or imparting courses of study in general humanities,
professional courses, technical courses of study, technology, research, higher learn-
ing, or instructions for mental, moral, cultural or physical development, moral, or
intellectual excellence, or for higher studies, vocational, teaching, professional
courses in Arts, Commerce, Law, Genetics, Farming, Animal Husbandry, Medicine,
Engineering, Technology, Post-graduation, Ph.D, Post Graduation, Specialities,
Super-specialities in medicine, science, para-medical science, engineering, tech-
nology, genetics, dairy farming veterinary sceince or any other subject or subjects,
advanced technological pursuits, professional courses of all categories, or any course
of study offered in an educational institution to the general category candidates in
that particular subject or course of study, faculty or teaching or instructions in the
acadmic year established under or/and in pursuance of an Act of the Parliament or
of a State Legislature or a company or autonomous body registered under the Com-
panies Act, 1956 as amended from time to time, or a cooperative society registered
or deemed to have been registered under the appropriate Cooperative Societies Act
in force in the concerned State or Union Territory for short ‘U.T” or the Societies
Registration Act or any other Act as amended to the respective acts from time to
time, minority (religious or linguistic) educational institution covered by Article
30(/) of the Constitution of India, any educational institution by whatever name
called recognised by the Government of India or the concerned State Government
or Union Territory or officer duly authorised by it in this behalf by appropriate
Government and received or receiving grant-in-aid from the Government of India,
the appropriate State Government or Union Territory/local body or instrumentality
covered by Article /2 of the Constitution of India.

(e) “notification” means an order/notification issued by the Government of
India, rules, instructions, or orders in force, issued by the Government of India or
the concerned State Government or Union Territory, as the case may be, not incon-
sistent with the Act or Rules and published in the Gazette of India.

(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Gov-
ernment of India, rules, instructions, or orders in force, issued by the Government of

10

15

20

25

30

35

50


10

15

20

25

30

35

45

50

India or the appropriate State government or Union Territory, as the case may be,
not consistent with the Act or Rules.

(i) “rules” means rules, instructions or directions made under the Act and
published in the Gazette of India and instructions or directions or orders whether
statutory or not in force before the Act came into force, issued under the appropriate
Act or executive instructions by the Government of India/ appropriate State
Government, Union Territory or local body/authority not inconsistent with the Act
and Rules.

(A) “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes” shall have the same meanings
assigned to them, respectively in Clause 24 and Clause 25 of Article 366 of the
Constitution and notifed by the President of India under Article 341 (7) or 342 (7) as
amended by the Article 341(2) or 342(2) by the Act of Parliament.

(a) “State” include the Union of India/all the State Governments and the Union
Territories, specified in the First Schedule to the Constitution of India as amended
from time to time or any local body, authority or instrumentality under Article 12 of
the constitution of India. Local authorities, Municipalities, Nagar Palikas, Muncipal
Corporations, Nagar Mahapalikas, Zilla Parishads, Panchayat Samithis, Gram
Panchyat and the alike and all instrumentalities of the State or other authorities by
whatever name called.

CHAPTER-II

RESERVATION OF SEATS IN ALL FACULTIES/CouRSES OF STUDY IN ALL
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS

3. The State shall provide reservation of seats for education in all the courses of
study or faculties in the educational institutions to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes at such percentage as may be prescribed by the Government of India, by the
concerned State Government or Union Territory, from time to time, proportionate to the
population of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Union of India or the
respective States or union Territory as per the latest census published by the Government
of India.

4. (1) Every educational institution and those incharge of the educational institution
shall admit the students belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
filling the seats reserved in the respective course of study or faculty. The Scheduled Caste/
Scheduled Tribe student securing marks on his own merit with general category candidates,
shall not be counted towards percentage of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes/
Scheduled Tribes. If there is a selection committee for allocation of candidates for admission
by the educational institution, the Committee shall not include the merit candidate among
the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in computing the reserved seats, as per the prescribed
percentage. A report in this behalf, within one month from the date of such admission,
shall be submitted to the Secretary to Government of India, Social Justice and Empowerment
Department Secretary Social/Tribal Welfare Department of the Concerned State
Government or Union Territory as the case may be. A copy thereof shall be sent to the
Secretary Education Department of the State Government Union Territory or Human
Resource Department of Government of India, as the case may be.

(2) Wherever the sufficient members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, from the respective quota are not available for admission, it shall be the duty of the
admitting authority to admit available candidates from the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
‘Tribes, vice versa, as the case may be, to the unfilled seats, so as to provide opportunity
and to advance the educational opportunity to the disadvantaged Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes.

5. The State shall club single posts in Post-graduate, Specialities, Super-specialities,
Ph. D etc., carrying equal scale of pay/similar duties, responsibilities or designations and
apply reservation for admission of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes category candidate.

Percentage of
reservation,

Duty to admit
students of
scheduled
castes and
scheduled
Tribes,

Clubbing of
single post for
admission.


Eligibility of
children of
smugrant labour
etc. for
admission.

Duty of the
Head of the
educational
institution,

Relaxation and
Concessions.

6. (1) In case of a child of migrant labour or Government employee of All India
Service /Central service/Interstate transfers, liable to be transferred allotted or other
employee and belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may
be, in the native State, but was not a notified Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in the
migrated, transferred or allotted State, shall be eligible to apply for admission and shall be
considered for admission as Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, as the case may be, as if
the caste or tribe be deemed to be the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, in the appropriate
notification issued under Article 341(/) or 342(/) of Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe
applicable in the respective State or area of birth or origin.

(2) Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidate seeking admission/admitted or his
parent/guardian, however, shall obtain social status certificate from the competent officer
empowered to issue such certificate, within the jurisdiction of the original native birth
place of the parents of the child/ candidate/student.

(3) Pending obtaining social status certificate from the competent officer/authority,
if the last date for admission in expiring, an affidavit duly attested by a competent gazetted
officer of the State or Central Govt. or Union Territory affirming that the student/candi-
date or ward belongs to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes as notified by the Presi-
dent of India under Article 341(/) or 342(J) or as amended by law as prescribed in the
Schedule to this Act shall apply provisionally subject to production of the social status
certificate within one month from the date of admission by the candidate.

(4) The admitting authority/competent officer of the educational institution shall
send the affidavit and the social status certificate or social status certificate of the admit-
ted student for verification and report by the Director, Social/Tribal Welfare Department
of the original native States of origin/birth of the parent/guardian. The Director of Social/
Tribal Welfare Department shall, verify or cause verification as per the procedure pre-
scribed in clause 10 of this Act.

7. (1) The Head of the institution, Principal, Head Master/Head Mistress, or any one
in charge of the educational institution, at the relevant time, shall strictly implement the
reservation in the educational institution, of the candidates belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and shall ensure full compliance with this Act.

(2) The provision of this Act are in addition to any other rules of reservation for
admission in vogue but not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or rules issued
under this Act and the same, shall be followed to the extent of not over lapping with the
Act and Rules.

8& In the case of the candidate belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled
Tribes;

(A if the State has prescribed the age limits under the appropriate rules made under
any Act of Rules/Instructions and have force of law for admission in a course of study or
faculty, the State may prescribe such relaxed age limit to the members belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, of not less than five years. The rules, instruc-
tions or orders, by whatever name be called, in force or operation, more favourable to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, shall remain valid and operate unless they are
suitably amended by the rules made under this Act to the extent of inconsistent or overlap-
ping rules shall be of no effect.

(ii) The fee prescribed for application form seeking admission in an educational
institution, may be exempted or reduced to such extent as may be prescribed under the
rules made under this Act. Till then, the existing rules, instructions or orders, by whatever
name be called, shall remain valid and operate per force.

10

20

25

30

35

45


10

20

25

35

45

5

(iii) Notwithstanding anything contained any other law, judgement/order/decree of
a court/ competent Tribunal or Authority to the contrary, the requirement as to certain
percentage of marks, with reference to the qualifying examination or entrance examination,
or both, if combined, for admission, in the appropriate course of study etc., the Government
of India/concerned State Government or Union Territory, may so relax, as to ensure filling
of all the reserved seats by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Till then, the
tules, instructions or orders, by whatever name called, and in operation, shall remain valid
and operate until they are suitably amended under this Act/Rules.

Explanation: Relaxation of marks in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes students/ candidates shall be only for admission into the course of study or faculty
and there shall be no relaxation of marks for qualifying examination for degree etc. It
shall be construed accordingly.

(iv) The rules in vogue for payment of travelling allowance for attending interviews
for admission, if any , shall remain in operation till new rules are made under the Act.

9. Every rule, notification, direction, instruction or orders issued under this Act,
shall, as soon as may be, after being issued, be laid before each House of the Parliament
and shall receive approval before becoming effective. Equally the concerned State
Government shall be entitled to issue such rules or orders/ instructions not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act or rules, instructions or directions issued from time to time
by the Government of India or those issued by the concerned State Govt. with prior approval
of the Government of India, shall be placed on the floor of each House of the Legislature
and shall obtain prior approval before becoming effective in that State.

10. (/) A person claiming reservation for Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes,
may apply for admission in an educational institution on that premise, shall produce
the social status certificate in the prescribed form issued by the concerned Government
or by a competent officer. If, issue of such certificate is pending before the competent
officer and the last date prescribed to submit the application to the educational institution
for admission is expiring, the candidate/parent/guardian would be entitled to submit
an affidavit in the prescribed form as set out in the Schedule to the Act, duly attested by
any gazetted officer of the State that he/she by birth belongs to a Caste or Sub-caste/Tribe
or part or group of a Tribe specified in the appropriate notification issued under Article
341(1) or 342(1) as the case may be, and that he/ she continues to be the Scheduled Caste/
the Scheduled Tribe.

Explanation: The word “Hindu” shall be construed as including Sikhs, Buddhists
or Jains or professing Hindu religious faith in any form whatever called as specified in
Explanation II to Article 25 of the Constitution.

(2) The Head of the educational institution or one in-charge of admission shall
admit such reserved category candidate and shall direct the student/parent/guardian to
produce the social status certificate in the prescribed form from the competent officer
within one month after admission.

(3) After admitting a student of SC/ST category, the Head Master, Head Mistress,
Principal or the Head of the educational institution, shall immediately thereafter
transmit the affidavit and the original social status certificate, produced together with
the admission form to the Director of Social Welfare/ Tribal Welfare Department of the
concerned State Government for enquiry and report to the educational institution of
the correctness or genuineness of the social status claimed by the concerned admitted
candidate.

(4) On receipt of the original social status certificate/ affidavit and the admission
form, the Director of Social Welfare/Tribal Welfare Department, himself or by an officer
authorised by him or as per the existing procedure, shall verify or cause, verification of
the correctness/genuineness of the social status. The procedure in vogue in this behalf

Laying
provision.

Eligibility to
file an
affidavit or
certificate
claiming
social status
and procedure
for enquiry.



Protection of
the action
taken in good
faith

Liaison Officer

6

prescribed by the concerned State Government or Union Territory, shall remain in operation,
The report as required under sub clause (3) shall be sent to the Head Master, Principal/
Head of the educational institution etc. within two months from the date of the receipt of
the letter from the Head Master etc.

(5) In case the report is adverse to the student, the Head Master, Head Mistress,
Principal, Director or Head of the institution by whatever name called, shall forthwith issue
show-cause notice to the student enclosing a copy of the report received from the Director
of Social Welfare/Tribal Welfare Department, calling for an explanation within a specified
time of not less than 10 days. On receipt of the explanation, if any, within the specified time
or extended time, of not more than 5 days, if the student seeks an opportunity of personal
hearing by himself, after giving the same to him shall take appropriate decision thereon
within a period of one month, as per rules complying with the principles of natural justice
and pass appropriate orders as the case warrants with brief reasons in support of his
conclusion, A copy thereof shall be communicated, to the student in person or by registered
post with acknowledgement due. A copy thereof, sent to the Director, Social Welfare/Tribal
Welfare Department of the concerned State Govt.

Section 6 (6) If the aggrieved student/guardian may file an appeal against the said
order to the Secretary to Social Welfare/Tribal Welfare Department of the concerned State
Government or Administrator of Union Territory, Secretary to the Government of India,
Social Justice and Empowerment, as the case may be, within whose control the educational
institution functions. The Secretary shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard in
person to the aggrieved student/in case of minor by the parent/legal guardian, shall decide
the appeal with brief reasons in support thereof, within two months from the date of filing
of the appeal. The decision of the appellate authority shall be final and binding on the
student/parent/legal guardian and shall not be questioned in any court of law. The order
shall be communicated to the student/guardian and Director, Social/Tribal Welfare Deptt.
of the concerned State Govt. by registered post with acknowledgement due. In case the
decision is in favour of the student, the same may be questioned by the Director, Social
Welfare/ Tribal Welfare Deptt. under Art. 266 of the Constitution of India.

CHAPTER-II
‘SuUpPLEMENTAL PROCEDURE

11. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against.any educational
institution or Head Master, Head Mistress, Principal or Head of the institution, etc. for
anything done in good faith in implementation of the provisions of this Act or rule or order
made or instructions issued thereunder or in operation.

12. (1) Every Director of School Education (Secondary Education/Intermediate Board/
Higher Education, etc.) by whatever name called or an officer of the Government of India
who has ultimate supervisory jurisdiction over the concerned educational institution shall
nominate such number of officer or officers not below the rank of District/Deputy Education
Officer to ensure proper implementation of this Act who shall, in particular, be responsible
for due, proper and full implementation of this Act and rules made thereunder or existing
order, instructions or directions issued by the Government of India, the concerned State
Government or Union Territory;

(2) To do such other incidental work as may be necessary for effective implementation
of the Act, Rules/Directions or instructions issued under this Act or those issued by the
appropriate State Government/Union Territory and in force not inconsistent with the Act
and the Rules;

(3) The Principal/Head Master/Director/Head of the educational institution shall submit
areport in quadruplicate and return to the State Government, Education Deptt., the Secretary,
Government of India, Social Justice and Economic Empowerment; the Secretary, Social
Welfare Department/Tribal Deptt. of the State Govt. or Union Territory;

10

15

20

25

30

35

45

50


20

25

30

35

45

7

(4) The Government of India/State Government/Union Territory shall cause the annual
inspection of the records of the educational institutions in such a manner as may be prescribed
Or as 15 In vogue.

13, (/) Every educational institution shall maintain such records as may be prescribed
and shall furnish in every education year to the Government of India/concerned State
Government, Union Territory in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed,
an annual report on the admissions of the students/candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes/
Scheduled Tribes respectively made in the educational institution or under its control.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Head/Incharge of the educational institution to make
available such record of documents in particular of false claim of social status; action taken
thereon and the result thereof, shortfall of reserves seats for inspection by the liaison officer
or the District Education Officer and furnish such information or arrange such assistance as
may be necessary for him to carry out his functions under this Act.

(3) The concerned State Government/Union Territory shall submit periodically, to the
Government of India, Social Justice & Economic Empowerment Deptt. and to the Legislature
of the State, every year the consolidated report of the students admitted in higher education;
false social status claims detected/and/the result of the action taken, the number of unfilled
left over seats and those filled with general category candidates, with reasons therefor. The
same shall be caused to be laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament/Legislature of
the State Assembly/Legislation Council, if any, by the respective Secretaries of Social Justice
and Economic Empowerment, Govt. of India, Deptt. of Social Welfare/Tribal Welfare of the
concerned State Govt./Union Territory.

14, Whoever responsible for implementation of any provision of the Act or Rules/
Instructions/Directions issued under the Act/or in vogue, found contravened the same or
rules, instructions or directions issued by the concerned State Government/Union Territory
or existing one in operation by whatever name called, or fails to implement the same, shall
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend upto six months and with fine of not
less than rupees three thousand or both. The fine shall be payable from the personal pay of
the delinquent officer.

Provided that nothing in this section shall render any person liable to punishment, if
he proves that he had made every bona fide endeavour or exercised utmost care, attention
and diligence to implement the provision of the Act, rules, instructions or orders issued
under the Act or existing rules/instructions.

15. () Whosoever knowingly makes a false claim that he belongs to Scheduled Caste/
Scheduled Tribe, and whoever charged with the responsibility of issuing a social status
certificate knowingly issues a false social status certificate, knowingly attests an affidavit,
and if proved that the person is not a Scheduled Castes or a Scheduled Tribes, shall be
punishable with imprisonment of not less than one year and not more than three years and
with fine which may extend to Rs. 10,000/—.

Explanation: The educational institution if it did not accept social status certificate as
correct/genuine, prima facie, shall be presumed that the contents of the certificate are false
to his knowledge.

(2) Whenever any question arises whether the social status certificate is false to the
knowledge of the accused or certificate issuing/attesting officer/authority, the burden of
proof that the contents of the affidavit/social status certificate are not false to his knowledge,
shall lie on the accused/certificate issuing authority/officer.

(3) The conviction under sub-section (2) of this section shall disqualify the person
for any future admission in any other educational institution or appointment in any
establishment under the Government of India or State Government, Union Territory, local
body with status as Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes. The accused shall not be eligible
to contest an elective office like a Member of, the Parliament, the Legislature, Local
Bodies/authority, like Nagarpalika, Zilla Parishads, Gram Panchayat, etc.

‘Submission of
Annual Report
and mainte-
nance of other
records and
inspection
thereof.

Penalty for
contravention
of provisions of
the Act.

Penalty for
false claims or
issue of false
social status
certificate.


Cognizance of
the offence
courts.

Power of Govt.
of India to give
directions.

Effect and
extent of the
operation of
existing rules.

Act to have
over-riding
effect.

Removal of
Giff culties.

statement to be
laid on floor of
Parliament.

8

(4) The notification issued by the President of India under Article 341(1) or 342(1) or
as amended by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes List Amendment Act, 1976 of the
social status of the caste or sub-caste/tribe shall be conclusive proof ot the caste/sub-caste/
tribe/part of the tribe.

(5) No court, shall have jurisdiction, de horses the Presidential Notification/Act,
1976 to declare that the plaintiff is a member of a caste or sub-caste or tribe/part of a tribe,
as the case may be and to grant declaration of such social status.

(6) Representation of the People Act and Local Bodies Acts etc. shall be deemed to
have been amended incorporating the disqualification in Clause (5) as a disqualification
therein unless it is suitably amended or till then.

16. (7) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be maintained against an
officer except by, or with sanction of, the Government of India, the concerned State
Government or the Union and Territory Government/Administrator. The Govt. shall consult
the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes before grant of sanction
u/s 197 Cr.P.C, and the advice tendered by it shall be binding on the Government.

(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Section 15(1)
save on a complaint by the aggrieved person or on a report by a competent Police Officer or
except as provided under sub-section (/).

(3) No court, inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the First Class shall try an offence punishable under this Act.

(4) The offence under the Act shall be congnizable and non-bailable.

17. (1) Every educational institution shall be bound by the Act, Rules or Instructions
by whatever name called issued under this Act or existing rules, etc., no contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or as the Government of India may, by general
or special order, in writing from time to time notifies/issues to give effect to the provision of
this Act.

(2) The Government of India shall lay on the table of both Houses of Parliament such
rules, instructions or directions and obtain approval thereof.

18. All rules, directions and orders, statutory or non-statutory, issued by the
Government of India or the concerned State Government or the Union Territory or Local
Body regulating the implementation of the reservation of seats for admission in the
educational institutions under its control/dispensation (including relaxation, concession,
etc.) issued to safeguard the interests of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes,
before the commencement of this Act and not inconsistent with the provision of this Act,
shall continue to be in force, unless withdrawn superseded or suitably amended,

19. Notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law, order,
judgement or decree of any court, tribunal or authority for the time being in force. The
provisions of this Act shall have effect, in addition to and not in derogation of or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law.

20. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Government of India may, by order to be published in the official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary
for removing any difficulty in the implementation of the provisions of the Act or rules.

(2) Every rule, instruction/direction/order made under sub-section shall soon after it
is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

21, The Government of India shall, once in every year, lay before each House of
Parliament, a report giving full account of the implementation of the Act during the preceding
year.

15

20

25

30

35

45


10

15

25

30

35

45

9

22. (7) The Government of India may, by a notification, make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Act and published in Gazette of India.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules
as may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely,—

(a) The percentage of seats reserved for admission in an educational institution
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under sub-section (7) of Section 4
consistent with the percentage of population in the latest census in operation.

(b) Guidelines for identifying educational institutions which are not already
covered under Section 2(c) for inclusion therein,

(c) Relaxation of upper age limit or percentage of qualifying marks for admission
into educational institutions/courses of study or faculty in wherever reservation for
admission is made.

(व) Exemption from payment of application fee or relaxation thereof.
(e) Authority to give relaxation in this behalf or to authorise under the Act.

(f) Authority to determine the travelling allowance payable, if any, attending
the interview, to the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
before to the educational institutions.

(g) Rank of the officer to be nominated as a liaison officer or inspection officer.

(h) Forms prescribed for maintaining the particulars relating to the
implementation of the Act by the educational institutions. Till then the educational
institutions shall state the number of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
students admitted, the claims of social status found to be false, the result thereof.
Reasons for admission, if any, made of a general candidate in a reserved seat,

(i) The authority to sanction prosecution against the officer or officers that
contravened the provisions of the Act.

(0) Any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.

(& The procedure for inquiry by the educational institutions or appellate authority
against false claim of social status. Until then the educational institution or the appellate
authority shall follow the principle of natural justice, namely, igsue show-cause notice,
supply the report of the Director, Social Welfare/Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
Deptt., as the case may be, copies of any other material sought to be used against the
student and an opportunity of hearing in person to the aggrieved student/parent/
guardian and brief reasoned order in support of the conclusion whether or not the
charge of the false claim has been established and its result; immediate communication
of the order to the concerned student in person to obtain signature in his own hand
acknowledging the receipt of the order, in case of avoiding, by registered post with
Acknowledgement Due to the known address mentioned in the application for
admission/ residential hostel and a copy to the Director of Social/Tribunal/Welfare of
the appropriate Govt.

(J) Such other rules, instructions, orders or directions to give full effect to the Act.

(3) Every rule etc., made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thiry days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both houses agree in making any modification in the rules, etc., or both Houses
agree that the rules, etc, should not be made, the rules, etc. shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be. However, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under this Act/rules/or existing rules/instructions/directions in operation.

Power to
make rules.


SCHEDULE

AFFIDAVIT
I S/Dio of
Village/Town ——____———- within the jurisdication of —————_—___.
Police Station in ———_—_—_—- Taluk/Mandal in the
District/Division —-—_-———-- of the State/Union Territory ———————__
belong to Community/Caste/Tribe by birth and continue

to be a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe which is recognised in item No. ——————
— as Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe under the Constitution (Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribe) Order, 1950 or as amended from time to time by the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribe List Modification Order, 1956, the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960, The Punjab
Reorganisation, 1966, The State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970, The North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation), 1971 and the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe Order Amendment Act,

1976 of the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe Amendment Order —————_——— I ——

S/D/o. further state that
myself and my parents ordinarily/normally reside in the said Village/Town and within the
jurisdiction of —-—__——————- Police Station in ————————___—___
Taluk/Mandal in the District/Division

— of the State/Union Territory. I further solemnly verify and state that the facts stated
above are true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and no part of the
statement is incorrect and false.

Signature

Attested by Gazetted Officer

Note: In case the candidate is son/daughter of a migrant labour/transferee, it should further
be stated in the affidavit of the date of migration/transfer and the duration of stay in
the migrated/ transferred State in which the Caste/Tribe was not recognised as
Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe.

The following are eligible to attest the affidavit:

(1). District Magistrate/Additional District Magistrate/Collector, Deputy Commissioner/
Additional Deputy Commissioner/Deputy Collector/Ist Class Stipendary Magistrate/
Sub Divisional Magistrate/Taluka Magistrate/Executive Magistrate/Extra Assistant
Commissioner.

(2) Chief Presidency Magistrate/Additional Chief Presidency Magistrate/Presidency
Magistrate.

(3) Revenue Officer not below the rank of Tehsildar and

(4) Sub-Divisional Officer/Mandal, Revenue/Development Officer of the area where the
candidate and/or his family normally resides.

Signed by

10


THE STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The preamble of the Constitution assures equality of opportunity and of status,
socio-economic justice to all the citizens of India, and due to practice of untouchability
on the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes living in the inaccessible scheduled areas
have been denied education and opportunity to higher education is lacking due to poverty
and illiteracy.

Article 46 of the Constitution imposes a duty on the State to promote with special
care the educational interest, in particular of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
and shall protect them from social injustice.

Article 38 mandates the State that it shall strive to promote the welfare of the people
by securing and protecting effective social order rendering socio-economic and political
justice and shall inform all the instructions of national life and to endeavor to eliminate
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities among individuals as well as groups of
people of India.

Article 51A(j) imposes fundamental duty on every citizen to strive towards excellence
in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation consistently rise3 to
higher levels of endeavor and achievement.

Article 15(4) of the Constitution, notwithstanding Articles 15(1) and 14, empowers
the State.to make special provision for the social and educational advancement of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

It has been the policy of the Govt. of India and the State Govt. to provide, in
implementation of the aforesaid Constitutional mandates, reservation in admissions in all
educational institutions in all the courses of study, faculties and disciplines to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes not only in humanities but in engineering, technical, medical,
post-graduation, M.Phil, Ph.D., super-specialities and technical courses of study as well so
that the every Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe educated youths have opportunity to
improve intellectual, excellence and secure equality of status and dignity in the society. In
Indersawhani case, the Supreme Court opined that reservation in technical, super-specialities
and other advanced and specialised courses of study shall not be made for the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes and in Dr. Preeti Srivastava’s case, the Supreme Court held
that reservation in super-specialities in medical courses of study is not in the national interest
and cannot be made and it directed the Medical Council of India to consider whether
reservation for admission in post-graduation course of study would be provided to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and also in post-graduation centre in Chandigarh
case, five Judges Bench of the Supreme Court held that clubbing of the single posts in post-
graduation or in super-specialities is illegal. It was also held that relaxation of marks with
disparity of 10 marks between general and reserved candidates for admission of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes to the extent of reserved seats as illegal.

The aforesaid judgements defeat the very object of the reservation policy, purpose
and constitutional animation and deny opportunity to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes of education and deprive them to strive towards intellectual excellence in all spheres
of their educational activities and to improve their cultural advancement.

With a view to effectively implementing the policy of reservation to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in admission to the seats at the prescribed percentage in all
courses of study and in all faculties, disciplines, professional courses etc. and to relieve the
hardship to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes from the afore-mentioned
Judgements, the Constitution is being proposed to be amended through this Bill.

R. S. GAVAI
11


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for exemption of payment of fees for application form
for seeking admission in an educational institution for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes candidates. However the exact amount of expenditure cannot be calculated, the
Bill of enacted would involve expenditure of rupees ten lakh per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

12


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 17 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power is therefore of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for reservation for admission in all courses of study, higher, technical, professional,
higher learning faculties etc. in all the educational institutions in the country to
give effect to the preamble, Articles 15, 29 (2) 46, 38 and 39, 51A (j) of the
Constitution of India and all other provisions incidental thereto.

(Shri R. S. Gavai, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2048RS—27-07-2000.