THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for measures to control the population in the country and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Population Control Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
Bill No. XLII of 2019
5

2
(b) "Committee" means the District Population Stabilisation Committee set up
under section 5;
(c) "employee of Union Government", means any person who is serving in
connection with the affairs of the Central Government or in any undertaking or
organization under the control of the Central Government.
(d) "Fund" means the National Population Stabilisation Fund constituted under
section 10; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
this Act shall be applicable only to married couples, where the boy is not less than twenty-
one years of age and the girl is not less than eighteen years of age.
4.  The Central Government shall ensure that contraceptives are available at reasonable
rates at all sub-health centres in the country.
5.  (1) The appropriate Government shall set up district level monitoring committee to
be known as District Population Stabilisation Committee in hundred districts with the highest
recorded population growth rates for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of;
(a) the Chief Medical Officer of the district;
(b) the District Collector; and
(c) one representative from each Panchayat Samiti in the district.
(3) The Committee shall take steps to encourage the use of contraceptives and control
the pupulation growth rate in their concerned district in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. If both the husband and the wife in the case of a married couple, who have only one
child, voluntarily undergo sterilization operation the appropriate Government shall provide
them with the following benefits, namely:—
(a) preference to the single child for admission in institutes of Higher Education;
(b) preference for selection to the single child in Government jobs; and
(c) such other benefits that may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
7.  If both the husband and the wife in the case of a married couple who are living
below the poverty line and having only one child, voluntarily undergo sterilization operation,
in addition to the benefits granted under section 6 by the appropriate Government, such
married couple shall be eligible for payment from Central Government a one time lump sum
amount of sixty thousand rupees if the single child is a boy or one lakh rupees if the single
child is a girl.
8. Both the husband and the wife in the case of a married couple, who have more than
two children shall be debarred from:—
(a) contesting in Lok Sabha, State Legislature, and Panchayati elections;
(b) getting elected to the Rajya Sabha, the State Legislative Councils, and similar
elective representative bodies;
(c) getting promotion in government service;
(d) applying to 'Group A' parts under the Central and State Government; and
(e) receiving any kind of Government subsidy, in case the married couple falls in
the Above Poverty Line category.
Act to apply
to married
couples.
Availability of
contraceptive.
Setting of
District
Population
Stabilisation
Committee.
Benefits on
undergoing
sterilisation
operation by
married
couples with
only one
child.
Additional
benefits for
married
couples living
below the
poverty line.
Dismentives
for the
married
couples with
more than two
children.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The appropriate Government shall introduce a compulsory subject relating to
population control in all senior secondary schools in States where the average fertility rate
is more than the replacement level of 2.1 children per women.
10. (1) There shall be constituted a fund called the National Population Stabilisation
Fund by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the fund in
such a ratio as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that the ratio shall be such that the states with higher fertility rate shall
contribute in higher proportion compared to the State with lower fertility rate.
(3) The money collected under the Fund shall be redistributed to the States and Union
Territories that have implemented reforms to control population and have been able to
significantly reduce their population growth rate, in such manner as may be prescribed.
11. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
12. (1) After one year from the commencement of this Act, all employees of the Central
Government shall submit an undertaking in writing to the respective appointing authority
that they shall not procreate more than two children:
Provided that the employees who already have more than two children at the
commencement of the Act shall submit an undertaking that they shall not procreate any
more children.
13. The employees of the Central Government already having two living children may
be allowed to procreate one more child in case of disability of living child or any other
circumstances as may be prescribed.
(2) An employee of the Central Government whose action is found to be in violation of
any provision of this Act shall be liable for dismissal from service.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying the purpose of this Act.
15. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anyting inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Introduction
of compulsory
subject on
population
control.
Constitution
of National
Population
Stabilisation
Fund.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Undertaking
by the
Government
employees.
Miscelaneous
provisions.
Power to
make rules.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is projected to become the world's most populours country by 2024. Currently,
India every year adds 15 million people to its population base by far the largest in the world.
The problematic aspect is that India accounts for about 17 per cent. of the world population
worth only 2.2 per cent. of the world's land mass. The increasing population has resulted in
an increasing pressure on the country's limited natural resources. As a result, we have
witnessed a range of socio-economic issues in the past few decades such as large-scale
environmental degradation, urban air pollution and the reduction in the size of agricultural
holdings. Additionally, the state of the infrastructure in the country has failed to meet the
demands of the growing population, Most parts of the country are suffering due to absence
of basic education and health facilities.
In the past three decades, India has made significant progress in decreasing popula-
tion growth. As per the World Bank, the fertility rate in the country has decreased from 4.97
in 1975 to nearly 2.4 in 2015. It is expected in the coming decade the fertility rate in India will
soon reach the replacement level of 2.1. However, despite the decrease in fertility rate,
according to United Nations World Population Prospects report India's population will
continue to increase up till 2050. Given the array of socio-economic issues arising as a result
of over population, it is important that India as a country starts focusing on steps to
decrease population rather than just stabilising it. Additionally, the population growth is
very uneven across the country. While some state have successfully been able to stabilize
their population, northern states have witnessed and continue to witness high population
growth. It is essential to focus on specific districts with high population growth rates to
tackle the problem effectively.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to introduce incentives for population control and provides
for constitution of National Population Stabilisation Fund. It is vital for us to realize that
population control and enforcement of two child norms for central government employees
are immediate measures, however steps such as providing contraceptives and encouranging
family planning can possibly play a stronger role in decreasing the population growth rate in
the long run.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. ABHISHEK  MANU  SINGHVI
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment of District Population Stabilization
Committees that would work to provide assistance and information regarding population
control. Clause 7 provides for lump sum cash amount to be given to married couples living
below poverty line as an incentive for pupulation control. Clause 9 provides for the
introduction of a compulsory subject on population control in schools of certain districts.
Clause 5 provides for the establishment of the National Population Stabilization Fund. Clause
11 provides that the Central Government shall provide funds for carrying out the purposes
of the Act. The Central Government shall have to incur some expenditure for implementing
the provisions of this Bill in respect of Union territories. The State Government  will incur
expenditure in respect of their States out of their respective consolidated funds. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five
hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of details only, the
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
to provide for measures to control the population in the country and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4320RS(S3)—11-12-2019.