AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XLII of 2001

THE JUTE PACKAGING MATERIALS
(COMPULSORY USE IN PACKING COMMODITIES)
REPEAL BILL, 2001

A
BILL

to repeal the Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities)
Act, 1987,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in
Packing Commodities) Repeal Act, 2001.

2. The Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act,
1987 is hereby repealed.

Short title

Repeal of
‘Act No 10 of
1987


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A packaging crisis for essential commodities like Foodgrains, Sugar and Fertilizers
looms large. In recent years supply of jute bags has fallen well short of peak demand
starting March/April each year. Non-jute packaging cannot be used to cover the gap
between demand and the shortfall in supply because of provisions of the Act (JPMA)
for compulsory packing in jute. The problem of shortage in packaging is further
aggravated by serious irregularities that have been allowed to prevail in the Jute sector
behind the protection provided to it by JPMA. These are:

(1) Violation of ILO convention No. 127 to which India is a signatory. While the
above ILO convention being implemented in our country States that manual labour
should not carry loads in excess of 55 Kgs in order to protect their health and safety, the,
jute industry supplies 100 kgs capacity bags for packing Sugar and Foodgrains all over
the country.

(2) Because of monopolistic mismanagement by a small group of Jute Mill owners
who misuse provisions of JPMA for their own benefits, the jute farmer who despite
being the targeted beneficiary of JPMA continues to remain in a depressed state earning
an annual per capita average income of a mere Rs. 2200/-.

(3) Exploitation of workers in the jute industry has reached new heights because
of the vested interest of Jute Mill Owners in perpetuating sickness and technological
backwardness. Cases of default of PF and ESI payments of these workers are huge and
still mounting.

(4) The prevailing scenario of JPMA created demand and deficient domestic
production of jute bags has encouraged imports (both Legal and illegal) from Bangladesh
in recent times causing a drain on our Foreign Exchange Reserves. It causes JPMA to
benefit Bangladeshi jute farmers.

(5) In order to keep their profits high jute bags manufacturers produce Non Food
Grade bags to pack edible items for domestic consumption. Cheap Jute Batching oil
which is petroleum based and health hazardous is used. For export, the jute industry
produces Food Grade Bags using more expensive Rice Brand Oil which is the
recommended standard for packaging of all edible items.

Non-Jute packaging like HDPE/PP packaging, which has been found technically
suitable by recognised Institutions like IIT Delhi for packaging commodities like Sugar,
Foodgrains and Feftilizers among others has exposed serious limitations of JPMA
because of the reason that jute packaging emerges twice as expensive in comparison
and a national saving of thousands of crores would be effected if, jute packaging gets
replaced by HDPE/PP.

Our present Union Minister for Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution has
gone on record in a press statement that the mere 10 percent relaxation once allowed
but withdrawn before it could be implemented would have resulted in a saving of Rs. 70
crores annually to FCI alone. Subsidies allocated to commodities are getting wasted on
very expensive jute packaging.

* An additional cost burden is being borne in the case of jute packaging because
heavy seepage losses occur.

Additional transportation costs have to be borne in the case of jute packaging
because jute bags are produced only in the State of West Bengal.

The lack of economic logic in JPMA was seen in the case of Cement and Fertilizer
Industries originally mandated for 100% compulsory packaging. Cement has been totally
exempted from JPMA and Fertilizers given the benefit of 80% dilution.


3

The Government of Andhra Pradesh has realised the overall benefits of
substituting jute packaging with plastic Woven Sacks. It did so in the matter of packaging
of Rice. But it had to retract because of compulsory jute packaging mandated by JPMA.

A High Powered Committee headed by the then Union Textiles Secretary had
recommended withdrawal of JPMA for the good of the jute industry itself in its Report
in 1992-93,

Hence this Bill.

‘VIAY SINGH YADAV


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to repeal the jute packaging Materials (Compulsory use in packing Commodities)
Act, 1987.

(Shri Vijay Singh Yadav, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—827RS—27-6-01