THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 366 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
'(5A) "consultation" means the action or process of formally consulting or
discussing with another in a merely consultative, advisory and non-binding manner.'
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article
366.
Bill No. XLII of 2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 15TH DECEMBER, 2017

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Certain terms in the Constitution are not defined leading to leeway in interpretation
causing substantial questions of law. Such ambiguity in the law has contributed to the
question regarding the appointment of judges to the higher judiciary in India. It is for this
reason that the term "consultation" requires to be defined in the Constitution by way of
amendment of article 366 that defines certain terms used in the Constitution. Such definition
will not only remove ambiguity in the definition of the term, but restore the constitutional
scheme in the appointment of judges to higher juduciary by restoring the role of the Executive
Branch in the appointment process of judges and reaffirming the primacy of Parliament in the
domain of legislation in the nation that has been weakened by judicial overreach in the
domain of judicial appointments.
The term "consultation" appears in a number of articles in the Constitution, mainly in
articles 124 and its analogous article 217 and articles 127 and 222. Herein the matters under
question allow for the consultation of other parties by the President of India or the Governor
of the State, as the case may be, in the discharge of his duties. The President and Governor
are bound by the opinions of others as delivered explicitly by the Constitution under article
103(2) and its analogous article 192(2).
Articles 103(2) and its analogous article 192(2) incorporate the wording "'the President
(Governor) shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to
such opinion". Hence indicating the intent of the framers of the Constitution to bind the
President and the Governor's actions to the advice they have received on the matter detailed
in the relevant articles. While exercising the powers under the articles 103(2) and 192(2), the
President and the Governor respectively are not required to act on the aid and advice of the
respective Council of Ministers.
Article 124 and its analogous article 217 and articles 127, 143, 146(1) and 222 of the
Constitution utilise the word "consultation", hence indicating that the framers of the
Constitution did not have the intention to bind the President and the Governor's actions to
the advice they have received on the matter detailed in the relevant articles. They sought
only to ensure that the President or Governor appropriately consulted the relevant authorities
or institutions in discharging their duties, therefore undertaking the action to the best of
their knowledge, even allowing them to disregard the recommendations received during the
consultation process. This is essential as it ensurs that the highest executive functionary of
the nation and states, respectively, has flexibility in the discharge of duties of his office,
while ensuring that he received sound non-binding guidance on matters of constitutional
and national importance and ensuring that all stakeholders were represented in the
consultation process. The term "consultation" mentioned in the Constitution should be
given the same meaning homogeneously throughout the Constitution and different meaning
cannot be assigned for different provisions of the Constitution.
The judicial pronouncements with regard to article 124 made the recommendations
buding upon the President which  is not in keeping with the constitutional scheme. Similar
judicial pronouncements can alter the meaning of other articles of the Constitution, risking
the constitutional fabric and framework of the nation. Similar arguments can be utilised with
respect to article 143, making the court's recommendations to the President binding on
questions of law, not allowing the President to exercise his authority with the flexibility
accorded to him and disturbing the constitutional scheme. Similarly under article 146(1), the
recommendations of the Union Public Service Commission may be made binding upon the
President for the appointment of officers and servants to the Supreme Court and analogously
for the State, hence going against the constitutional scheme.
2

3
As detailed above, there is a requirement for defining the term "consultation" to
ensure that the constitutional scheme is not disturbed due to ambiguity of the definition of
the term. This will also ensure that the principle of separation of powers, while not enumerated
in the Constitution, but upon which it is based, will be maintained. This will also ensure that
the appointment process for higher judiciary in the nation is maintained and kept in sync
with the constitutional scheme and constitutional text as envisioned by the framers of the
Constitution. The need for the same has been elaborated upon below.
The Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed under clause (2) of article 124 of the
Constitution and the Judges of the High Courts are appointed under clause (1) of article 217
of the Constitution, by the President of India. The Ad-hoc-Judges and retired Judges of the
Supreme Court are appointed under clause (1) of article 127 and article 128 of the Constitution
respectively. The appointment of Additional Judges and Acting Judges for the High Court is
made under article 224 and the appointment of retired Judges for sittings of the High Courts
is made under article 224A of the Constitution. The transfer of Judges from one High Court
to another High Court is made by the President of India after consultation with the Chief
Justice of India under clause (1) of article 222 of the Constitution.
The Supreme Court in the matter of the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record
Association vs. Union of India in the year 1993, and in its Advisory Opinion given in the year
1998 in the Third Judges' case on a reference being made to the Supreme Court by the then
President of India under his constitutional powers, had interpreted clause (2) of article 124
and clause (1) of article 217 of the Constitution with respect to the meaning of "consultation"
as "concurrence". Consequently, a Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges to
the Supreme Court and High Courts was formulated known as the "collegium system", and
is presently being followed for such appointments. Pertinently, the said collegium system
does not find mention either in the original Constitution or in any successive amendments
thereto. This was in direct contravention of the Court's earlier decision in the matter. In the
case of S.P. Gupta (December 30, 1981) also known as the "First Judges Case", it declared
that the "primacy" of the recommendations of the Chief Justice of India to the President can
be refused for cogent reasons. This had brought a paradigm shift in favour of the executive
having primacy over the judiciary in judicial appointments for the next twelve years before
the Supreme Court overturned this in the Second and Third Judges' case.
In a democratic set up, the legitimacy of every constitutional institution including the
supreme judicial authority must be traced to the will and consent of the people, directly or
indirectly. The bearers to public offices in all other institutions in the country are appointed
either by an executive authority that is accountable to the people or by a mechanism involving
the executive and legislature by law. No institution in a democracy is entitled under the
constitutional provisions to assure itself any power of appointing its own successors. An
unelected institution, however exalted, appointing its own peers and successors is smeared
with the questions regarding democratic accountability. Since the pronouncements made by
the judges have a strong and deep impact on the public at large, it is necessary that the
judicial appointments are not made unilaterally by the incumbents of the said institutions.
Transparency and objectivity in appointment of judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts is also sine qua non, to ensure the credibility of the judiciary and the will of the
people.
It is important to protect the credibility of the judiciary, an institution held in high
regard by the citizens of India and the other organs of the State. This credibility must not be
tarnished and a credible and respected Supreme Court alone can safeguard the Constitution
and the nation and effectively reconcile justice, constitution, law, harmony and the public
good. Any supposed unconstitutional usurpation of power by any constitutent of democracy
will only go to adversely affect the entire democratic set up. Any apprehension or suspicion
that any input by the executive and/or legislature would deconstruct the independence of
judiciary and the attempts to completely exclude the executive and/or legislature from the
process of appointing judges would be wholly illogical and inconsistent with the foundations
of the theory of democracy and a doctrinal heresy.

4
For achieving the goals as set out above, for ensuring the continued credibility and
independence of judiciary and for reinforcing the faith of general public in the judicial set up,
the proposed Bill seeks to restore the Constitutional scheme as established by the text of the
constitution and not by judicial usurpation of constitutional amendment, while also defining
the key term of "consultation" within the Constitution, removing ambiguity while subsequently
eliminating substantial question of law regarding the term.
Hence this Bill.
SUKHENDU  SEKHAR  RAY

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
366. (1)*        *                     *                    *                     *                    *                     *
(5) "clause" means a clause of the article in which the expression occurs;
* * * * * * *
5

GMGIPMRND—2897RS(S3)—15.12.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, M.P.)