AS INTRODUCED IN THE RasyA SABHA

Bill No, XL of 2000

THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES
(RESERVATION IN SERVICE) BILL, 2000

A

BILL

to provide reservation in services in all the Departments and establishments of the Central
Government. statutory authorities, autonomous bodtes constituted under the central
Acts, Company, Corporation, Public Sector Banks, Private Sector Undertakings,
Cooperative Societies, Universities and affihated/recogmsed schools, colleges etc.
recerving grant in aid etc., from Central Govt./State Govt./Local Body/Public
Undertaking or Private Sector etc. for the citizens of the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected therewith or inctdental thereto,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

5 1. (7) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation
in Services) Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

Short title,
extent
‘Commence-
‘ment, and
application.


Definitions

(3) It shall come into force at once.

(@ This Act is in addition to the provisions relating to reservation in the recruit-
ment/promotion/ upgradation in accordance with the rules issued under proviso to
Article 309 of the Constitution and shall remain to be in operation to the extend not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.

(4) It shall apply to every establishment defined in this Act/department of the Union

of India or under its control and receiving/received grant/aid/subsidies/concessions/loans
from Govt. of India/ Public Sector Bank/Financial Institution Controlled or Managed by
Govt./Private Sector throughout the territory India.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—

(a) “establishment” includes the Government of India, the Parliament of India,
C.A.G., Election Commission, U.P.S.C. all local bodies or other authorities within
the territory of India and under the control of the Govt., of India/Public Sector Banks,
Public Sector Undertakings, Statutory Authorities, Autonomous Body or Authority
consituted under a Central Act, registered or deemed to have been registered under
the Companies Act, Corporation, Cooperative Societes, Universities, established by
Central/State Acts or established by Central Acts and affiliated or recognised educa-
tional institutions receiving grant in aid from Govt. of India, Private Sector person,
partnership firm registered under Indian Partnership Act, a Company registered under
Companies Act, 1956 as amended from time to time, a Trust registered under Indian
Trusts Act and/or Co-operative Societies registered under the Co-operative Societies
Act, State Act/Central Act or deemed to have been registered under that Act and
receiving/received loan or grant in lump sum, financial assistance or concessions
from Govt. of India or any Nationalised Bank/Financial Corporation managed or
controlled by Govt. of India, constituted or body corporate under Central Act or
maintained by or with the help of the Govt. of India, or Govt. of India has share
capital in au establishment.

(b) "notification" means a notification issued under the Act and published in
the Official Gazette of India.

(© "prescribed Authority" mean and include D.O.P.T. or Secretary to the Union
of India or any other Department, Nodal Ministry or Head of the Department or
appointing authority in the establishment, or as may be specified in the appropriate
Rules, regulation or instructions applicable to the establishment.

(@ “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Govt. of India under
this Act or are in force but not inconsistent with the Act or Rules.

(९) “recruitment year” means the English calendar year during which a recruit-
ment is made and shall include part of an year preceding the recruitment, if recruit-
ment is made more than once within a year as per the procedure or as defined in the
relevant recruitment rules or regulations/Act as rules made under proviso to Article
309 of the Constitution and applied to that establishment.

(0 “rules” means Rules made under this Act and instructions/directions/orders
issued under this Act or of those existing but not inconsistent with this Act and Rules.

(g) “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes” shall have the same meanings
assigned to them respectively under clause (24) and clause (25) of Art. 366 of the
Constitution of India and notified by the President of India under Art. 341 (1) and
342(1) as amended by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes List Amendment
Act, 1976 under Act. 341(2) and 342 (2) of the Constitution.

(A) “service” means any service or post of classes of posts or office, appointed
for remuneration for a continuous period of not less than ninety (90) days in a year in
connection with the affairs of the establishment.

10

35


10

35

45

3
CHAPTER II
RESERVATION OF Posts/OrFIce/SERVICE ETC. IN THE ESTABLISHMENT

3. (7) There shall be reservation in every establishment for the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes in all posts/classes of posts in the services/offices and in all cadres/
grades/categories including single posts of a service, at all levels of recruitment for
appointment or promotion/upgradation elevation, except those exempted from the purview
of the Act with prior approval of both the Houses of Parliament as Certified by the Speaker
of the Lok Sabha and Chairman of the Rajya Sabha of such approval and their Certificates
shail be conclusive proof of such approval of the respective Houses.

(2) It shall be the duty of the every State Government to incorporate similar provisions
as a condition to grant loan/concession/subsidy, share capital to any Private Sector, Person,
Firm, Trust, Industry/Organisation within the territory to the state specified in the first
schedule of the Constitution.

(3) The office/post or classes of posts in connection with the services of the
establishment so reserved, shall not be filled by any other candidate other than the Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates respectively, except where otherwise expressly provided
by or under this Act.

4. Notwithstanding anything in any Judgement/Decree/Direction/Order of a Court/
Tribunal or authority to the contrary, every establishment shall adopt such procedure as is
just to secure the results in implementation of the reservation to the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes in all services and posts, classes of posts in the services, in cadre,
grade, category, in direct recruitment, promotion/upgradation, upgradation or appointment
by transfer.

5. The reservation of posts/classes of posts in the services for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes covered by sub-section (/) shall be at such percentage of population of
the latest census, as the Union of India may from time to time prescribe, but in any case it
shall not be less than fifteen per cent for the Scheduled Castes and seven and a half per cent
for the Scheduled Tribes respectively or at such higher percentage as is applicable to the
concerned establishment in case the recruitment/promotion/ upgradation is made on local/
regional basis. The census, for the purposes of this Act, will be treated complete if it had
covered more then 70% of the total population of the country, irrespective of the fact that
it remained incomplete in one or more states wholly or partially for any reason whatsoever.

6. Notwithstanding any incompletion of census in any part of the territory of India,
the Union of India shall take into account the latest preceding census of that part of the
country that had publicized in accordance with the procedure for its publication, so as to
give effect the increase in the percentage of reservation within 3 months of the completion
of census within the meaning of above sub-section (2).

7. Notwithstanding anything in any law, judgement/decree/order/direction to the
contrary, a Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidate selected on merit is not barred to
avail the benefit of relaxed evaluation or concession for consideration at a later stage to the
reserved posts. He also, if, found eligible later on his merit with general candidate for
further promotion/upgradation, previous availment of relaxed standard or concession is
nota bar for consideration of such a candidate.

8. Notwithstanding anything in any law, Judgement/decree/order/direction ofa Court/
Tribunal or authority to the contrary, the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes candidate,
selected on merit ina direct recruitment/promotion/upgradation/upgradation or appointment
by transfer, shall have his inter se seniority on such post with general category candidate.
However, he is eligible for future consideration for reserved posts; and to the rights of
reservation under this Act.

Reservation
and percentage
thereof.

Procedure to
secure results.

Reservation to
be based on
population of
the latest
census

Incompletion
of census in
any part not
to affect
reservation

Procedure
with regard to
candidates
selected on
merit.

Inter se
seniority.


Roster to be

treated
seniority

4

9. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any law, judgement, decree, order, or
558. direction or court/ tribunal or authority, and notwithstanding any inter se merit prepared by
the Public Service Commission, recruitment authority/board/competent person, separately
between general and reserved category candidates, the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
candidate appointed/promoted to a reserved post shall get his seniority, from the date of
such appointment/promotion/upgradation and adjusted in the service as per the roster
maintained in the concerned establishment/deptt./cadre/service/or office at each stage of
appointment/promotion/upgradation irrespective of the roster points occupied in the
immediate lower cadre/post as the case may be. The roster shall be treated as seniority for
general as well as reserved candidate.

Reserved posts 10. Post reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under sub-

not to be filled
by general

section (7) of Section 3 shall be filled in such manner as may be prescribed with the reserved
candidate only and shall not be filled up by general category candidate, even in the absence

candidates, " है
of reserved category candidate not selected/not available.

Vacancies not 11. The unfilled reserved posts or class of posts/vacancies for whatever cause may be,

हा be 4 shall not be dereserved and shall be carried forward from time to time.

lereserved.

Special 12. Notwithstanding anything in any judgement/Decree/Order or Direction of a Court/

राणा Tribunal or authority to the contrary, the Union of India or the establishment shall fill up

drive to such backlog posts or class of posts/vacancies by Special Recruitment Drive for recruitment/

vacancies promotion/upgradation without clubbing the current vacant post(s) or vacancy(ies). The
prohibition of not to reserved in a recruitment year more than 50% of the posts/class of
posts/vacancies in a cadre/grade/service shall have no bearing to such Special Recruitment
Drive/Promotion/upgradation along with general Recruitment or otherwise.

Exchange of 13. If the required number of candidates from the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes

reserved are not selected or not available to fill up the respective reserved post/class of post/vacancy,

wacancies the same shall be filled up by the other reserved category candidates belonging to Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be.

Maintenance 14, However, in a subsequent recruitment, if a reserved candidate from the other

of percentage category so selected, shall be appointed and adjusted in the quota reserved for the other

reservation. —_ category. Thus the balance of the prescribed percentage of reservation shall always be
maintained.

Head of 15, The Head of the establishment/department/organisation and if the appointing

Establishment authority is higher in rank than the Head of the Establishment, the appointing authority

1९ implement shall be the responsible to implement this Act in letter and spirit.

Savings. 16. This Act is in addition to the Law or Rules made under proviso to Article 309 of

Seniority to
base on
existing
roster.

the Constitution or the instructions having force of law prescribing qualification, method
of recruitment/ selection for appointment/promotion/upgradation/appointment by transfer,
regulate probation and all other conditions of service but not inconsistent with this Act or
the Rules made under this Act.

17, Notwithstanding anything in any other Law, Judgement, Decree, Order, Direction
ofa Court/ Tribunal or authority to the contrary, the seniority of a person belonging to the
Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes appointed, on direct recruitment/promotion/
upgradation or on transfer to a reserved post on regular basis in accordance with the
prescribed procedure, shall be counted from the date of his appointment/promotion/
upgradation in each cadre/grade/service/category. His placement of seniority will be as per
the existing roster in the promoted cadre/grade/service/category. The roster point occupied
in the lower grade, cadre, service or category shall have no relevance irrespective of the
later promotion/upgradation of his erstwhile senior general category person.

Relaxation and 4. (1) The Union of India/Competent Authority of the establishment shall be

Concessions.

responsibje for the following:—

10

45


15

5

(i relaxation of the upper age limit fixed for appointment to a service by
such number of years as may be prescribed under the Rules made under this Act,
but not less than five years. However, till then the rules, instructions or regulation
in force/operation not inconsistent with this Act, shall remain in operation.
However, relaxation of five years shall remain in force till then.

(i) exemption of the fee fixed for applying for selection to a service/post/
office separately or combinedly, through an examination or otherwise to such

extent as may be prescribed. Till then the existing rules or instructions shall
remain in operation.

(ii) Notwithstanding any Law, Judgement/Decree/Order/Direction of Court,
Tribunal or Authority to the contrary, the Union of India, the instrumentality or
the concerned establishment, shall have power and shall always be deemed to
have power to make provision for relaxation, prescribed lower qualifying marks
or lessor standards of evaluation, other qualifications or relax previous experience
for direct recruitment/promotion/upgradation for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, to secure their full representation as per prescribed percentage
in Section 3(2) in all services/ offices/cadres/categories/grades. Instructions,
relaxation and concessions prescribed by the Union of India prior to 16.11.1992
1.6. judgement in Inder Sawheny versus Union of India 1992 Supple. 3 SCC 217
case shall remain in force to the extent not inconsistent with this Act, unless new
rules or instructions consistent with this Act are issued in the meanwhile.
Withdrawal of any relaxation/concession, made after the said date shall have no
legal effect.

(2) The recruiting authority/competent officer may pay to the candidate belonging to
the Scheduied Castes or the Scheduled Tribes called for interview, such travelling allowance,
as may be determined by prescribed authority. Till the Rules under the Act are made, the
existing Rules or instructions in that behalf shall remain in operation.

5. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any Jaw, Judgement, Decree, Order or Direction of
Court, Tribunal or Authority to the contrary, single posts carrying equal scale of pay or
responsibility and duty in the Deptt. or establishment, shall be clubbed and provide
teservation to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for appointment/promotion/
upgradation, in those posts in accordance with this Act and rules. Instructions or directions
by whatever name called but not inconsistent with the Act in force shall remain in operation.

(2) Roster shall be applied for other single post in an establishment and if Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidate at the roster point at the time of vacancy arising, available,
such vacancy at the roster point, shall be considered and if Scheduled Caste/Scheduled.
Tribe candidate found selected, may be appointed or otherwise be carried forward till
succeeding vacancy arises.

6. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any Judgement, Decree, Order or
Direction ofa Court, Tribunal or Authority, to the contrary, respective roster points earmarked
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in—40 points or 100 points roster as the case
may be or any other points roster, the same shall remain in operation even after the date of
the Judgement of the Supreme Court of India in R.K. Sabarwal versus State of Punjab
(1995)2 SCC 745 i.e. 10th February, 1995, the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes
candidates, on appointment or promotion/upgradation, shall be placed in the roster points
specified thereon for them according to the order of merit among themselves, respectively.
Every Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe employee holds a lien on the post till he is duly
promoted and became a member in the higher service. Irrespective of the respective merit
listinter se between general category employees and reserved category employees prepared
by the Public Service Commission/Sélection Committee Authority, the inter se seniority
between the general and reserved category candidates shall be as is maintained in the roster
operating in the particular cadre/ grade/category/service.

Clubbing of
single post.

Roster and its
operation.


Protection of
the action
taken in good
faith

Nomination of
jiaison officer

Submission of
annual report
& mainte-

nance thereot

6

(2) Notwithstanding anything in any Judgement, Decree, Order or Direction of Court,
Tribunal or Authority to the contrary, on appointment by promotion/upgradation to a
higher post in a cadre/grade/service/category on regular basis according to rules, the
Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribes promotee shall be fixed in the appropriate roster
point earmarked for the respective reserved category. The seniority of such a promotee shall
be according to the roster in the promoted cadre/ grade or service. The roster in the lower
cadre/grade service shall cease to have application from the date of promotion/upgradation
on regular basis.

(3) Notwithstanding anything in any Judgement, Decree, Order or Direction of Court,
Tribunal or Authority to the contrary, the general category senior employee in lower cadre/
grade/service, on promotion/upgradation to the next higher cadre/grade/service, does not
gain senioriy over the earlier promoted junior reserved category employee. The inter se
seniority between reserved and general category employees is from the respective dates of
promotion/upgradation, irrespective of seniority/ juniority position had in the lower cadre/
grade/service/category.

CHAPTER III
MIscELLANEOUS

7.No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any establishment.
or other person responsible for implementation and application of the Act or anything
which in good faith done in pursuance of this Act or rules or order made thereunder or
applicable in respect thereto.

8. Every establishment/Deptt./Appointing Authority/Head of the Deptt. shall nominate
one or more officers of such rank or ranks as may be prescribed to act as liaison officers.
Officers from among the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, if available, as far as
possible, may be nominated for enforcement of this Act, who shall, in particular, be
responsible for:—

(a) Coordination and due and strict implementation of the provisions of this
Act and rules made or any other instructions or directions issued by the Union of
India thereunder, in their true spirit and purpose and to achieve its object.

(b) Submission of the report and returns to the Union of India within the
prescribed period.

(c) Conduct annual inspection of the records of the establishment etc. in such
manner as may be prescribed.

(@ Doing such other incidental work or act, as may be necessary, for the above
purposes.

9. (1) Every establishment etc. shall maintain such records as may be prescribed and
shall furnish every year to the Union of India in such manner and at such time as may be
prescribed, an annual report on appointments and promotion/upgradation of Scheduled
Castes and of other Scheduled Tribes personnel made by it during the previous year;
number records and of unfilled posts/vacancies and the steps taken to fill up the inspection
posts/vacancies and reasons for not filling them up.

(2) An officer authorised by the Union of India in this behalf not below the rank of
Director in the Nodal Ministry of the Union of India may inspect any records or documents
maintained in the establishment of the recruitment, appointment and promotion/upgradation
of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in an establishment etc. As far as possible, ifan
officer of that rank/status belonging to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe is available,
he may be authorised for inspection and reporting.

(3) It shall be the duty of the Head of the establishment etc. to make available such
records or documents for inspection by the authorised officer under sub-section (2) and
furnish such information or extend and arrange such assistance, as may be necessary, for
him to carry out his functions under this Act.

10

45


10

35

45

7

10. (7) Whosoever responsible for implementation of the contravenes the provisions
of the Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend upto-six months or
fine of not less than rupees ten thousand or both. The fine shall be recoverable from personal
pay of such officer:

Provided that nothing in this section shall render any person liable to punishment, if
he proves that he had made very bona fide and sincere endeavour or exercised utmost care
attention diligence and devotion to implement the provisions of the Act/Rules/Orders/
Directions issued under the Act or in force but not inconsistent with the Act and Rules.

(2) Any person claiming to be of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, applies for
recruitment/seek promotion/upgradation shall file an affidavit duly attested by a gazetted
officer of State Govt. or Govt. of India or a judicial Magistrate First Class and above rank as
per the instruction of the Union of India as prescribed in the schedule to the Act that he by
birth belongs to the Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribe and continues to be the Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe. In case he had already obtained a social status certificate from a
competent officer/authority in the prescribed format that he belongs to the Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes, the original certificate shall be produced at the time of selection
and the certified/zerox copy may be filed along with the application for recruitment/
selection etc.

(3) As soon as after making the appointment to a post/office/service of a reserved
candidate, the appointing authority shall immediately send the affidavit and the original
social status certificate and application for recruitment/promotion/upgradation etc. to the
Director of Social/Tribal Welfare Deptt. for verification and prompt reporting to the
establishment etc.

(4) On receipt of the record as provided in section (3), above from the establishment,
the Director, Social Welfare/Tribal Welfare Department himself or by his authorised officer
shall verify or cause verification of the correctness of the social status of the candidate and
shall report back within three months from the date of the receipt of the record to the
appointing authority/Head of the Deptt. of the establishment, of the Correctness or otherwise
of the social status of the appointed concerned reserved category person.

(5) In case the report is adverse to the appointee, the appointing authority shall
immediately issue a show cause notice to the appointee together with a copy of the report
received from the Director, Social Welfare/Tribal Welfare Department of the concerned
State Govt. calling for an explanation within a specified time; on receipt of the explanation,
if any, within the specified or extended time, it shall take appropriate action within a period
one month as per the rules or in accordance with the principles of natural justice and pass
appropriate brief reasoned orders as the case may be. If the appointee seeks oral hearing in
person, the opportunity may be given. The order shall be served in person on the appointee/
in case of avoidance to receive it, send it by registered post with acknowledgement due to
the last known address. A copy thereof be sent to the Director Social Welfare/Tribal
Department, of the State Government.

(6) Anappeal shall lie against the order passed u/s 9(5) to the Head of the Department.
If the impugned order was passed by a Head of the Deptt., if it is the appointing authority,
to the immediate higher authority who shall, after giving an opportunity of hearing in
person to an aggrieved employee, decide the same within three months from the date of
filing of the appeal; the decision shall be final and is binding on the appointee and shall not
be questioned in any court of law. The same shall be served on the employee either or
person or by registered post with acknowledgement due. In case the decision is in his
favour, the same may be communicated to the Director of Social Welfare/Tribal Welfare
Department who on its receipt may question the same under Art. 226 of the Constitution.

(7) Whomsoever knowingly makes a false claim that he is a citizen of Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe and whosoever charged with the responsibility of issuing a certificate/
attesting an affidavit knowingly issues a false social status certificate or attests an affidavit,

Penalty for
contravention
of this Act
and false
claims or
issue of false
social status
certificate.


Cognizance of
the offence by
courts.

Cognizance &
non-bailable.
Saving of
existing
directions etc.,
issued by the
Central
Government.

Power of
Central Govt.
to give
directions.

Act to have
over-riding
effect.

Removal of
difficulties.

Laying of
Annual
Report.

8

proved that the person is not a member of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, ‘shall be
punishable with imprisonment of not less than three years and fine which may extend to
rupees twenty thousand or both. The concerned officer may be convicted and sentenced to
pay a fine upto rupees ten thousand.

(8) The conviction under sub-section (7) of this section shall be disqualification for
any future appointment in any establishment etc under the Central Government or State
Government and the accused shall not be eligible to contest any elective post, like Member
of the Parliament, the State Legislature, Local Bodies, Nagar Palika, Gram Panchayat, etc.:

Representation of People Act or Local Bodies Acts shall be deemed to have been
suitably amended and incorporated the disqualification in sec. 10 (7) as disqualification
therein.

11. (J) No prosecution for any offence under this Act shall be maintainable against an
officer except by, or with the sanction of the competent officer with prior approval of the
National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes constituted under Article
338 of the Constitution of India who shall the authority to examine whether the conclusion
of prima facie violation of the Act is proved from record. The competent officer shall
oridnarily accept such recommendation unless it further consults the Commission and had
revised its recommendation.

(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Section (70) save
ona complaint by the aggrieved person or competent police officer or other officer, except
as provided under sub-section (7)

(3) No court, inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the First Class shall try an offence punishable under this Act.

(4) The offence under the Act is congnizable and non-bailable.

12. Allinstructions, directions and orders issued by the prescribed authority relating
to the reservation of posts/classes of posts or vacancies in services etc. including relaxation,
concessions and safeguards for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes existing
immediately before the Inder sawheny versus Union of India 1992, Supplement 3 SCC 217
of the Supreme Court and in respect of which there is no express provision in this Act, in so
far as they are not consistent with the provision of this Act, shall continue to be in force,
unless withdrawn or superseded in the meanwhile with prior approval of both the Houses of
the Parliament.

13. Every establishment etc. shall be bound by the Act, Rules or such existing Rules,
direction/ instructions by whatever name may be called not contrary to or inconsistent with
the provisions of the Act or as the Central Government of India may by general or special
order, give in writing from time to time to give effect to the provisions of this Act.

14. Notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law,
order, judgement or decree of any court, tribunal or authority for the time being in force the
provisions of this act shall have effect in addition to and not in derogation of or any
instrument/instruction having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act.

15. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Union
of India may by order published in the officials Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty.

(2) Every rule, instruction/direction/order made under this Act shall, as soon as may
be, after it is so made, be laid before each House of Parliament and obtain prior approval of
both the Houses of the Parliament.

16. The Government of India shall in every two years, lay before each house of Parliament,
a report giving full account of the implementation of the Act during the preceding years.

10


9

; 17. (/) Notwithstanding the operation of the provisions in sections 3 and 4 per force, Power to
to give proper and full effect to the Act, the Union of India, may, by notification, make rules — make rules.
to carry out the provisions of this Act.

, (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-going, such
5 provisions may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the percentages of posts to be reserved in services for the members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under sub-section 2(a) of Section 3 and
not less than 15% and 712% respectively;

(0) the manner of filling the posts reserved for the Scheduled Castes and
10 Scheduled Tribes under sub-sections (71) and (72) of Section 3;

(©) relaxation of upper age limit etc. under clause (/) of sub-section (7) of
Section 4;

(व) exemption of fee for applying to the recruitment to a service under clause
(ii) of sub-section (/) of Section 4;

15 (९) the authority to determine the travelling allowances under sub-section (2)
of section 4;

(f rank of officer to be nominated as liaison officer under section 8;
(g) the prescribed authority u/s 4(/) (iii);

(A) the manner of conducting annual inspection of records under clause (c) of
20 section 8;

@ the records to be maintained by an establishment etc. under sub-section (1)
of section 9 and the manner in which and the time at which an annual report on the
appointments etc. of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes made during the
previous year to be furnished under that sub-section;

95 (/ the authority to sanction prosecution under sub-section (7) of Section 11;
(0 any other matter, which is required to be, or may be, prescribed;

(0) form of affidavit of the candidate, officer, non-official to counter sign/
attestation under section 3;

(m) procedure for enquiry by the appointing authority and appellate authority;
30 (n) such other rules or orders or direction to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(3) Every rule made under this Act or instructions/directions shall be laid, as soon as
may be, after it is made, before each Houses of Parliament, while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the

35. successive sessions aforesaid, both houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified from or be of no effect, as the case may be. So, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under this rule.


SCHEDULE
AFFIDAVIT

I _ _ —

—— S/DIo Sunn a
of Village/Town रण
———— within the jurisdiction of
— Police Station in _

Taluk/Mandal ———- — — in the District/Division
न a of the State/Union Territory ~-————

—— belong to
नया Community/Caste/Tribe by birth and continues to be a Scheduled Caste/Tribe which
is recognised in item No as Scheduled Caste/

Scheduled Tribe under the Constitution (Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe) Order, 1950 or
as amended from time to time by the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe List Modification
Order, 1956, the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960, The Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966,
The State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970, The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation), 1971
and the Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribe Order Amendment Act, 1976 of the Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe Amendment Order ———————————, |

न 5/0/0
SEE further state that myself and my parents ordinarily/normally
reside in the said Village/Town and within the jurisdiction of --~-——————. —
Police Station in ——— Taluk/Mandal —-—————————
in the District/Division —-———. -———— of the State/Union Territory. I further
solemnly verify and state that the facts stated above are true and correct to the best of my
knowledge and belief and no part of statement is incorrect and false.

Signature

Attested by Gazetted Officer:

Note : Incase the candidate is son/daughter of a migrant labour/transferee, it should further
be stated in the affidavit of the date of migration/transfer and the duration of stay in
the migrated/transferred State in which the Caste/Tribe was not recognised as Sched-
uled Caste/Scheduled Tribe.

The following are eligible to attest the affidavit:

(1) District Magistrate/Additional District Magistrate/Collector, Deputy Commissioner/
Additional Deputy Commissioner/Deputy Collector/Ist Class Stipendary Magis-
trate/Sub-Divisional Magistrate/Taluka Magistrate/Executive Magistrate/Extra
Assistant Commissioner.

(2) Chief Presidency Magistrate/ Additional Chief Presidency Magistrate/Presidency
Magistrate.

(3) Revenue Officer not below the rank of Tehsildar and

(4) Sub-Divisional Officer/Mandal, Revenue/Development Officer of the area where
the candidate and/or his family normally resides.

Signed by

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The preamble of the Constitution assures social and economic justice, equality of
Status and of opportunity to every citizen and Article 38 imposes duty on the state to
Strive to promote welfare of the people by securing and protecting effective social order
in which social and economic justice shall inform all the institutions of the national life
in particular strive to and endeavor to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and
opportunities among individuals and the groups of people of India and every opportu-
nity to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes should be provided to remove social
jnequatity and economic empowerment given to secure equality of status and dignity of
individual.

Article 46 enjoins the State to promote with special care, economic interest, in
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and shall protect them from
social injustice.

Art. 335 mandates that the claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall
be taken into consideration consistently with efficiency of administration in the making

of appointment to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union and the
State.

Even after fifty three years of independence the Scheduled Castes and the Sched-
uled Tribes do not have proper representation in all the services under the State except
class IV or class Ill services for variegated reasons. While Article 335 assures and given
right to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for being considered fastens funda-
mental duty on the State to secure adequate representation to them in all services and
posts in all cadres, grades/categories of services under the State, the Supreme Court has
by its Judgements, cut down its width.

In recent judgements of the Supreme Court of India in Indrasawhni Versus Union
of India opined that reservation in specialised posts in engineering, medical, military
etc. shall not be made.

In Ajit Singh-II case the Suprme Court held that the Scheduled Castes and Sched-
uled Tribes promoted to reserved quota posts shall not be entitled to seniority from the
date of promotion till the erstwhile senior general candidates are promoted and the later
catch up the former and gain seniority over him, depriving the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes officers seniority from the date of regular promotion as per service
rules with attended benefits and denied lien on the post held by them. It was also held
that the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes promotees have no fundamental right
to promotion though Article 16(4A) guarantees such right while declaring the general
candidates have that right to promotion as fundamental right impeding the phase of
providing proper representation to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in all serv-
ices and posts under the State. It was also held that the roster points in the lower cadre
of the reserved candidates on promotion should not be delinked in Narisihman case and
Telecommunication case, the Supreme Court opined that reservation in single post is
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.

In Ajit Singh-II case the Supreme Court had held that the facilities and opportunities
in relaxed standards for consideration of the claims of the reserve candidates for
appointment or promotion to a service or a post is illegal and the Department of Personnel
purported implementation of the above judgements of the Supreme Court issued various
orders nullifying the effective implementation of the reservation in the letter and spirit
of the Constitutional mandate.

n


12

It has been the policy of the Government of India that reservation in services/posts
under the Union of India etc. is one of the policies to provide equality of opportunity
and of status, economic and social justice to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes
and the aforesaid judgements defeat the object of the Constitution and the policy of the
State in securing proper and adequate representation to the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in various posts/offices/services in an establishment etc. defined under
the Act.

After adopting liberal economy and private investment in Public Sector
Undertaking, it has become corresponding necessity to provide opportunity of
employment to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the services/posts in
the establishment covered by the Act.

With a view to remove the injustice being meted out to the Scheduled Caste and
the Scheduled Tribes in implementation and enforcement of the policy of reservation in
service etc. under the State, etc. this Bill is being proposed for being enacted.

R.S. GAVAI


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 22 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Act. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislature power is therefore of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for reservation in services in all the Departments and establishments of the
Central Government, statutory authorities, autonomous bodies constituted under the
central Acts, Company, Corporation, Public Sector Banks, Private Sector Undertakings,
Cooperative Societies, Universities and affiliated/recognised schools, colleges etc.
receiving grant in aid etc. from Central Government/ State Government/Local Body/
Public Undertaking or Private Sector etc. for the citizens of the Scheduled Castes and.
Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri R.S. Gavai, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—2046RS 27-7-2000.