THE QUALITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to formalise the commitment to high quality education; adopt grade specific performance
oriented education system; provide for grading of schools by independent agency on
the basis of  their academic performance; award schools for achieving high academic
standard for; establish a system of accountability in education and matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Quality and Accountability in Education Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of the
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill NO. XLII of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2009
Definitions.

2
(b) "core academic area" means subjects of Mathematics, English, Social Studies,
and Science;
(c) "Oversight Committee" means Education Oversight Committee constituted
under section 4;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "standard based assessment" means a system of assessment where an
individual's performance is compared to specific performance standard and not to the
performance of other students; and
(f) "school" means any educational institution providing education up to the
twelfth standard.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within its jurisdiction, ensure high quality
educational opportunities to every citizen in the country and establish a system of
accountability in the educational system at every level.
(2) For the purpose of providing high quality education, the appropriate Government
shall prescribe a system of standard based assessment in the core academic area for assessing
the performance of each student and introduce grade specific performance oriented standards
in schools.
4. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Committee to be known as the Education Oversight Committee to perform the functions
assigned under this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of,—
(i) Union Minister of Human Resource Development—as Chairman;
(ii) Five Members of Parliament—three from Lok Sabha and two from Rajya
Sabha to be nominated by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and Chairman, Rajya Sabha
respectively;
(iii) Chairman, University Grants Commission;
(iv) Chairman, All India Council of Technical Education;
(v) Chairman, National Council for Teachers Education;
(vi) Chairman, Indian Council of Historical Research;
(vii) Chairman, Indian Council of Social Science Research;
(viii) Chief Secretary of seven States or Union Territories to be nominated by the
Central Government on relation basis in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ix) Chairman, National Council of Education research and Training;
(x) Chairman, Central Board of Secondary Education;
(xi) Five eminent academicians to be nominated by the Central Government who
shall have at least twenty years experience in the field of education;
(xii) Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human
Resource Development—as Member Secretary.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the five eminent academicians shall be such
as may be prescribed.
(4) The Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource
Development shall provide the secretarial assistance to the Oversight Committee.
(5) The headquarter of the Oversight Committee shall be in New Delhi and the Oversight
Committee shall have its office in each State and Union Territory and at such places as may
be decided by the Committee.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
quality
education and
establish
accountability.
Central
Government
to constitute
Education
oversight
committee.

3
5. (1) The functions of the Committee shall be—
(a) to review the assessment system in States and Union Territories;
(b) to devise and review grade specific performance oriented education standards
in core area;
(c) to develop and review the standard based assessment system at various
levels in States and Union Territories;
(d) to develop a comprehensive system of quarterly and annual reporting for
rating academic performance;
(e) to devise and review the tests conducted for evaluating the performance at
various levels;
(f) to make recommendation on any matter relating to quality effectiveness of the
education;
(g) to prepare an annual report and submit it to the Parliament; and
(h) to devise, review and monitor the implementation and evaluation of education
accountability system.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1)
of section 5, the Oversight Committee shall ensure that the standard based assessment
reflects highest level of academic skill with rigor necessary to improve the curriculum and
interaction so that the students are encouraged to learn at unprecedented level and shall be
the reflection of highest level of academic skill at each grade level.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within its jurisdiction constitute an independent
panel, in such manner and with such composition as may be prescribed, for evaluating the
performance of schools and awarding grades as per their performance for attaining high
quality academic education.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions in clause (1) of section 6, the
composition of the independent panel shall be such so as to have eminent academicians and
representatives of Non-Government Organisations working in the field of education in majority.
(3) The independent panel shall always have a representative of the Oversight
Committee in its composition.
(4) The appropriate Government shall establish an award giving system in such manner
as may be prescribed in each district, to recognise and reward schools for attaining high
quality academic achievements on the basis of the recommendation of the independent
panel.
7. (1) If any school receives a grade of below average or unsatisfactory  the appropriate
Government in consultation with the Office of the Oversight Committee shall frame a revival
plan and compulsory packages and provide the research based technical assistance on each
and every aspect of the schooling.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Office of the Oversight
Committee also review the accountability system and take such action as may be required for
reviving the school at the appropriate grade level.
8.  (1) The Oversight Committee shall within six months of the coming into force of this
Act establish a task force to prepare a roadmap for involving parents with their children's
education.
(2) The task force shall look for ways to encourage and induce parents to oversee
students academic performance and behaviour that contribute to the academic improvement.
Functions of
the Oversight
Committee.
Independent
Panel to grade
and award
school.
Revival of
school,
receiving
below average
grade.
Task Force for
involving
Parents with
their
children’s
education.

4
9. (1) The Oversight Committee shall , through its offices in States and Union Territories,
in consultation with State Government establish in each district a performance based
accountability system in the district and school administration for providing quality education
at the district level.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, ensure the participation of parents, teachers
and principals in the development, annual review and revisions of the accountability system
established in the district.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1)
and (2) of section 9, while framing the accountability system, persons shall be identified at
district and school level who shall be responsible for various aspects and activities of the
school education.
10. (1) The Oversight Committee may prescribe norms and issue guidelines in respect
of following matters pertaining to school education:—
(a) clean learning environment and basic infrastructure in schools;
(b) well lit classrooms with suitable chair, desks and other equipment;
(c) fully qualified and adequately trained teachers and counselors;
(d) adequate text books, other leaning material and writing material;
(e) fair and authentic assessment system based on grading;
(f) teacher-student ratio in each standard;
(g) time to be devoted by teacher in class room;
(h) meeting of counselors with students;
(i)  hygienic toilets and drinking water facilities;
(j) protection from harassment;
(k) preparedness for disaster mitigation;
(l) access to co-curricular activities and sports;
(m) nursing facilities;
(n) fair and non-discriminatory discipline system;
(o) well equipped laboratories; and
(p) parents participation in school activities.
(2) It shall be the duty of the appropriate government to ensure compliance of the
norms prescribed and guidelines issued by Oversight Committee through district
administration in the district.
(3) The office of the Oversight Committee in States or Union Territories shall monitor
the compliance and send a report in this regard to the headquarter annually.
11. The Central Government shall, by due appropriation made by Parliament in this
regard, provide funds for the purposes of this Act.
12. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided  that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
Accountability
in
administration
and school.
Oversight
Committee to
issue guidline.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.

5
13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law, for the
time being in force.
14. (1) The Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every order and every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. While it is in
Session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one Session or in two or
more successive Sessions, and if, before the expiry of the Session immediately following the
Session or the successive Sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be. So, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power to make rules.
Overriding
effect of this
Act.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Literacy is the key to development, health care, employment and last but not the least,
to population control. The literacy rate of the country at the time of independence was only
fourteen per cent. With the concerted efforts of the successive Governments, the literacy
rate has increased and reached to a level of 65.38 per cent. There are many Government
schemes which have been launched to increase the number of literates in the country such
as, the Serva Shiksha Abhiyan, Education Guarantee Scheme, Alternative and Innovative
Education Scheme, District Primary Education Programme, Total Literacy Campaign,
Continuing Education Scheme and Mid-Day Meal Programme. Though the literacy level in
the country has increased but going by the generally accepted definition of "literacy" and
the poor quality of education being imparted in the country, it is not going to have desired
impact on the development of the country. As things stand today, not much attention is
being paid towards the quality of education in the existing education system and in various
schemes or programmes. With the participation of private sector in education, it has become
a business as everyone with commerce motive wants to make money by running an
educational institution. On the Government side, there is no accountability in various
Government run or aided educational institutes if they fails to deliver on quality parameters.
As a result the quality of education suffers in such institutes. Education is one of the most
powerful instruments for reducing poverty and inequality in the society. It is equally a key to
enhance India's competitiveness in the global economy. Therefore, only making the people
literate is not going to help. It has to be ensured that access to quality education should be
given to all, in particular, to the poor and rural population for economic and social development
of the country. In a recent study by ASSOCHAM called 'Comparative Study of Emerging
Economies on Quality of Education' in respect of educational quality our country ranks sixth
among the seven emerging economies of the world. The study reveals that in terms of quality
of secondary education, our country stands at the last position. Therefore, it is necessary
that serious attention is paid towards quality of education so that the country may not lose
its competitive advantages against other countries in long term. For obtaining quality in
education, it is all the most necessary that the system of accountability should be introduced
in  the administration as well as in educational institutions. The Bill seeks to achieve the
above objectives of quality and accountability in educational system in the country.
Hence this Bill.
MABEL REBELLO
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute an Education
Oversight Committee which shall have its offices in States and Union Territories as well.
Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Oversight Committee shall constitute a task force to
prepare a roadmap for involving parents with children's education. Clause 11 of the Bill
provides that the Central Government shall provide funds the purposes of the Bill. Therefore,
the Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the consolidated fund of India. It is estimated
that an expenditure of rupees one hundred crore per annum will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore will also be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to formalise the commitment to high quality education; adopt grade specific performance
oriented education system, provide for grading of schools by independent agency on
the basis of their academic performance, award schools for achieving high academic
standards; establish a system of accountability in education and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Ms. Mabel Rebello,, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5611RS(S5)—18-12-2009.