33 of 1995.

5

REPRINT

AS INTRODUCED IN (५०४५ SABHA ON
THE 287H JuLy, 1997

Bill No. XLIII_of 1997

THE DELHI RENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1997
A
BILL
to amend the Dethi Rent Act, 1995.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows :—

1. This Act may be called the Delhi Rent (Amendment) Act, 1997.

2. In section 3 of the Delhi Rent Act, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in sub-section (/),—

(०) in clause (०), for the words “monthly deemed rent on the date of
commencement of this Act”, the words “monthly rent payable” shall be substituted;

(8) Explanation II] shall be omitted;

(©) Explanation IV and Explanation V shall be renumbered as Explanation गा
and Explanation IV respectively.

Short title.

Amendment
of Section 3.


Zz

Substitution of 3. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
new section namely :--

for section 4. 252

Agreement to “4, Notwithstanding anything contained in section 107 of the Transfer of
be in writing. Property Act, 1882, no person shall, after the commencement of this Act, let or
a take on rent any premises except by an agreement in writing.”.
Amendment 4, In section 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-

of section 5. section shall be inserted, namely :—

“(4) In relation to a tenant referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (3), the
right of tenancy shall devolve for a period of three years from the date of his
death to his successors in the following order, namely :—

(a) spouse;

(6) son or daughter, or, where there are both son and daughter, both of
them,

(c) parents;
(d) daughter-in-law, being the widow of his pre-deceased son :

Provided that the tenancy shall devolve upon 3 successor only in a
case where such successor was dependent on the tenant on the date of his
death and such successor is not owning or occupying any other non-
residential premises in the National Capital Territory of Delhi.”.

Amendment 5. In section 6 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following sub-section
of section 6. shall be substituted, namely :-—

"(1) The rent payable in relation to a premises shall be,—

(a) in the case of a tenancy entered into before the commencement of
this Act,—

(i) where standared rent under section 7 has not been fixed, the
rent agreed to between the landlord and the tenant as enhanced in the
manner provided in Schedule I; or

(ii) the standard rent specified under section 7;

(8) in the case of a tenancy entered into after the commencement of
this Act, the rent agreed to between the landlord and the tenant as enhanced
as per agreement, failing which in the manner provided in Schedule 1,

as revised under section 9.”.

Amendment 6. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),—
of section 11.
(a) clause (i) shall be omitted;
(b) clauses (ii) to (v) shall be renumbered as clauses (J to (iv) respectively;
(०) inthe provisio, after the word “landlord”, the words “or the tenant” shall
be inserted.
Substitution of 7. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
new section namely :—
for section 13.
Limitation for “13. A landlord or a tenant may file an application, within two years from the
ane oe date on which the cause of action has arisen, to the Rent Authority,—
ixation 0!
standard rent (a) in the case of any premises which was let before the commencement
ete. of this Act, for any lawful increase or decrease of rent including fixation of

standard rent or for payment of other charges;

4 of 1882.
5

15

20

25

30

35

40


3

(8) im the case of any premises which was let after the commencement of this
t ‘Act, for determining lawful increase or decrease of rent or other charges payable
~ excluding fixing of standard rent:
Provided thet the Rent Authority may entertain the application after the expiry ofthe
s said period of two years ifhe is satisfied that the aplicant was prevented by suficent ¢atse
from filing the application in time.".
& In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),.—
(a) के clause (a), for the words "two or more", the words “three or more“ shall be
substituted;
डक @ imclause (0), for Explanation I, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
=Provided also that for the purpose of this clause, section 23, section 24, section
25 of section 26 and notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of
छ Act, where the landlord in his application supported by an affidavit submits that
‘Se premises are required by him for occupation for himself or for any member of 8
a डक dependent on him, the Rent Authority shal give an opportunity the ees
कट his reply supported by an affidavit within fifteen days of the intimation in this
regard to such tenant, shall pass orders on the basis of such affidavits only and shall

{ endezvour to dispose of the matter within one month of intimation to such tenant,

Explanation |—For the purposes of this clause, section 23, section 24, section
2 sor enon 26, premises let fora particular use may be requiod bythe landlord for
different use if such use is permissible under Jaw.".
9. In section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section (8), for clause (a), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(a) Every application by 8 jandlord for the recovery of possession of any
25 premises on the specified inclause (०) or clause () of sub-section (2) of section
Pree o geation 33 shall be dealt within accordance wit the procedure specified ता
this sub-section.”.
10. In section 48 of the principal Act,—
(७) in sub-section (/),—
30 (i in clause (6), for the words "Member; or", the word “Member.” shall be
substituted;
(ii) clause (2) and clause (d) shall be omitted.
(6) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
(2) Aperson shal ot be qualified fr appointment a a Member, unis
35 he—
(a)is,orhas been, qualified 1 be, «Judge of 2 High Cours
(ey hasbeen a Member ofthe Indian Legal Service and has held 2
post in Grade I of that Service for at east three Yeo
(28 sub-section (3), forthe words, brackes and figures "SSO
45 tothe Sovisions of sub-section (an) the" the word “The” stall 02
substituted;
(2) sub-section (4) and sub-section (5) shall be omitied,
si rsaion ही ofthe principal Act forthe opening words "On he ९०आए
an Son to eoblament ने he Trina mde section 46 A ७०
45 substituted.

Amendment
of section 22.

Amendment
of section 45.

Amendment
of section 48.

cs
Amendment
of section 67.


= 12. In section 71 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the opening words “No
of section 71. court", the words and figures "On the establishment of the Tribunal under section 46, no
court” shall be substituted.
Amendment 13. In section 81 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clauses (०) and (0) shall be
of section 81. omitted,
Addition of 14. Section 82 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as section 84 and before

पक. section 84 as so renumbered, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:-—

Saving of "82, Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the Administration of
4 की of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, or the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act,
enactments. 1956.

Transitory 83. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, for so Jong as a Rent Au-
provisions. thority is not appointed under sub-section (7) of section 43 and the Delhi Rent Tribu-

nal is not established under section 46,—

(७) the Controllers appointed under section 35 of the Delhi Rent Control
Act, 1958 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the repealed Act), shall con-
tinue to hold office and shall exercise the powers conferred, and duties imposed,
on a Rent Authority by or under this Act in the manner provided in Chapter VI
of the repealed Act;

(6) the Rent Control Tribunal appointed under sub-section (7) of section
38 of the repealed Act shall continue to hold office and exercise the powers of
appeal over the decisions of the Controllers referred to in clause (a) in the
manner it had been exercising such powers under section 38 of the repealed Act;

(c) reference to—
(6) "Tribunal" in sub-section (6) of section 44,
(i) "Chairman" in sub-section (3) of section 45,
(iif) “Chairman of the Tribunal” in clause (6) of sub-section (7) of

section 45,
(iv) "Chairman of the Tribunal" in clause (व) of ‘sub-section (7) of
section 45,
shall be deemed to be reference to Rent Control Tribunal referred to in clause (5).”.
Amendment 15. In Schedule I of the principal Act, for Table I, the following Table shall be
of Schedule 1. substituted, namely:—
“TABLE!
Date of agreement/commencement of aa of annual enhancement of rent ‘of annual enhancement of rent
__famatrmetion  2.यक्‍--हूे+++ 5
शा नए एन ee 2)
छ् Up to the 3ist December, 1949 ‘Two per cent.
2. On and from the Ist January, 1950 to Four per cent.
the 31st December, 1960
3, On and from the 1st January, 1961 to Six per cent.
a the 31st December, 1970
"4. On and from the Ist January, 1971 to () Bight per cent. for
the 31st December, 1995 residential premises;
(ii) Ten per cent, for non-residential premises.
5.  Onand from the Ist January, 1996 (0). Bight per cent, for residential premises;
onwards (i) Twelve per cent. for non-residential
premises.".

ee as

31 of 1950.
10 96 of 1956.

15 59 of 1958.

20

25

30

35

40


ig In Schedule

TV of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words,
brackets and lettcrs “For cases covered under clauses (९) and (/)" and the ending with the
words "and for other cases indicate thirty days.", the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“For cases covered under clause (e) or clause (f) or clause (7) of sub-section (2)
of section 22 or section 23, section 24, section 25, section 26 or section 33, indicate
fifteen days and for other cases indicate thirty days.”.



= ‘OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Delhi Rent Bill, 1995 which received assent of the President on the 23rd August,
1995 was published as the Delhi Rent Act, 1995. However, in view of the strong reservations
expressed by various individuals and organisations, the Act could not be brought into force
so far. Though the Act was conceived as an attempt to promote private investment in rental
housing by balancing the interests of the landlords and the tenants, yet it was felt that
certain distortions are to be set at rest.

2. The issue regarding enforcement of the Act with or without amendments has been
under examination of the Central Government at various levels for over a year. A view has
emerged after various high level meetings that the Act may te brought into force after
effecting certain amendments therein.

3. Having regard to the various representations and the developments referred to
above, ithhas been decided to amend the Act, inter alia, seeking to provide for the following,
namely:—

(a) provision regarding non-applicability of the Act under section ३(1)(०) will be
in relation to monthly rent payable instead of in relation to monthly deemed rent;

(0) all tenancies which may be entered into after the commencement of the Delhi
Rent Act, 1995 shall be in writing and registration thereof shall be governed by the
provisions of the Registration Act, 1908;

(©) inheritability of tenancies in relation to non-residental premises where the
successor of the deceased tenant was dependent on him and is also not owning or
possessing any non-residential premises in the National Capital Territory of Delhi
shall be for a period of three years;

(@) the tenant will be given an opportunity to file a counter-affidavit in reply to
the affidavit filed by the house-owner for getting his premises vacated in relation to

‘ of evitdioes

(©) qualifications and mode of selection of the Chairman and the Members of the
Dethi Rent Tribunal will be at par with those of the Central Administrative Tribunal
(CAT);

(0 the adjudicating machinery set up under the Delhi Rent (Control) Act, 1958
will continue to deal with cases till the new machinery (i.e. Rent Authority and Delhi
Rent Tribunal) is set up and becomes operational under the Delhi Rent Act, 1995; and

(g) the Act shall not affect the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee
Property Act, 1950 or the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956.

4, The proposed amendments are intended to make the Act more acceptable both to
landlords and tenants, At the same time these would also encourage investment in the
housing sector, particularly the rental housing.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deu; U. VENKATESWARLU.
The 25th July, 1997.


4 of 1882.

16 of 1908.

16 of 1908.

ANNEXURE
ExtRACTS FROM THE Deut Rent Act, 1995
3 of 195)

* * * * a *

3. (7) Nothing in this Act shall apply—

* * * * *

(©) to any premises, whether residential or not and whether let out before or after
the commencement of this Act, whose monthly deemed rent on the date of commence-
ment of this Act exceeds three thousand and five hundred Tupees;

* * * * *

Explanation IIT —"Deemed rent on the date of commencement of this Act” shall be
the rent calculated in the manner provided in section 7, together with revision, if any, as
provided in section 9 and decreased in the case of premises constructed after the commence-
ment of this Act at the same rate as the rate of enhancement stipulated in Schedule I to reflect
the position on the date of the commencement of this Act.

* * * * *

4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 107 of the Transfer of Property
Act, 1882, no person shail, after the commencement of this Act, let or take on rent any
premises except by an agreement in writing,

(2) Every agreement referred to in sub-section (1) or required to be registered under
sub-section (3) shall be registered under the Registration Act, 1908, within such period as
may be prescribed and for this purpose the agreement shall be deemed to be a document for
which registration is compulsory under section 17 of the said Act.

(3) Where, in relation to a tenancy created before the commencement of this Act,—

(०) an agreement in writing was entered into and was not registered under the
Registration Act, 1908, the landlord and the tenant shall jointly present a copy thereof
for registration before the registering officer under the said Act;

(4) no agreement in writing was entered into, the landlord and the tenant shall
enter into an agreement in writing with regard to that tenancy and present the same for
registration before the registering officer under the said Act:

Provided that where the landlord and the tenant fail to present jointly a copy of
tenancy agreement under clause (a) or fail to reach an agreement under clause (8) such
landlord and the tenant shall separately file the particulars about such tenancy with the
prescribed authority in such form and in such manner and within such period as may be

prescribed.
* के * * *
CHAPTER TT
Rent

6. (/) The rent payable in relation to 3 premises shall—
(a) the rent agreed to between the landlord and the tenant as enhanced in the
manner provided in Schedule I; or

(6) the standard rent specified under section 7,
as revised under section 9.

Certain provi-
sions not to
apply to pre-
mises.

Registration of
tenancy agree-
ments.


Rent authority
to fix standard
Tent, etc.

Limitation for
application
for fixations
of standard
rent, etc.

Protection of
tenant against
eviction.

11. (1) The Rent Authority shall, on an application made to him in this behalf, in the
prescribed manner, fix in respect of any premises—
( the deemed rent for the purpose of clause (c) of sub-section (4) of section 3;
(i) the enhancement in rent in the manner provided in Schedule I;
(iii) the standard rent as per the provisions of section 7;
(#) the other charges payable as per the provisions of section 8; and
(४) the revision in rent as per the provisions of section 9:
Provided that it shall not be permissible for the-landlord to apply for the fixation of

standard rent as per the provisions of section 7 in the case of a tenancy entered into efter the
commencement of this Act.

* * * * *

13. A tenant may file an application to the Rent Autnorisy for fixing the standard rent
of the premises and a landlord or a tenant may file application for determining the lawful
increase or decrease of rent or other charges payable —

* * * cy *

(6) in the case of any premises which was let after the commencement of this
Act,—
(i for fixing the standard rent thereof, within two years from the date on
which the premises was let;
(ii) in any other case, within two years from the date on which cause of
action arose:
Provided that the Rent Authority may entertain the application after the expiry of the
said period of two years, if he is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the application in time,

* * * * *
CHAPTERIV
PROTECTION OF TENANTS AGAINST EVICTION
22. (1)* * * * के

(2) The Rent Authority may, on an application made to him in the prescribed manner,
make an order for the recovery of possession of the premises on one or more of the following
grounds only, namely:—

(०) that the tenants has neither paid nor tendered the whole of the arrears of the
rent and other charges payable for two or more consecutive months legally recover-
able from him within two months of the date on which a notice of demand for the
arrears of such rent and other charges payable and interest at the rate of fifteen per
cent. for the period of the default has been served on him by the landlord in the manner
provided in section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882:

Provided that a tenant shall not be entitled to the benefit of service of notice by the
landlord under this clause where, having obtained such benefit once respect of any
premises, he again makes a default in the payment of rent and other charges payable in
Tespect of those premises;

* के * * का

(7) that the premises let for residential or non-residential purposes are required,
whether in the same form or after re-construction or re-building, by the landlord for
occupation for residential or non-residential purpose for himself or for eny member of
his family if he is the owner thereof, or for any person for whose benefit the premises
are held and that the landlord or such person has no other reasonably suitable accom-
modation:

4 of 1882.


9

Provided that where the landlord has acquired the premises by transfer, no application
for the recovery of possession of such premises shall lie under this clause unless a period of
three years has elapsed from the date of the acquisition:

Provided further that where an order for the recovery of possession of any premises is
made on the ground specified in this clause, the landlord shall be entitled to obtain posses-
sion thereof on the expiration of a period of six months in the case of residential premises and
one year in the case of non-residential premises from the date of passing of eviction order.

Explanation I. — For the purposes of this clause and section 23 to 26,—

(0) where the landlord in his application supported by an affidavit submits that
the premises are required by him for occupation for himself or for any member of his
family dependent on him, the Rent Authority shall presume that the premises are so
required;

(ii) premises let for a particular use may be required by the landlord for a different
use if such use is permissible under law. .

. * * ie *
45. (7)* * * * +

(8) (०) Every application by a landlord for the recovery of possession of any premises
on the ground specified in clause (e) or clause (/) or clause (r) of sub-section (2) of section 22,
or under section 23, or under section 24, or under section 25, or under section 26, or under
section 33, shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified in this sub-section.
* * * . *
48. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman ‘unless he—
(०) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or
(6) has, for at least three years, held the office of a Member; or

(c)is, or has been, 2 Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held, for at least
three years, a post in Grade I of that Service; or

(4) has, for at least three years, held the post of a Secretary in the Law Depart-
ment of a State Government.

(2) A person shail not be qualified for appointment as a Member unless he—

(a) has, for at least eight years, held the post of Rent Authority; or

(6) has, for at least-five years, held the post of a District Judge; or

(©) is, or has been, a Member of the Indian Legal Service in Grade I of that
Service; or

(a) has, for at least two years, held the post of a Secretary in the Law Department
of a State Government; or

(e) has, for at least ten years, been an Advocate.

(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) and (5), the Chairman and other Mem-
ber of the Tribunal shall be appointed by the President of India after consultation with the
Chief Justice of India.

(4) The Chairman and other Members shall be appointed by the President of India on
the recommendation of a Selection Committee appointed by the Central Government consist-
ing of the following, namely:— :

(a) Chief Justice of the High Court of Delhi or his nominee who shall be assitting

Judge of the High Court;

(9) Chairman of the Tribunal (except in case of the appointment of the

Chairman);

Procedure to
be followed by
Rent


Ea of
Pending cases.

the Tribunal.

Power to
make rules.

10

fue ney Oenling wit tre
Affairs; :
(@) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry dealing with Urban
Development;
* (९) Chief Secretary to the Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
(5) The Selection Committee shall recommend a person for appointment as Chairman
or other Member from amongst the persons on the list of candidates prepared by the Minis-
try dealing with Urban Development in consultation with the Department dealing with Jus-
tice of the Government of India in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed. 1.
* * . * *

67. Onthe commencement of this Act, all cases pertaining to the matters in respect of
which the Tribunal shall have jurisdiction under this Act including the cases under the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 in respect of premises and tenancies covered under clauses
{c) to (0) of sub-section (/) of séction 3 and pending in the High Court and all cases pending
in the Rent Control Tribunal or Additional Rent Control Tribunal constituted under the Delhi
Rent Control Act, 1958 shall stand transferred to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may proceed
with the matter either denovo or from the stage it was so transferred.

* * * * *

71. (1) No court other than the Tribunal shall try any offence punishable under this

Act.
* * * * *

81.(1)* t. * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(०) the period within which agreements shall be registered under sub-section (2)
of section 4;
(6) the authority before whom, the form and the manner in which and the period

within which the landlord and the tenant shall separately file the particulars about the
tenancy under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 4;

» . + * *
SCHEDULE 1
(See sections 6 and 7)
* * * * *
TABLE 1

Date of agreement/Commencement Rate of enhancement of rent
of construction
1... Upto3lst December, 1949 Two per cent.
2. -Onand from Ist January, 1950 to Four per cent.

31st December, 1960
3. Onand from Ist January, 1961 to Six per cent.

31st December, 1970
4. Onand from Ist January, 1971 to (i) Eight per cent. for residential

31st December, 1994 premises. i

(ii) ten per cent. for non-residential
premises.

5,  Onand from Ist January, 1995 onwards Seventy-five per cent. of annual inflation
rate based on Whole sale Price Index in
the case of residential premises and
hundred per cent. of such rate in the case
of non-residential premises.

* * * * *

4 of 1882.

59 of 1958.


डे

SCHEDULE IV
(See sub-section (4) of section 45]
Form of Summons
(Name, description and place of residence of the tenant)

.. has filed an application (a copy of which is
on the grounds specified in session ...

You are hereby summoned to appear before the Rent Authority within (*) days of the
service hereof and file a reply within ———days, in default whereof the matter shall be heard
and disposed of ex parie.

(**) You are to obtain the leave of the Rent Authority to contest the application for
eviction on the ground ————, in default whereof, the applicant will be entitled at any time
after the expiry of the said period of fifteen days to obtain an order for your eviction from the
said premises.

Leave to appear and contest the application may be obtained on an application to the
Rent Authority supported by an affidavit as is referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (7) of
section 45.

Given under my hand and seal of the Rent Authority/Additional Rent Authority:
This. Sa नल

Rent Authority/
(Seal) Additional Rent Authority.

*To be filled in.
**Strike off portion not applicable.

Notes:—

*For cases covered under clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (2) of section 22 and
sections 23, 24, 25, 26 and 33 indicate fifteen days and for other cases indicate thirty
days.

**For only cases covered under claused (a) of sub-section (8) of section 45.



= SABHA

A
BLL
to amend the Delhi Rent Act, 1995.

(Dr. U. Venkateswarlu, Minister of State in the Ministry of Urban Affairs and
Employment)

GMGIPMRND—526RS—18-06-2014.