As intr
OPUCED IN THE Ragya Sarna on

Bill No. XLII of 1988
THE FINANCIAL RELIEF TO BLIND PERSONS BILL, 1988

A
BILL

to provide for the grant of financial relief to blind persons and for
matters connected therewith.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Re-
public of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Financial Relief to Blind Per-
sons Act, 1988.

(2) It extends to the whole of India. |
. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint and different dates
a ५ : of different States.

e requires, “blind per-
ght or vision.

+ 1998

Short
title,
extent
and
commen.
cement,

Definition.


Relief to
blind
_person,

Social
Welfare
Boards to
disburse
relief,

‘Central
Govern-
ment to
“give

adequate
funds to

‘the

‘Social
Welfare
‘Boards, ~

Applica-
tion for
granting
relief,

“Medical

Certificate

for
blindness,

Power to
make *
Tules,

2

3. (1) Every blind person shall be entitled to a financial relief - of
rupees three hundred fifty per month:

Provided that the relief shall not be granted to any blind Person
who is already getting financial help from any other source to sustain,
himself, | ;

(2) The amount of relief specified in sub-section (1) shall be Subject

to alteration according to the cost of living index. i

4. The financial relief specified in section 3 shall be disburseq to
blind persons by the Central and State Social Welfare Boards.

5. The Central Government shall, by due appropriation, place at the 10
disposal of the Central and State Sociat Welfare Boards adequate funds
for granting relief te blind persons under this Act.

6. (1) A blind person seeking financial relief under this Act shall
make an application in the prescribed form to a Social Welfare Board

with whose jurisdiction he resides. i 15

(2) The Social Welfare Board shall dispose of the application with-
in a period of ninety days. from the date of receipt of such application.

7. A medical Certificate issued by the Chief Medical Officer of the
District. where. the applicant ‘resides: to. the éffect' that the “person con-
cerned is blind shall be conclusive proof of his blindness and shall be 20
accepted as such by the concerned authorities.

8. The’ Central Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, make rules. for carrying eut the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

7 Welfare of blind persons should be the country’s prime concern.
here are lakhs of bling persons all over the country who are suffering
from this worst disability ang are financially crippled. They have no

independent or adequate means of livelihood and spend their days in
agony and distress.

Government should, therefore, come out in a big way to beacon!
social welfare measures for blind persons and to provide financial relie!
‘to them to enable them to lead an honourable life.

Hence, this Bill.

SATYA PRAKASH MALAVIYA



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the grant of a monthly relief of
Rupees three hundred and fifty to every blind person. Clause 4 of the
Bil] provides that the Central Government shall place at the disposal of
Central and State Welfare Boards sufficient funds for disbursing relief

There is no actual estimate of the number of

and financial assistance.
blind persons who may be eligible for such relief and financial assistance

but their number may run into several Jakhs. It is estimated that
about rupees three hundred crores per annum will be required for pro-
viding relief and financial assistance to eligible blind persons. This is a
recurring expenditure and cam be met from the Consolidated Fund of

India. i
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to !
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The matters wi ; हा ke
which rules may be made are matters of procedure or ails. हल
delegation of the Legislative power is, therefore, of a nocmal car एपटा-

cules



RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the grant of financial relief to blind

persons and for
matters connected therewith.

( Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya, M.P.)