THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, sub-section ( 3) of section 31, shall be
omitted.
Bill No. XLII of 2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 31.
5
2 of 1934.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The insertion of sub-section (3) in section 31 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
through the Finance Act, 2017 introduced a new scheme called the Electoral Bond Scheme,
which was notified on January 2, 2018. The Electoral Bond Scheme allows individuals
(who are citizens of India) and domestic companies to donate electoral bonds — issued in
multiples of Rs. 1,000, Rs. 10,000, Rs. 1 lakh, Rs. 10 lakhs and Rs. 1 crore — to political parties
of their choice, which have to redeem them within fifteen days. A person being an individual
can buy bonds, either singly or jointly with other individuals. No limit exists on the number
of electoral bonds that a person (including corporate entities) can purchase. Only the Political
Parties registered under Section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
(43 of 1951) and which secured not less than one per cent. of the votes polled in the last
General Election to the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of the State, shall be
eligible to receive the Electoral Bonds. Under the Electoral Bond Scheme, 2018, the section
29C of The Representation of the People Act, 1951 has been amended to remove the obligation
of political parties to keep a record of the identity of donors who give any sum of money
through Electoral Bonds or report the same to the Election Commission of India (ECI) annually.
2. The amendment of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 by the insertion of
sub-section (3) in section 31 of the said Act, have made changes in our electoral system. First
of all, previously, all political parties had to maintain a record of all donations above rupees
twenty thousand including the name and address of the donor (Section 13A, Income Tax
Act). But, the Electoral Bond Scheme, created as a result of this amendment, is an exception
to this for donations greater than rupees twenty thousand which are made through electoral
bonds. These are not only tax-exempt, but the political parties don't need to record the details
of the donor anymore. Secondly, before the introduction of the amendment, there was a
ceiling on the amount of money that a company could donate i.e. 7.5% of its average net
profits during the previous three financial years (Section 182(1) of the Companies Act, 2013).
This was meant to prevent shell companies from being set up to pump money into political
parties. The electoral bond scheme that emerged out of the amendment of the Reverse Bank
of India Act, 1934 has removed this ceiling. Thirdly, before the adoption of the electoral bond
scheme, companies needed to disclose the amount of money donated and the names of the
political parties to which they donated money in their profit and loss accounts (Section
182(3) of the Companies Act, 2013). However this provision for mandatory disclosure is
removed now. Fourthly, the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA), 2010 has also
been amended, to allow foreign companies with subsidiaries in India to fund political parties
in India.
3. In the present form, the said amendment in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and
the resultant introduction of the Electoral Bond Scheme is non-transparent. More importantly,
it violates the citizen's 'right to know'. The Indian Constitution derives its supreme power and
authority from the people. One of the fundamental pillars of popular sovereignty and the
democratic process in our country is the process of a free and fair election. The Electoral
Bond Scheme seriously erodes the functioning of democracy because it has led to an enormous
increase in anonymous donations to political parties. The principle of anonymity in donation
leads to unlimited corporate donations to political parties of their choice. Apart from that,
Electoral Bond Scheme allows the foreign corporates having subsidiaries in India to fund the
election expense of political parties. This will create serious consequences because
anonymous foreign funding can expose the democratic process to the whims and fancies of
foreign corporate interests and lobbyists. It is against the very spirit of independent and
impartial election.
2

3
4. Therefore, it is important to discontinue the scheme urgently by repealing the
amendment made in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 via the Finance Act, 2017. It should
be mandatory for all political parties to declare the amount and source of donations that they
receive in the given financial year, along with the details of the donors. There should be a
standardised procedure to ensure transparency. Details of all donors should be made available
for public scrutiny under the RTI Act.
5. Given the above, the aforesaid amendment in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 by
the insertion of sub-section (3) in section 31 is proposed to be repealed.
Hence, this Bill.
SANDOSH  KUMAR  P.

MGIPMRND—881RS(S3)—08.08.2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
————
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P .)