Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
new article for
article 361B.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Constitution of India for article 361B, the following article shall be substituted
namely:—
"361B. A Member of a House belonging to any political party against whom a
petition for disqualification has been presented under the Tenth Schedule for the
decision of the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, shall not hold any
remunerative political post including that of a Minister in Government or any office of
profit during the pendency of such petition or till the final decision of the Chairman or
the Speaker of the House:
Provided that in the event of a Member of a House being disqualified under the
Tenth Schedule, his disqualification shall continue till the date on which the term of his
office as such Member would have expired.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH AUGUST, 2016
Bill No.  XLII  of  2016
Disqualification
for holding a
remunerative
political post a
member
against whom
a petition for
disqualification
has been
presented.
5
10

2
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article,—
(a) the expression "House" has the meaning assigned to it in clause (a) of
paragraph 1 of the Tenth Schedule;
(b) the expression "remunerative political post" means any office—
(i) under the Government of India or the Government of a State
where the salary or remuneration for such office is paid out of the public
revenue of the Government of India or the Government of the State, as the
case may be; or
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or
partially owned by the Government of India or the Government of State,
and the salary or remuneration for such office is paid by such body,
except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.
3. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, (i) in paragraph 6 after sub-paragraph (2),
the following sub-paragraphs shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Subject to the provisions of paragraph 8, all petitions for disqualification of
a Member of a House, shall be decided by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House
within a period of six months after the petition is presented to him.
(4) Nothing contained in the Tenth Schedule shall affect the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court and High Court under articles 32, 136, 226 and 227 of the constitution to
secure disposal of the petitions before the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may
be".
(ii) in paragraph 8, sub-paragraph (1) for clause (d), the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
(d) The procedure for deciding any question referred to in sub-
paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, including:—
(i) the receipt of petitions;
(ii) the objections to be complied with by the petitioner;
(iii) the resubmission of the petition after compliance with
deficiencies; and
(iv) such other procedure for facilitating expeditious inquiry
into the petition.
Amendment
of Tenth
Schedule.
5
  10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution (52nd Amendment) Bill, 1985 was enacted to curb the political evil of
defection while providing  for disqualification of any elected Member of a House on grounds
of defection.There have been various instances in the recent past wherein defections on a
large scale have occurred in various legislatures resulting in applications being filed in
accordance with the rules, before the Speaker, seeking disqualification of such elected
members. Most such defections are from the opposition party to the ruling party whereby
the number of elected Member in the House, in support of the ruling party increases.  Instances
wherein the aggrieved political party files an application before the Speaker for disqualifying
such defecting elected members, and have been kept pending, for years, without any progress
until the end of the Tenure of the House have been on the rise. There has been a criticism of
such conduct of the Speaker for not acting expeditiously on such applications seeking
disqualification, since continuance of such Members in the House would be in derogation of
the intent and express provisions of the Tenth Schedule.
Article 361B bars disqualified Members from holding any remunerative political post
consequent on disqualification, for the remaining of the tenure of the House, or until the next
fresh elections. Therefore, a Member who consciously defects contrary to the intent of the
Tenth Schedule, is thus rewarded with public office, pending final adjudication, and after
final adjudication, is enabled to contest in the by-elections and be a Member of the very
Legislature in the very same tenure, in which he is disqualified. The bar on re-election of such
Member shall extend to remainder of the Tenure of the House or term.
The remedy of approaching the Courts seeking a direction of the Speaker to dispose of
the said applications expeditiously and within a time frame have been rendered futile, in view
of the judicial dicta limiting Court's interference only after the final decision is made by the
Speaker.
It is therefore proposed to amend the paragraph 6 of the Tenth Schedule of the
Constitution to provide for a mandatory time frame for the disposal of the petitions filed
before the Chairman or Speaker of the House. Such mandatory time frame would ensure
sustenance of the electors' faith in the democratic process of elections apart from upholding
the majesty of the House. The time frame and the remedy for judicial redressal in case of
inaction, would be consistent with the view of the Supreme Court as regards the power of the
Speaker being of a "Tribunal" with judicial powers of adjudication and also the areas of
judicial review under articles 32, 136, 226 and 227, held to be permissible quia timet of the
proceedings of the Tenth Schedule.
This Bill Seeks to achieved the above objectives.
V .   VIJAY ASAI   REDDY
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUION OF INDIA
* * * * *
361B. A member of a House belonging to any politcal party who is disqualified for
being a member of the House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified
to hold any remunerative politcal post for duration of the period commencing from the date
of his disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member would
expire or till the date on which he contests an election to a House and is declared elected,
whichever is earlier.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this article,—
(a) the expression "House" has the meaning assigned to it in clause (a) of
paragraph 1 of the Tenth Schedule;
(b) the expression "remunerative political post" means any office—
(i) under the Government of India or the Government of a State where the
salary or remuneration for such office is paid out of the public revenue of the
Government of India or the Government of the State, as the case may be; or
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or partially
owned by the Government of India or the Government of a State and the salary
or remuneration for such office is paid by such body,
except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.
* * * * *
TENTH  SCHEDULE
[Article 102(2) and 191(2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
* * * * *
6. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to
disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the
Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final:
Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or the
Speaker of a House has become subject to scuh disqualification shall be referred for the
decision of such memebr of the House as the Hosue may elect in this behalf and his decision
shall be final.
(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to any question
as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule shall be deemed to be
proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article 122 or, as the case may be, proceedings
in the Legislature of a State within the meaning of article 212.
* * * * *
Decision on
question as to
disqualification
on ground of
defection.
Disqualification
for appointment
on remunerative
political post.
4

5
8. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the Chairman or
the Speaker of a House may make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Schedule,
and in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may
provide for—
(a) the maintenance of registers or other records as to the political parties, if any,
to which different memebrs of the House belong;
(b) the report which the leader of a legislature party in relation to a member of a
House shall furnish with regard to any condonation of the nature referred to in clause
(b) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 in respect of such member, the time within
which and the authority to whom sch report shall be furnished;
(c) the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to admission to
such political party of any members of the House and the officer of the House to whom
such reports shall be furnished; and
(d) the procedure for deciding any question referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of
paragraph 6 including the procedure for any inquiry which may be made for the purpose
of deciding such question.
* * * * *
Rules.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2260RS(S3)—05-08-2016.