THE CONTROL OF RISING PRICES BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the deterrent measures for the control of consistently rising prices of
essential commodities particularly of foodgrains, pulses, edible oils, fruits and
vegetable and items of daily use which have adversely affected the commonman
and for prevention of hoarding, profiteering and determination of prices of all
consumer goods by the appropriate Government to give the desired relief to the
commonman and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Control of Rising Prices Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008
Bill  No.  XLII of  2008
5

(b) ‘‘consumer goods’’ include all essential commodities of daily use of
consumers including wheat and wheat products mainly flour, rice and other cereals,
pulses and beans, edible oils, ghee including desi and vanaspati, sugar and jaggery,
salt, soaps and detergents but does not include seasonal vegetables and fruits;
(c) ‘‘dealer’’ means any person, by whatever name known or called, who
carries on the business of selling any consumer good or goods in any manner;
(d) ‘‘hoarding’’ means accumulating consumer goods and their stocks meant
for sale to the general public with a view to conering such goods and stocks so as
to create artificial scarcity with malicious intention to raise their prices which are
very high and are not competitive;
(e) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) ‘‘profiteering’’ with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions
means the sale of any consumer goods at a price or rate higher than the fixed
maximum retail price or prevailing market price;
(g) ‘‘retail price’’ means such fixed price at which a dealer can sell consumer
goods in retail and such price shall include all taxes levied on such products.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force the hoarding of, profiteering in and over pricing of consumer goods and articles in
any manner whatsoever is hereby prohibited.
(2) whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an
offence under this Act.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
Commission For Price Fixation of Consumer Goods for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government with such
qualifications and experience as may be prescribed;
(b) five members to be appointed by the Central Government who are experts
in the field of commodities and consumer goods including representatives of the
public and dealers respectively in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) four members to be nominated by the State Governments by rotation in
the alphabetical order.
(3) The terms of office of the Chairperson and members and the procedure to be
followed in the discharge of their functions, and the salary and allowances shall be such
as may be prescribed.
(4) The Union Ministry of Consumer Affairs shall provide Secretarial assistance to
the Commission.
5. (1) The Commission shall, by order notified in the Official Gazette, fix the maximum
selling retail price of all consumer goods and commodities which may be charged by a
dealer or the minimum price which is to be paid by a consumer to the dealer.
(2) The Commission may while fixing the prices of the consumer goods, take into
account,—
(i) the quality and durability of the goods;
(ii) the supply and demand position of consumer goods;
(iii) the overall cost of production;
Prohibition of
hoarding of,
profiteering
in and over
pricing of
consumer
goods and
articles.
Constitution
of a commis-
sion for price
fixation of
consumer
goods.
Function of
the Commis-
sion.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(iv) the losses, if any, during production;
(v) the price of accessories, which in any manner affect the price factor of the
consumer goods;
(vi) the prevailing price and availability position of similar products in the
international market;
(vii) the export potential of the consumer goods;
(viii) any other relevant factor which may be deemed necessary in determining
the price factor of the consumer goods;
(ix) fixation of different prices for different consumer goods in different States
or regions as per the local production, consumption and availability and other
factors.
(3) After taking into consideration all the relevant factors the prices fixed under this
Act shall be revised from time to time by the Commission.
(4) The prices fixed under this Act shall be given wide publicity throughout the
country through print, electronic and media in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) It shall be duty of the appropriate Government to implement the provisions of
this Act and the price structure fixed under this Act within its territorial jurisdiction in the
manner it may deem necessary or expedient to do so for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, ban
the export of consumer goods which are in short supply in the country and allow free
import of such goods in the country.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every dealer of consumer goods shall,—
(a) display a board showing the maximum retail price of every consumer
goods which he sells at a conspicuous place of his shop or establishment;
(b) display the stock position on daily basis of all the consumer goods
available with him;
(c) maintain a register for the consumer goods and make entries about the
goods giving such details and in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) Any dealer who contravenes the provisions of sub-section—
(1) of section 3 and profiteers in any consumer goods shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than four years but may extend to seven
years and also with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but may extend to
ten lakh rupees and the consumer goods in respect of which the offence has been
committed or such part thereof as the trial Court may deem fit shall be confiscated by the
appropriate Government.
(2) Any dealer, consumer or person who in contravention of the provisions of this
Act found deliberately hoarding consumer goods or articles of daily use shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten
years and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and the hoarded stock shall
be confiscated by the appropriate Government under the orders of the trial Court.
(3) Any dealer who, without valid and reasonable ground refuses to sell any
consumer goods shown in the stock by him to any consumer desirous to purchase the
goods or refuses to sell it at the price fixed under this Act shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to five years and also with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
the provi-
sions.
Miscellaneous.
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(4) Any dealer who contravenes the provisions of section 6 shall be punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend
to two lakh rupees.
9. When any Police Officer not below the rank of Inspector of Police has reasonable
grounds for believing or has definite information that there has been a contravention of
any provisions of this Act, such officer may, after recording in writing the grounds on his
belief, at all reasonable hours enter and search any place where a dealer keeps, or is for the
time being keeping, any consumer goods covered under this Act and seize the goods
under this Act.
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of criminal Procedure,
1973 all offences punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
(2) Any Police Officer, not below the rank of Inspector of Police, may arrest without
warrant any person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or creditable
information has been received of his having been involved in any of the offences
punishable under this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force dealing with any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
13. The Central Government may,  by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power of
search and
seizure.
Cognizance of
offence and
arrest without
Warrant.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make Rules.
5
10
15
20
2 of 1974.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
These days the general public particularly the poor, middle class and housewives
have adversely been affected by sharp increase in the prices of consumer goods of daily
use. It is becoming difficult for the households to have two square meals as the atta, rice,
pulses, edible oils, ghee, spices, sugar, vegetables and fruits have become very costly
and gone out of the reach of the common man. This is causing resentment, concern and
frustration amongst the people be it salaried class, middle class, daily wage earners, poor
or those living below the poverty line and mostly the housewives whose budget for
kitchen is shrinking very fast. In order to maintain the balance and keep check on increasing
expenditure, the housewives resort to cut the items or reduce their quantity but in vain.
Even Daal-roti has become a luxury for almost all the households. Nutrition has become
the victim and survival has become the main issue. On the other hand, the dealers are
resorting to profiteering and selling the goods on premium at their whims and fancy. The
wholesalers and others are in most cases creating artificial scarcity by hoarding the
goods with intention of profiteering later. There is no check on the pricing of any
commodity. Prices are fixed by the dealers as per their choice and it is said that syndicates
in different parts determine the prices on daily basis resulting in price rise of every thing.
Hence, a system of checks and balances has become necessary in order to stabilize
the prices of different consumer goods, which are used by the common man. If a
Commissions is set up for this purpose it may fix the retail prices of all consumer goods to
protect the poor consumers in the country. Penal clauses have to be provided for those
who do not comply with the prices determined by the Commission and those who resort
to hoarding and profiteering so as to deter them. This will control the price rise to a great
extent and give the desired results to the common man, those living below poverty line,
daily wage earners and housewives whose household budget has become nightmarish
for them.
Hence, this Bill.
V .  HANUMANTHA  RAO
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Commission to fix the retail prices of
consumer goods for the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one hundred
crore may involve as recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India per
annum.
A sum of rupees one hundred crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELIGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the deterrent measures for the control of consistently rising prices of
essential commodities particularly of foodgrains, pulses, edible oils, fruits and
vegetables and items of daily use which have adversely affected the commonman
and for prevention of hoarding, profiteering and determination of prices of all
consumer goods by the appropriate Government to give the desired relief to the
commonman and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri V. Hanumantha Rao, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—4763RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.