AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XLIII of 1999
——$—

THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE (AMENDMENT
AND VALIDATION) BILL, 1999

A
BILL

further to amend the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968, and to validate certain
revision petitions disposed of under the rules made under the said Act.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment and _ Shorttitle.
Validation) Act, 1999.

50 of 1968, 5 2. In the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as the — Amendment of
principal Act), for the long title, the following long title shall be substituted, namely:— long title.

“An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the

Union for the better protection and security of industrial undertakings owned by the

Central Government, certain other industrial undertakings, employees of all such

10 undertakings and to provide technical consultancy services to industrial
\ establishments in the private sector and for matters connected therewith.".


Amendment
of section 2.

Amendment
of section 3.

Amendment
of section 8.

Amendment
of section 9.

Amendment
of section 10.

2

3. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (c), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:-—

‘(ca) “industrial establishment" means an industrial undertaking or a company
as defined under section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 or a firm registered under
section 59 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 which 1s engaged in any industry, or
in any trade, business or service;’.

4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the words “and to perform
such other duties as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government" shall be inserted
at the end.

5. In section 8 of the principal Act,—

(i) in clause (7), after the word "remove", the words ", order for compulsory
retirement of" shall be inserted;

(ii) in clause (it), after sub-clause (c), the following sub-clauses shall he inserted,
namely:—

“(d) withholding of increment of pay with or without cumulative effect;
(e) withholding of promotion;
(f) censure.".

6. In section 9 of the principal Act—

(i) in sub-section (/), for the words, brackets and figure “subject to the
provisions of sub-section (3)”, the words, brackets, figires and letters "subject to
the provisions of sub-section (2A), sub-section (2B) and sub-section (3)" shall be
substituted;

(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—

"(2A) Any enrolled member of the Force aggrieved by an order passed
in appeal under sub-section (/) may, within a period of six months from the
date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer a revision petition
against the order to such authority as may be prescribed and in disposing of
the revision petition, the said authority shall follow such procedure as may be
prescribed,

(2B) The authority, as may be prescribed for the purpose of this sub-
section, on a revision petition preferred by an aggrieved enrolled member of
the Force or suo moto, may call for, within a prescribed period, the records of
any proceeding under section 8 or sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A) and
such authority may, after making inquiry in the prescribed manner, and subject
to the provisions of this Act, pass such order thereon as it thinks fit.";

(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words, figures and brackets "under section 8 or
under sub-section (2)", the words, figures, brackets and letters "under section 8,
sub-section (2), sub-section (2A) or sub-section (2B)" shall be substituted.

7. In section 10 of the principal Act, after clause (e), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—

"() to provide technical consultancy services relating to security of any private
sector industrial establishments under section 14A;

(g) to protect and safeguard the organisations owned or funded by the
Government and the employees of such organisations as may be entrusted to him by
the Central Government;

(h) any other duty which may be entrusted to him by the Central Government
from time to time.”.

5

10

20

25

30

35

40

45

1 of 1956
9 of 1932


10

20

25

30

35

3

8. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—

"14A. (1) Subject to any general directions which may be issued by the Central
Government, it shall be lawful for the Director-General, on a request received from
the Managing Director of an industrial establishment in the private sector or any
other person authorised by him in this behalf, to direct the members of the Force to
provide technical consultancy services relating to security, to such industrial
establishments in such manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.

(2) The fee received under sub-section (1) shall be credited to the Consolidated
Fund of India.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "Managing
Director”, in relation to an industrial establishment, means the person (whether called
general manager, manager, chief executive officer or a partner of a firm or by any
other name) who exercises control over the affairs of the establishment.".

9. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i after clause (ggg), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

"(gggg) prescribing authority under sub-section (2A) of section 9 and
the procedure to be followed by such authority in disposing of the revision
petition;

(ggggg) prescribing authority under sub-section (2B) of section 9, the
period within which such authority may call for the records and the manner in
which such authority may make inquiry;";

(ii) in clause (A), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely;—

(hh) the manner in which and the fee on payment of which the technical
consultancy services shall be provided under Sub-section (/) of section 14A;
and".

10. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court to the contrary,
rule 49 of the Central Industrial Security Force Rules, 1969 published with the notification
of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs number S.O. 4632, dated the
12th November, 1969 shall be deemed to be, and to have always been, made under the
principal Act as amended by this Act as if the principal Act as so amended had been in
force at all material times before the commencement of this Act and accordingly the
disposal of any revision petition under the said rule 49 before the commencement of this
Act or any order made or purporting to have been made or any action or thing taken or
done in or under such petition shall not be deemed to be invalid or ever to have become
invalid merely on the ground that the Central Government had no power under the principal
Act to make the said rule 49.

Insertion of
new section
148.

Technical
Consultancy
Service to
industrial
establishments,

Amendment of
section 22,

Validation of
the disposal of
certain revision
petitions.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) was raised under the Central Industrial
Security Force Act, 1968 to provide protection and security to the Central Government
Industrial Undertakings. At present. as per sub-section (1) of section 3 of the said Act, this
Force can be deployed only in the Public Sector Industrial Undertakings. However, there
are many other Government Organisations which are not strictly covered under the
definition of Industrial Undertaking but are of strategic importance to the nation. It is
proposed to empower the Government to deploy the said Force also to perform other
security duties. Accordingly sub-section (1) of section 3 of the said Act is being amended.

2. In the emerging scenario, private sector will play an increasing role in the economy
of the country. The State will play the role of a regulator by cr ga secure environment
for free play of the economic forces. This will include the security of the industrial
establishments. Over the years, CISF have achieved specialisation in the field of industrial
security which can be used gainfully by providing consultancy services to the private
sector to develop and strengthen their security network. Such consultancy services will
be on full cost recovery basis. Therefore it is proposed to amend section 10 of the said
Act and also to insert a new section 14A to empower the Force to perform such duties.

3. Section 8 of the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 prescribes penalties
that can be imposed on members of the Force. However, some recognised penalties like
compulsory retirement, withholding of increment with or without cumulative effect,
withholding of promotion and censure are being included in the said section to bring it
in line with the provision of the Central Civil Services (Clas: n, Control and
Appeal) Rules, 1965.

4, Section 22 of the said Act empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act and, in particular, clause (g) of sub-section (2) of
section 22 of the said Act empowers, the Central Government to make rules for regulating
the punishments and prescribing authoritics to whom appcals shall be preferred from
orders of punishment or remission of fines or other penaltics, and the procedure to be
followed for the disposal of such appeals. In exercise of the said power, the Central
Government has framed CISF Rules, 1969. Rule 49 of the said rules has been declared
ultra-vires by the Orissa High Court in the matter of Sanatan Sahu Vs. Union of India. In
the said case, the court observed that the Act spe ly confers re nal powers on
the Central Government and these powers cannot be delegated to a subordinate authority.
Therefore, it is proposed to suitably amend sections 9 and 22 of the Central Industrial
Security Force Act, 1968 for making provisions for filing of the revision petitions in
disciplinary cases and for their consideration, suo moto or otherwise, by the next superior
authority and to empower the Central Government to prescribe the procedure, time
limit, competent authorities, etc. for disposal of the revision petitions. It is also proposed
to validate all actions taken so far under the provisions of the existing rule 49 of the
Central Industrial Security Force Rules, 1968.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deut, L.K. ADVANI.
The Ist December, 1999.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub clause (i) and sub-clause (ii) of clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert clauses
(gggg), clause (ggggg) and clause (hh) respectively in sub-scction (2) of section 22 of the
Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 to empower the Central Government to make
tules for the following matters, namely:—

(a) prescribing authority under sub-section (2A) of section 9 of the Act and the
procedure to be followed by such authority in disposing of the revision petition;

(0) prescribing authority under sub-section (2B) of section 9 of the Act, the period
within which such authority may call for the records and the manner in which such authority
may make inquiry; and

(c) to provide for the manner in which and the fee on payment of which the technical
consultancy services shall be provided under sub-section (/) of section 14A of the Act.

2. These are matters of detail and could hardly be provided in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


Definitions:

Constitution of
the Force

Dismissal
removal, etc
of members of
the Force

Appeal and
revision

ANNEXURE
EXIRACISTROM THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE ACT, £968

(50 oF 1968)

* * * * *

An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union
for the better protection and security of industrial undertakings owned by the Central
Government and certain other industrial undertakings and the employees of all such
industrial undertakings and for matters Connected therewith

* * * * *

2. (7) In this Act: unless the context otherwise requires —

* * * * *

(6) ‘industrial undertaking in public sector meany an industital undertaking
owned, controlled 0 managed by—

(1) a Government company as defined in secuion 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956,

(a) a Corporation established by छा undet a Central Provincial or State
Act, which 1५ controlled ता managed by the Government

* * * * *

3. (/) There shall be constituted and maintained by the Central Government an
armed force of the Umon to be called the Central Industiial Security Force for the better
protection and security of industual undertakings owned by that Government

* * * के *

8. Subject to the provisions of atticle 311 of the Constitution and to such rules as the
Central Government may make under thiy Act any supervisory officer may—

(1) dismiss, remove or reduce in rank any enrolled member of the Force whom
he thinks remiss or negligent in the discharge of hts duty or unfit for the same, or

(1) awatd any one or mote 01 the following punishments to any enrolled
member of the Force who discharges his duty ina carcless or negligent manner, ot
who by any act of his own renders himself unfit for the discharge thereof, namely —

(a) fine to any amount not exceeding seven day's pay ot reduction m
pay scale,

(0) dull, exta guard fatigue or other duty,

(c) removal from any office of distinction or deptivation of any special
emolument

9. (1) Any enrolled member of the Force aggrieved by an order made under section
8 may, within thirty days from the date on which the order 15 communicated to him, prefer
an appeal against the order to such authority 1 may be prescribed, and subject to the
provisions of sub-section (3), the decision of the said authority thereon shall be final

Provided that the prescribed authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of
the said period of thirty days, if it 15 satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the appeal in ime

* * * * *

(3) The Cential Government may call for and examine the record of any proceeding
under section 8 or under sub-section (2) of this section and may make such inquity or
cause such inquiry to be made and subject to the provisions of this Act, may pass such

order thereon as it thinks fit 6


Provided that no order mmposing an enhanced penalty under sub section (2) or sub
section (3) shall be made unless a reasonable opportunity of beimg heard has been given to
the person affected by such order

10. It shall be the duty of every member of the Force—

* * * * *

(९) to do any other act conducive to the better protection and security of the
industrial undertakings and installauions ieferied to in clauses (b) and (६) and the
employees referred to in clause (वी

* * * * *

22. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular and without preyudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such rules may provide 10--

* * * * *

(ggg) regulating matters with respect to disposal of cases relating to
offences under this Act and specifyimg the places in which persons convicted
under this Act may be confined,

(A) the terms and conditions subject to which members of the Force may
be deputed under section 14 and the charges therefor, and

* * * * *

Duties of
members of the
Fone

Power to make,
rules


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 and to validate certain
revision petitions disposed of under the rules made under the said Act.

(Shri L. K. Advani, Minister of Home Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2261RS—1-12-1999