AS INTRODUCED IN THE [७०४8 Sapa

Bill No. XLU of 1999

THE SPECIAL PROTECTION GROUP (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1999

A

BILL
Jurther to amend the Special Protection Group Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Special Protection Group (Amendment) Act, 1999. Short title and

. commence-
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th day of November, 1999. ment.


2

Amendment 2. In section 4 of the Special Protection Group Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to
of section 4 as the principal Act), for sub-section (1), the following sub-scctions shall be substituted,
namely:—

“(1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the Special Protection
Group for providing proximate security to—

(i) the Prime Minister and the members of his immediate family; and

(ii) any former Prime Minister or to the members of his immediate
family —

(a) for a period of ten years from the date on which the former

Prime Minister ceased to hold the office of the Prime Minister; and

(b) for any period beyond the period of ten years referred to in
sub-clause (a) in a case where the level of threat faced by the former

Prime Minister or by any member of his immediate family is of such a

nature that such level of threat justifies the provision of proximate security

to such former Prime Minister or such member of his immediate family,
as the case may be:

Provided that, while assessing the level of threat, the Central Government
shall take into account the following factors, namely:—

(A) that the threat emanates from any militant or terrorist organisation;
and

(B) that the threat is of a grave and continuing nature:

Provided further that the Central Government shall assess the level of threat
periodically in such a manner that not more than twelve months shall elapse between
two consecutive assessments.

(14) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),—

(a) any former Prime Minister or any member of the immediate family
of the Prime Minister or of a former Prime Minister may decline proximate
security;

(6) where the proximate security is withdrawn from a former Prime
Minister, whether before or after the commencement of the Special Protection
Group (Amendment) Act, 1999, such proximate security shall also stand
withdrawn from the immediate family members of such former Prime Minister:
Provided that where the level of threat faced by any member of the immediate

family of a former Prime Minister warrants proximate security or any other security,
such security shall be provided to that member.”.
Repeal and _ 3. (7) The Special Protection Group (Amendment) Ordinance, 1999, is hereby
saving. repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal
Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under
the principal Act, as amended by this Act.

34 of 1988.

20

25

30

35

Ord.
10 of 1999,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Special Protection Group Act, 1988 was enacted, inter alia, for providing
proximate security to the Prime Minister and his immediate family members.

2. The aforesaid Act was amended by the Special Protecuon Group (Amendment)
Act, 1991 so as to provide proximate security by the Special Protection Group to former
Prime Ministers and the members of their immediate family for a period of five years
from the date on which the former Prime Minister has ceased to hold the office of the
Prime Minister. The Special Protection Group (Amendment) Act, 1991 also provided that
any former Prime Minister or any member of the immediate family of the Prime Minister
or of the former Prime Minister may decline such proximate security.

3. The Special Protection Group Act, 1988 was further amended in 1995 to extend
the protection of the Special Protection Group to former Prime Ministers and their
immediate family members for a period of ten years instead of five years.

4, The Government have again considered the matter and decided that the Special
Protection Group Act, 1988 be further amended so as to provide proximate security to any
former Prime Minister or to any member of the immediate family of such former Prime
Minister beyond the period of ten years, where the level of threat justifies such security.

5. It has also been decided that where the proximate security is withdrawn from
former Prime Minister, such security shall also stand withdrawn from the immediate
family members of such former Prime Minister. However, if the level of threat justifies
continuation of Special Protection Group's security or alternative security, the sarhe shall
be provided by the Central Government.

6. As Parliament was not in session and the above mentioned amendments were
required to be carried out immediately, the President promulgated the Special Protection
Group (Amendment) Ordinance, 1999 (Ord. 10 of 1999) on the 18th November, 1999.

7. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.

New Deut; L. K. ADVANI.
The 30th November, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for amendment of section 4 of the Special Protection
Group Act, 1988 ५० as to extend the cover of proximate security under the Spectal Protection
Group Act or any other security, on the basis of level of threat, to former Prime Minister
and their immediate family members even beyond the period of ten years

2 With the proposed amendment, ॥ 15 not intended to create any new post and the
existing personnel of the Special Protection Group or those manning alternate security
will provide protection to former Prime Ministers and their immediate family members
even beyond the period of ten years on the basis of level of threat faced by them

3 In view thereof, the provisions of the Bill, if enacted and brought into operation,
would not involve any additional expenditure fiom the Consolidated Fund of India


Memorandum erplanung the modiftcation contained in the Bill to rcplace the Spectal
Protection Group (Amendment) Ordinance 1999

The Special Protection Group (Amendment) Bill 1999 which sceks (0 teplace the
Special Protection Group (Amendment) Ordinance, 1999 proposes to make modification
in clause 2 of the Bull to enable the immediate family members of the Prme Minister to
decline proximate security

2 The proposed modification seeks to clarity that the proximate security may be
declined by immediate family members of the Prime Minister and ty in accordance with
the amendment made in section 4 of the Special Protection Group Act 1988 by the Special
Protection Group (Amendment) Act 1991


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE SPECIAL Protection Group Act, 1988
(34 oF 1988)

* * * * *
Constitution of 4. (J) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the Special Protection
the Group. Group for providing proximate security to— >

(i) the Prime Minister and the members of his immediate family; and
(ii) any former Prime Minister or to the members of his immediate family for
a period of ten years from the date on which the former Prime Minister ceased to
hold the office of the Prime Minister:
Provided that any former Prime Minister or any member of the immediate family of
the Prime Minister or of a former Prime Minister may decline such proximate security.
* * * x *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Special Protection Group Act, 1988

(Shri L.K. Advani, Minister of Home Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2244RS—1-12-99