AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No.  XLIII of 2025 
CL AUSES 
THE MACHINE CREATED INTELLECTUAL ASSET 
BILL, 2025 
_______________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
________________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 1. Short title and commencement.
2. Interpretation.
3. Meaning of origin tag.
4. Meaning of public interest.
5. Meaning of whistleblower.
6. Meaning of AI Sandbox.
7. Meaning of free AI Model.
8. Meaning of paid or proprietary AI model.
CHAPTER II 
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE 
9. Legal Recognition of AI-generated electronic records.
10. Use of digital signature by AI technologies.
11. Recognition of AI-signed communications.
12. Interoperability and open standards.
13. Data integrity and auditability.
CHAPTER III 
LEGAL STA TUS AND AUTHORSHIP OF AI-GENERA TED CONTENT 
14. Attribution of authorship of AI-generated content.
15. Presumption of authorship in AI contexts.
16. Rights conferred upon authorised persons.
17. Moral rights in AI-generated works.
18. Derivative AI-generated content.
19. Registration and disclosure of AI-created works.

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER IV 
NATIONAL AI DATA GOVERNANCE AUTHORITY 
20. Establishment of the National AI Data Governance Authority.
21. C omposition of the AI Authority.
22. O
fficers and Staff of the AI Authority.
23. Powers of the AI Authority.
24. R
epository of AI-generated content.
25. D
uties of the AI Authority.
CHAPTER V 
SPECIAL TRIBUNALS 
26. Establishment of Special Tribunals.
27. P
rocedure of the Tribunal.
28. Composition of the Tribunal.
29. Q
ualifications for appointment of Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member.
30.
Selection Committee.
31. T
enure, Resignation and Removal of the Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal.
32. P
owers of the Tribunal.
33. F
unctions of the Tribunal.
34. O
fficers and staff of the Tribunal.
35. Appeal to the Supreme Court.
36. P
rocedure for Appeals.
CHAPTER VI 
REMEDY AND PENALTY  
37. Penalty for unauthorized use of protected machine generated intellectual asset..
38. P
enalty for violation of data governance standards.
39. P
enalty for non-disclosure or misrepresentation.
40. P
enalty for re-identification of anonymised data.
41. P
enalty for unauthorized or fraudulent use of digital signature by AI systems.
42.
Offences by Companies.
43. P
rotection to Whistleblowers.
44. C
ivil Remedies.
45. I
nterim Measures and Relief.
46. C
rediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India.

(iii) 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER VII 
IMMUNITY AND EXEMPTION FROM LIABILITY 
47. General Immunity in case of action taken in good faith.
48. C ertain uses not to constitute infringement of machine created intellectual assets.
49. E
xemption from liability of AI Intermediary in certain cases.
50. O
bligations of AI intermediaries.
CHAPTER VIII 
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT 
51. Central Government to provide funds.
52. Accounts and Audit.
53. Annual Report.
CHAPTER IX 
M
ISCELLANEOUS 
54. Members, officers and staff of AI Authority and Special Tribunals to be public servants.
55. Protection of action taken in good faith.
56. P ower of the Central Government to make rules and of the AI Authority to make regulations.
57. S
avings.
58. A
ct to supplement other laws.
59. P
ower to remove difficulties.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No.  XLIII of 2025 
THE MACHINE CREATED INTELLECTUAL ASSET BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to establish a legal framework for the recognition o f content, attribution of authorship 
and protection of intellectual property right in AI-generated works, addressing 
the interests of creators, developers, users, and the public, with a focus 
on ensuring access, transparency, fairness, and the ethical use 
of AI technologies and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: –– 
C HAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Machine Created Intellectual Asset Act,
2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
c
ommence-
ment. 

2 
 
Interpretation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “AI Authority” means the National Artificial Intell igence 
Data Governance Authority established under section 20; 
(b) “Artificial Intelligence or AI” means a system or i nterrelated 
technology based on an algorithm or computer progra m integrated 
with hardware components built to perform tasks req uiring human-like 
intelligence to make decisions or generate outputs without explicit 
human guidance; 
(c) “AI Model” means a component of an information syst em 
that employs artificial intelligence technology, utilizing computational, 
statistical, or machine-learning techniques to proc ess inputs and 
generate outputs, forming an integral part of autom ated decision-
making or content generation; 
(d) “AI generated works or content” or “machine created  
intellectual asset” means any output, material, or content, whether in 
the form of text, image, audio, video, code, design , data structure, or 
any other similar format, generated, whether wholly  or substantially, 
by an Artificial Intelligence system, either autono mously or with 
limited human intervention, and which does not qual ify as a work of 
human authorship under existing copyright or intell ectual property 
law; 
Explanation.  — For the purposes of this clause, “AI-generated 
works or content” shall not apply to performances, inventions, or other 
subject matters regulated under the Copyright Act, 1957 or the Patents 
Act, 1970, or any other special law relating to int ellectual property 
rights, except to the extent expressly provided herein. 
(e) “creator” means, in relation to any literary, drama tic, musical, 
artistic, or other work that is AI-generated, a joi nt person, including 
the natural person(s) and/or legal entity responsib le for the 
conceptualization, input, guidance, or supervision of the AI system in 
the creation of such work; 
Explanation. ––  For the purposes of this clause, “joint person” 
means two or more persons, whether natural, legal, or electronic, who 
collectively contribute to the creation, developmen t, or authorship of a 
work or project, and who share rights, responsibili ties, and ownership 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(f) “electronic person” means an AI system, algorithm, or 
autonomous entity recognised under this Actor other  laws for the time 
being in force in this behalf; as having specific l egal rights, duties, or 
liabilities, with limited legal personality for int ellectual property, 
contracts, or accountability, subject to regulatory and ethical oversight; 
(g) “person” means any natural person, company, associa tion, or 
body of persons, whether incorporated or not, and i ncludes an 
electronic person, being an artificial intelligence  system or 
autonomous entity that has been granted legal recog nition, rights, or 
obligations under this Act or any other applicable law. 
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under t his Act; 
and 
(i) “Tribunal” means the Special Tribunal established u nder 
section 26. 
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 and rules made  thereunder, shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
14 of 1957. 
39 of 1970. 
21 of 2000. 
 

3 
 
 
5 
3. For the purposes of this Act, “origin tag” means a structured set of 
embedded or associated data used to verify the orig in, authenticity, and 
transformation history of AI-generated content, including, — 
(i) source models, datasets, and algorithms;  
(ii) involved entities in generation and distribution;  
(iii) timestamps and geo-tags of creation and edits;  
(iv) referenced or cited external content; and  
(v)  modification and custody logs ensuring end-to-end traceability. 
 Meaning of 
origin tag. 
 
 
10 
15 
20 
4. For the purposes of this Act, “public interest ” means activities such as 
research, education, critical analysis, journalism,  non-commercial 
innovation, digital accessibility, and archival or preservation efforts that 
serve the broader public good and also encompasses the use of open data, 
access to public domain materials, and other lawful  uses that may qualify 
as fair dealing or permitted use under Section 48 of this Act. 
Provided that such use,— 
(a) does not result in substantial commercial exploitat ion of AI-
generated or AI-assisted outputs; 
(b) includes appropriate attribution where applicable; 
(c) ensures that any AI system involved in such use ope rates in 
accordance with ethical and transparency standards; and 
(d)  avoids generating or distributing harmful, decepti ve, or 
manipulated content that may infringe upon rights o r mislead the 
public. 
 Meaning of 
public interest. 
 
 
25 
30 
35 
40 
5. For the purposes of this Act, “whistleblower” means  any person, including 
but not limited to an employee, officer, contractor , expert, consultant, or 
member of the public, who voluntarily, makes a bona fide  disclosure in the 
public interest and without personal gain or mala fide intent,  to the Special 
Tribunal, the Central Government, the National AI D ata Governance 
Authority, or any other authority constituted under  this Act, of any 
information, complaint or evidence regarding,—  
(a) the commission of an offence under this Act;  
(b)  misuse, abuse or violation of any provisions of th is Act or any 
rules or regulations made thereunder;  
(c)  any attempt to suppress, conceal, or falsify mater ial data 
related to artificial intelligence systems, intelle ctual property, or 
related governance mechanisms;  
(d)  any instance of bias, discrimination, manipulation  or 
unethical conduct in the training, deployment or use of AI models; or 
(e)  any instance of retaliatory action or victimisatio n in 
consequence of such disclosure.  
 Meaning of 
whistleblower. 
 
 
45 
50 
6. (1) For the purposes of this Act, “AI Sandbox” means a controlled, 
regulated, and monitored virtual or physical enviro nment established for 
the experimental development, testing, validation, and limited deployment 
of Artificial Intelligence systems, where developer s, researchers, or 
organizations are permitted to operate AI technolog ies under regulatory 
oversight and relaxed legal conditions, subject to defined safeguards, 
ethical standards, and data protection requirements. 
(2)  An AI Sandbox shall function under the supervision  of such competent 
authority designated under this Act, such as the Na tional AI Data 
Governance Authority established under section 20, and shall enable, ––  
(a) real-world or simulated testing of AI models prior to 
commercial deployment;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meaning of AI 
Sandbox. 
 
 

4 
 
(b) evaluation of intellectual property implications, p otential 
risks, and compliance gaps;  
(c) collection of feedback from stakeholders, regulator s, and 
affected parties;  
(d) temporary exemptions or calibrated application of r egulatory 
obligations to promote innovation, provided such ex emptions do not 
compromise public safety, rights, or lawful interests. 
Illustration 
A university research lab develops an AI tool that generates 
educational videos using copyrighted textbooks. Ins tead of releasing it 
publicly, the lab applies to test the tool within a n AI Sandbox. The 
regulatory authority allows limited use under super vision, requiring 
watermarking of AI-generated videos, keeping detail ed records, and 
ensuring that outputs are not used for commercial p urposes during the trial 
phase. 
5 
10 
15 
Meaning of free 
AI model. 
 
 
 
7. For the purposes of this Act, “free AI model” means any AI system, tool, or 
model that —  
(a)  is made accessible to the public without any direc t monetary 
payment or licensing fee;  
(b)  is available as open-source, open-access, or under  a Creative 
Commons or similar license; and  
(c)  permits users to input prompts or data and generat e content 
without entering into a paid arrangement with the provider. 
20 
 
Meaning of paid 
or proprietary AI 
model. 
 
 
 
8. For the purposes of this Act, “paid or proprietary AI model” means any 
Artificial Intelligence system, tool, or model that—  
 (a)   is accessible through a monetary transaction, sub scription 
fee, enterprise licensing agreement, or other form of commercial 
arrangement;  
(b)  is offered as a proprietary or closed-source solut ion by its 
developer, provider, or vendor; and  
(c)  provides access, support, or customization subject  to 
contractual terms or service-level agreements. 
25 
30 
 
  
 CHAPTER II 
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE  
  
Legal 
recognition of 
AI-generated 
electronic 
records. 
 
 
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law  for the time being in 
force, where any electronic record is generated, pr ocessed, or 
communicated by an AI system in accordance with suc h technical and 
ethical standards, as may be prescribed, such recor d   shall be deemed to be 
legally valid and enforceable. 
       Provided that the conditions prescribed unde r this Act, including 
authentication of digital signature, attribution of  authorship, of the AI 
system, have been duly complied with. 
35 
40 
 
Use of digital 
signature by AI 
technologies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. (1)  Every AI system or technology operating within the  jurisdiction of this 
Act and defined parameters as may be prescribed, an d performing 
electronic functions or generating electronic recor ds, shall mandatorily be 
assigned a verified digital signature, in such mann er as may be prescribed, 
to ensure secure, identifiable, and accountable activity. 
(2)  The digital signature referred to in sub-section (1) shall, — 
(a)  be issued by a licensed Certifying Authority under  the 
Information Technology Act, 2000;  
45 
50 
 
21 of 2000. 

5 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
(b)  be uniquely associated with the authorising person or entity;  
(c) contains such metadata credentials traceable to the  
identification of the AI system or technology and i ts operational 
parameters; and  
(d)  ensure the integrity, authenticity, and non-repudi ation of any 
electronic record, communication, or action initiat ed by such AI 
system.  
(3)  Any electronic record or action authenticated by a n AI system bearing 
such digital signature shall, subject to the provis ions of this Act and the 
Information Technology Act, 2000, be deemed to be v alid and attributable 
to the person or entity responsible for deploying o r operating such AI 
system, provided that—  
(a)  the AI system has acted within the scope of its au thorisation; 
and  
(b)  the digital signature remains valid and uncompromi sed at the 
time of execution.  
(4)  It shall be the duty of the Certifying authority to —  
(a)  ensure that the AI system operates within defined parameters 
and is regularly monitored for compliance; and 
(b)  revoke or suspend the digital signature in the eve nt of 
compromise, malfunction, or unauthorised use of the AI system.  
(5)  Nothing in this section shall affect the liability  of the Certifying 
authority for any act or omission of the AI system performed under such 
digital signature. 
 25 
30 
11. Where any law requires that a document be signed or  bears the signature of 
any person, such requirement shall be deemed to be satisfied in respect of 
electronic records generated by AI systems if —  
(i)  the electronic record is authenticated by a digita l signature assigned 
to the AI system as per the provisions of this Act; and  
(ii)  the digital signature remains valid and unrevoked at the time of 
authentication. 
 Recognition of 
AI-signed 
communi- 
cations. 
 
35 
40 
45 
50 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, promote the use and a doption of 
interoperable formats, open standards, and publicly  accessible Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs) in AI systems deploye d by or on behalf of 
any public authority, particularly those used for g overnance and public 
purposes.  
(2) Where any proprietary or closed-source AI system is  procured, 
deployed, used, or integrated by a public authority  for governance and 
public purposes, the public authority must comply w ith regulatory audit 
mechanisms and enable third-party oversight, in suc h manner as may be 
prescribed. 
Explanation.  – For the purpose of this section, – 
(a)  “interoperable format” means a data format or stan dard 
that allows exchange and processing of information across 
different systems without proprietary restriction; 
(b)  “open standard” means specifications or protocols that are 
publicly available, allowing for free use, modifica tion, and 
distribution without licensing restrictions; and  
(c) “public authority” means anybody, organization or 
establishment, , owned, controlled or substantially  financed by or 
under the jurisdiction of the Central Government th at engages in 
 Inter- 
operability and 
open 
standards. 

6 
 
works done for governance and public purposes and i ncludes any 
non-Government organization, directly or indirectly   funded by the 
Central Government; 
Data integrity 
and auditability. 
 
13. (1)  All electronic records generated or processed by A I systems deployed 
for governmental or public use or service delivery,  shall be subject to audit 
for —  
(i) verifying data accuracy and provenance;  
(ii) ensuring lawful use of data; and  
(iii) detecting and mitigating systemic bias and discrimination. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, designate or authorise one or more authori ties to conduct 
technical, ethical and legal audits of such AI syst ems and its electronic 
records. 
(3) The manner, periodicity, scope, and consequences of  such audits shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 
5 
10 
15 
 
  
 CHAPTER III 
LEGAL STATUS AND AUTHORSHIP OF AI-GENERA TED CONTENT  
  
Attribution of 
authorship of 
AI-generated 
content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
14. (1)  The authorship of AI-generated content shall, unle ss otherwise 
prescribed by contract or regulation, be determined as follows —  
(i) in the case of paid AI models, authorship shall be attributed to 
the natural or legal person who—  
(a)  initiated, directed, or caused the generation of s uch 
content through the AI System; and  
(b)  bears responsibility for the operation, including the input 
data, and output parameters of the AI System. 
(ii) in the case of publicly available, open-source, or free AI 
models, authorship shall be jointly attributed to —  
(a)  the person or entity that developed, maintained, o r made 
the AI model publicly accessible; and  
(b)  the person who initiated, directed, or caused the 
generation of such content through the AI System.  
Explanation.  – For the purposes of this clause, where authorshi p is 
jointly attributed, such attribution shall be treat ed as joint authorship within 
the meaning of section 2(z) of the Copyright Act, 1 957 , and all rights, 
liabilities, and conditions applicable to joint aut hors shall, mutatis 
mutandis , apply. 
(2)  In the absence of a determinable human author unde r sub-section (1) , 
the content shall be attributed to the person or en tity that owns or has 
operational control over the AI System at the time of generation.  
(3) The person or persons to whom authorship is attribu ted under this 
section shall, for all legal and regulatory purpose s, be deemed to possess 
the corresponding rights and obligations under —  
(a)  this Act;  
(b)  the Copyright Act, 1957; and 
(c)  any other applicable law for the time being in for ce, including 
laws relating to civil liability, criminal liabilit y, and consumer 
protection.  
(4)  Nothing in this section shall affect the operation  of any licensing 
agreement, usage terms, or terms of service governi ng the use of the AI 
System. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
14 of 1957. 
 
14 of 1957. 

7 
 
 
5 
15. (1)  Unless proven otherwise, the person or entity whos e digital credentials, 
authentication code, or organisational control is v erifiably associated with 
the AI System that generated the content, shall be presumed to be the 
author or rights-holder of such content within the meaning of section 14 of 
this Act. 
(2)  This presumption under sub-section (1) may be rebutted by credible 
documentary, forensic, or other admissible technica l evidence establishing 
different authorship or unlawful use of the AI System. 
 Presumption 
of authorship 
in AI contexts. 
 
10 
15 
20 
16. (1)  The natural or legal person to whom authorship of an AI-generated 
work is attributed under the provisions of this Act  shall have exclusive 
rights to, — 
(a)  use, reproduce, adapt, and distribute the content;  
(b)  assign, transfer, or license any or all of the rig hts referred to 
in clause (a), rights under the applicable laws; and  
(c)  initiate legal action against infringement or misu se of such 
content, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The rights conferred under sub-section (1) shall be exercisable for such 
period and subject to such conditions as may be pre scribed, and shall be 
without prejudice to any public interest exceptions  and regulatory 
guidelines, as may be prescribed. 
 Rights 
conferred upon 
authorised 
persons.  
 
25 
17. (1)  The natural or legal person to whom authorship of an AI generated 
work is attributed under this Act shall be entitled  to moral rights in respect 
of such work, including right to integrity and right to attribution. 
(2)  The rights conferred under sub-section (1)  shall not be waived, except 
by express written contract in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
 Moral rights in 
AI-generated 
works. 
 
14 of 1957. 
30 
18. (1)  Where an AI system generates new content that is d erived, in whole or 
in substantial part, from pre-existing human-author ed works protected 
under the Copyright Act, 1957, such output shall be  deemed as derivative 
work, and any use thereof shall be subject to the r ights and licencing terms 
of the original right holder.  
(2)  The person or entity authorising the use of such A I system shall ensure 
compliance with applicable copyright and moral righ ts of the original 
creator. 
 Derivative AI-
generated 
content.   
 
35 
40 
45 
50 
19. (1)  Any person or entity seeking exclusive rights in r espect of an AI-
generated content may apply for registration of suc h content to the AI 
Authority established under section 20 of this Act,  in such form and 
manner, accompanied by such fee and within such tim e, as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) Every such application shall be accompanied by a di sclosure statement 
containing the following particulars, namely, — 
(a)  the identity of the AI system used for generating the content;  
(b)  the extent of human involvement, if any, in the ge neration of 
the content;  
(c) details of the person or entity having ownership or  control of 
the AI system at the time of generation; and 
(d) such other information or supporting documentation as may 
be prescribed. 
(3) The AI Authority may, after making such inquiry as it deems fit and 
being satisfied about the eligibility of the applic ant, grant or reject the 
certificate of registration and may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and 
after giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, cancel or 
suspend such registration. 
 Registration 
and disclosure 
of AI-created 
works. 

8 
 
(4) The AI Authority shall establish and maintain a pub lic register of 
such registered AI-generated works, as per the prov isions of section 23 
of this Act.  
   CHAPTER IV 
NATIONAL AI  DATA GOVERNANCE AUTHORITY  5 
 
Establishment of 
the National AI 
Data Governance 
Authority. 
 
20. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in th e official 
Gazette, establish an authority to be known as the National AI Data 
Governance Authority for the purposes of regulating , supervising, and 
facilitating the lawful collection, processing, and  use of data for 
artificial intelligence systems. 
(2) The headquarters of the AI Authority shall be at New Delhi.  
10 
 
Composition of 
the AI Authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. (1) The AI Authority shall consist of the following members —  
(a) the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of 
India, who shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the AI Authority;  
(b) a Vice-Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central 
Government, from amongst persons with proven expert ise in 
artificial intelligence, data science, or digital g overnance, in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
(c) three Members of Parliament (two from the House of the 
People and one from the Council of States), to be nominated by the 
Presiding Officers of the respective Houses in such  manner as may 
be prescribed – Members;  
(d) not more than twenty-one members to be appointed by  
the Central Government, in such manner as may be pr escribed, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, from amongst individuals or 
representatives capable of representing the following domains —  
(i)  AI research institutions and technical universities;  
(ii) data protection and digital rights organizations;  
(iii) start-ups and AI-driven enterprises;  
(iv) public policy think tanks or regulatory bodies;  
(v) legal experts with a focus on technology law, 
intellectual property, or cyber law;  
(vi) industry bodies in digital infrastructure, cloud 
computing, or semiconductor manufacturing;  
(vii) civil society organizations and consumer rights 
advocacy groups;  
(viii) representatives from key sectors adopting AI, 
including agriculture, healthcare, education, and finance; and 
(ix) any other area of interest or expertise which, in t he 
opinion of the Central Government, ought to be represented: 
Provided that at least three members shall be exper ts in 
law, possessing demonstrable expertise in legal and  
regulatory frameworks relating to artificial intell igence, data 
protection, and emerging technologies.  
(2)  The number of persons to be appointed from each of  the categories 
specified in clause (d)  of sub-section ( 1) , the salary and allowances 
payable to, the terms and conditions of their appoi ntment, their term 
of office, the procedure to be followed in the disc harge of their 
functions, and the manner of filling vacancies amon g members of the 
AI Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under 
this Act. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
 

9 
5 
(3) No act or proceeding of the AI Authority shall be invalid merely by
reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the AI
Authority.
(4) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the AI Authority shall
not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a member of
either House of Parliament or any other public office.
1
0 
22. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the AI
Authority, appoint such number of officers and employees as it
considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of the functions of the
AI Authority under this Act.
(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and employees
of the AI Authority appointed under sub section (1) shall be such as
may be prescribed.
Officers and 
e
mployees of 
the AI 
Authority. 
15 23. The AI Authority shall, subject to any rules that may be made under this
Act, have power to regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of
places and times of its sittings.
Powers of the 
A
I Authority. 
20 
25 
30 
24. (1) The AI Authority shall establish and maintain a central Repository of
AI-Generated Content, for the purposes of, —
(a) promoting transparency, accountability, and traceability of AI-
generated works; 
(b) enabling rights management, registration, and licensing of
machine created intellectual assets; and 
(c) supporting research, monitoring, and policy formulation on the
use and impact of AI systems in content creation. 
(2) The Repository shall be a secure, searchable, and interoperable digital
platform accessible to the public, subject to reasonable restrictions, and
shall include metadata, such as —
(a) the identity of the attributed author or controlling entity;
(b) the date and nature of creation;
(c) the AI model or system used;
(d) the type and scope of content generated; and
(e) any applicable copyright, license, or public domain status.
Repository of 
A
I-generated 
content. 
35 
40 
45 
25. (1) It shall be the duty of the AI Authority to oversee, coordinate, and
regulate the governance of data used in the development, training, testing,
deployment, and auditing of artificial intelligence systems in India.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the AI Authority
shall perform all or any of the following functions: —
(a) formulate and issue binding standards on data quality, data
classification, consent, anonymisation, pseudonymisation, and data 
minimisation for AI systems;  
(b) monitor and ensure compliance with data-related provisions
of this Act and other applicable laws concerning AI-generated content 
and copyright;  
(c) develop frameworks for responsible data sharing and data
trusts, particularly for datasets used to train generative AI models; 
(d) certify high-risk or sensitive datasets used in training AI
systems that have implications for copyright, intellectual property, or 
public interest;  
D uties of the 
AI Authority. 

10  
 
14 of 1957. 
(e) conduct or commission audits of datasets and traini ng 
pipelines to ensure conformity with legal, ethical,  and quality 
standards;  
(f) maintain a central registry of datasets used by AI models that 
generate or manipulate content protected under the Copyright Act, 
1957 and/or rules made thereunder;  
(g) promote data transparency and explainability, inclu ding 
mandating disclosure of dataset provenance, generative trace metadata, 
and content lineage, where required;  
(h) advise the Central Government on policies related t o AI data 
governance, especially as it intersects with creati vity, innovation, and 
the protection of rights;  
(i) facilitate cooperation with other national and inte rnational 
data protection, copyright, and AI governance bodies;  
(j) provide technical and legal assistance to creators,  developers, 
and copyright holders in identifying unauthorized u se of their data in 
AI systems;  
(k) develop model contracts, licenses, and consent fram eworks 
for the ethical acquisition and use of data in AI training;  
(l) undertake public awareness and capacity-building in itiatives 
to foster responsible data practices and legal lite racy among 
stakeholders; and 
(m) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it under 
this Act or any rules made thereunder. 
(3) The AI Authority may make regulations, with the pre vious approval of 
the Central Government, as deemed necessary, for –– 
(a)  mandatory or voluntary submission of AI-generated content 
for registration;  
(b)  confidentiality of sensitive or proprietary content;  
(c) consequences of misrepresentation or falsification of AI-
generated content, or non-compliance with Repositor y requirements; 
and 
(d)  any other matter, as may be deemed necessary. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
  
 CHAPTER V 
SPECIAL TRIBUNALS  35 
 
Establishment of 
Special 
Tribunals. 
 
26. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in t he official 
Gazette, establish one or more Special Tribunals (f or the expeditious 
adjudication of disputes and offences arising under  this Act and for the 
awarding of penalties .  
(2)  Any person or entity aggrieved by any direction or  order or decision of 
the AI Authority may prefer an appeal to the Tribun al in whose jurisdiction 
the matter falls, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3)  On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (2) , the Tribunal may after 
giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of bein g heard, pass such 
orders, including interim orders, as it thinks fit. 
(4)  The decision of the Tribunal under the Act shall b e binding and 
enforceable as a decree of a civil court. 
40 
45 
 
Procedure of the 
Tribunal. 
 
 
 
27. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification, speci fy the ordinary 
place or places of sitting of the Tribunal and the territorial jurisdiction 
pertaining to each such place.  50 
 

11  
 
5 
10 
(2)  The Central Government may, in consultation with t he Chairperson, 
frame rules to regulate the practice and procedure of the Special Tribunal, 
including, but not limited to —  
(a)  the categories of persons entitled to appear befor e the 
Tribunal;  
(b)  the procedure for hearing of original applications  and appeals, 
including circuit sittings outside the ordinary place of sitting;  
(c)  the minimum number of Members required to constitu te a 
Bench for hearing applications or appeals, subject to the condition that 
the number of Expert Members shall be equal to the number of 
Judicial Members on any such Bench; and 
(d)  the procedure for transfer of proceedings from one  Bench to 
another, or from one place of sitting to another.  
 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
28. (1)  The Tribunal shall consist of—  
(a)  a full-time Chairperson, who shall be a person qua lified to 
be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court or a C hief Justice 
of a High Court;  
(b)  not less than ten, but not exceeding twenty, full- time 
Judicial Members, as may be notified by the Central  Government 
from time to time, who shall be persons qualified t o be appointed 
as Judges of a High Court and possess demonstrable knowledge or 
experience in the fields of technology law, intelle ctual property, or 
data governance; and 
(c)  not less than ten, but not exceeding twenty, full- time 
Expert Members, as may be notified by the Central G overnment 
from time to time, who shall be persons of ability,  integrity, and 
standing, having special knowledge and professional  experience of 
not less than fifteen years in the fields of artifi cial intelligence, 
machine learning, computer science, data science, o r intellectual 
property.  
(2)  The Chairperson of the Tribunal may, if deemed nec essary in any 
particular matter, invite one or more individuals p ossessing specialised 
knowledge or expertise relevant to the subject matt er of the dispute to 
assist the Tribunal in an advisory capacity.  
(3) The salary and/or allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other  Members of the 
Tribunal including experts invited under sub-sectio n (2)  shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 
 Composition 
of the 
Tribunal.   
 
40 
45 
50 
29. (1)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as  the Chairperson of 
the Tribunal unless they—  
(a)  are, or have been, a Judge of the Supreme Court; or  
(b)  are, or have been, the Chief Justice of a High Court.  
(2)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as  a Judicial Member 
unless they —  
(a)  have held a judicial office in the territory of In dia for at least 
fifteen years; or  
(b)  have been a member of the Indian Legal Service and  have held 
a post of Additional Secretary or equivalent for at least three years; or  
(c)  have been an advocate for not less than fifteen ye ars with 
substantial experience in the field of intellectual  property, technology 
law, or constitutional law.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Qualifications 
for appoint- 
ment  as 
Chairperson, 
Judicial 
Member and 
Expert 
Member. 

12  
 
(3)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as  an Expert Member 
unless they —  
(a)  possess a doctoral degree or Master’s degree in co mputer 
science, artificial intelligence, data science, int ellectual property, or 
related fields from a recognised university or institution; and  
(b)  have professional experience of not less than fift een years in 
matters relating to artificial intelligence, emergi ng technologies, data 
governance, machine learning, or intellectual property rights. 
5 
Selection 
Committee. 
 
30. (1)  The Chairperson and other Members of the Tribunal shall be appointed 
by the President, on the recommendation of a Select ion Committee 
constituted by the Central Government.  
(2)  The Selection Committee shall consist of, — 
(a)  the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supre me Court 
nominated by the Chief Justice of India — Chairperson ex-officio ;  
(b)  the Cabinet Secretary to the Government of India —  Member 
ex-officio ;  
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Min istry of 
Law and Justice — Member ex-officio ;  
(d)  the Secretary to the Government of India in the Mi nistry of 
Electronics and Information Technology — Member ex-officio ; and 
(e)  an eminent academic or technologist to be nominate d by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed — Member. 
10 
15 
20 
 
Tenure, 
Resignation and 
Removal of the 
Chairperson and 
Members of the 
Tribunal. 
 
31. (1)  The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office  for a term of five 
years from the date of entering upon their office, and shall be eligible for 
reappointment for a further term of three years, su bject to an upper age 
limit of seventy years in the case of the Chairpers on and sixty-five years in 
the case of other Members.  
(2)  The Chairperson or any Member may resign their off ice by giving 
notice in writing to the President of India and sha ll vacate office on the 
expiry of three months from the date of such notice  or earlier, if permitted 
by the President.  
(3)  The Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson or 
any Member on grounds of proven misbehaviour or inc apacity, after an 
inquiry conducted in accordance with the principles  of natural justice by a 
sitting Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India. 
25 
30 
35 
 
Powers of the 
Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. (1) The Tribunal shall have the power to adjudicate upo n all disputes and 
matters arising out of or in connection with the following, —  
(a) infringement, assignment, licensing, and use of cop yright, 
patents, trademarks, and other forms of intellectua l property in relation 
to artificial intelligence and digital technologies;  
(b) disputes regarding ownership, originality, fair use , or 
infringement arising from AI-generated works or datasets;  
(c) challenges to decisions of the AI and intellectual assets 
constituted under this Act;  
(d) appeals against orders or directions issued by the AI Authority 
or any other regulatory body under this Act; 
(e) interpretation and enforcement of data usage and co nsent-
related provisions for AI training or development purposes;  
(f) claims of liability or damages arising out of unaut horised use 
of copyrighted content by or through AI Systems;  
40 
45 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13  
 
5 of 1908. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
(g) disputes regarding authorship, attribution, or roya lties 
pertaining to AI-generated or AI-assisted works; and 
(h)  any other matter as may be assigned by the Central  
Government. 
(2) The Tribunal shall, for the purposes of exercising the powers conferred 
on it and discharging the functions assigned to it under this Act, have the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under th e Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, 
namely — 
(a)  summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pers on and 
examining him on oath;  
(b)  requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c)  receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d)  issuing commissions for the examination of witness es or 
documents;  
(e)  reviewing its decisions;  
(f)  dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex-parte ;  
(g)  setting aside any order of dismissal of any applic ation for 
default or any order passed by it ex-parte ; and 
(h)  any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
25 
30 
33. The Tribunal shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely —  
(a) to adjudicate cases brought before it under this Ac t or any 
other law in force, as may be notified by the Central Government;  
(b) to ensure effective enforcement of rights and dutie s under this 
Act through issuance of orders, directions, and penalties;  
(c) to promote settlement of disputes through mediation  or 
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, where possible;  
(d) to provide guidance through reasoned decisions whic h may 
serve as precedents in the domain of AI and intellectual property; and 
(e) to undertake, in appropriate cases, suo motu  review of any 
decision if such decision appears to cause manifest  injustice or is 
contrary to the provisions of this Act. 
 Functions of 
the Tribunal. 
 
35 
34. (1)  The Central Government shall provide such number o f officers and 
staff, as it may deem fit, to assist the Tribunal i n the efficient discharge 
of its functions. 
(2) The method of recruitment/appointment, the salary a nd allowances 
payable to, and other terms and conditions of servi ce of, the officers 
and staff shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 Officers and 
staff of the 
Tribunal. 
 
40 
45 
35. Any person aggrieved by any judgment, decree, or fi nal order of the 
Tribunal may, within ninety days from the date of s uch judgment, decree, 
or order, prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court, on  the ground that it 
involves a substantial question of law relating to the interpretation or 
application of this Act. 
 Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is sati sfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from fi ling the appeal within 
the said period, allow it to be filed within a furt her period as may be 
prescribed. 
 Appeal to the 
Supreme 
Court. 
 
50 
36.  The Supreme Court may make rules consistent with t he provisions of this 
Act, for governing the procedure to be followed in respect of appeals made 
to it under section 36. 
 Procedure for 
Appeals. 

14  
 
   CHAPTER VI 
REMEDY AND PENALTY  
  
Penalty for 
unauthorized use 
of protected 
machine 
generated 
intellectual asset. 
 
37. Whoever, knowingly, or having reason to believe, in fringes or abets the 
infringement of any copyright or proprietary right in a machine generated 
intellectual asset protected under this Act shall b e punished with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less tha n six months but which 
may extend to three years; or with fine of not less  than fifty thousand 
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees; or with both.  
Provided that where the infringement is not committ ed for commercial 
gain or profit, the AI Authority or the Court, as t he case may be, may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, impose a sentenc e lesser than the 
sentence prescribed under this section. 
5 
10 
 
Penalty for 
violation of data 
governance 
standards. 
 
38.  Whoever fails to comply with any rule, guideline, standard, or directions 
issued by the AI Authority or processes, stores, or  transfers data in 
contravention of   the provisions of this Act or ru les made thereunder, shall 
be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten lakh  rupees, in the case of a 
natural person; and five crore rupees, in the case of a company, or body 
corporate or electronic person. 
15 
 
Penalty for non-
disclosure or 
mis-
representation. 
 
39. Whoever, while applying for registration of AI gene rated content or enjoys 
the rights conferred by or is covered in any manner  under the provisions of 
this Act, is found to be knowingly suppressing mate rial facts from the 
authorities or the Government or provides false, in accurate, or misleading 
information, shall be  punished with imprisonment  for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with  fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or 
with both. 
20 
25 
 
Penalty for re-
identification of 
anonymised 
data. 
 
40. Whoever, without lawful authority, intentionally re-identifies or attempts to 
re-identify anonymised data used in AI systems shal l be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three y ears, or with fine not 
exceeding fifty lakh rupees, or with both. 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section,  — 
(a) “anonymised data” means any data which has been 
processed to remove or obscure personally identifia ble 
information of the data subject from the data set t o maintain data 
privacy in compliance with the data protection laws  for the time 
being in force; and 
(b)  “re-identification” means any process, method, or 
technique of matching anonymous data with another d ataset 
containing identifying information or auxiliary dat a to discover 
the identity of the data subject. 
30 
35 
 
Penalty for 
unauthorised or 
fraudulent use 
of digital 
signature by AI 
systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41. (1) Whoever knowingly and without lawful authority —  
 (a)  assigns or issues a digital signature in respect o f an AI 
system; or 
 (b)  misuses, tampers with, or facilitates the misuse o f a digital 
signature issued to an AI system; or  
 (c)  causes an AI system to authenticate or transmit el ectronic 
records using a falsified or compromised digital signature;  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term whic h may extend to five 
years, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both.  
(2)  Where the offence under sub-section (1)  is committed with the intent to 
cause wrongful loss or gain, or to commit fraud or impersonation or 
misrepresentation, the offender shall be punished w ith   imprisonment for a 
term not less than three years, but which may exten d to seven years, and 
with fine not less than ten lakh rupees.  
40 
45 
50 
 

15  
 
 
21 of 2000. 
5 
10 
(3)  Any person authorised under this Act who, having k nowledge or 
reasonable belief of the compromise, misuse, or una uthorised assignment 
of a digital signature associated with an AI system, fails to revoke, suspend, 
or report such digital signature in the manner pres cribed shall be liable to a 
penalty not exceeding ten lakh rupees, and may be s ubject to such 
disciplinary or regulatory action as may be prescribed.  
(4)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the simulta neous initiation of 
proceedings or imposition of penalties under the In formation Technology 
Act, 2000, or under any other applicable lawfor the  time being in force, in 
respect of the same act or omission. 
 
15 
20 
25 
30 
42. (1)  Where an offence under this Act has been committed  by a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was commi tted, was in charge of 
and responsible to the company for the conduct of i ts business shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be lia ble to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall ren der any such person 
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if h e proves that the 
contravention or offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the comm ission of such 
contravention or offence. 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , where a 
contravention or an offence under this Act has been  committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention or offence was committed 
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributab le to any neglect on the 
part of, any director, manager, secretary, or any o ther officer of the 
company, such person shall also be deemed to be gui lty of that offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, — 
(a)  "company" means anybody corporate and includes a c o-
operative society registered or deemed to be regist ered under any 
law for the time being in force, a firm or other as sociation of 
individuals; and 
(b)  "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner  in the 
firm. 
  Offences by 
companies. 
 35 
40 
45 
43. (1)  No person who makes a complaint, discloses informa tion, or assists the 
AI Authority in good faith with respect to a contra vention of or an offence 
under this Act shall be subjected to any civil, cri minal, or administrative 
liability or any form of reprisal, coercion, or dis crimination by reason of 
such disclosure. 
(2) Whoever causes harm to a whistleblower in contraven tion of sub-
section (1)  shall be liable to punishment with imprisonment wh ich may 
extend to one year or with fine which may extend to  two lakh rupees or 
with both.  
(3)  The AI Authority may issue directions for ensuring  the anonymity, 
safety, and non-retaliation of whistleblowers. 
 Protection to 
whistleblowers 
. 
 
50 
44. (1)  Without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under this Act, 
any person aggrieved by an act of violation of the provisions of this Act 
may initiate civil proceeding before a competent co urt for any one or more 
of the following reliefs, namely, — 
(a)  compensation for loss or damage suffered; or  
(b)  an injunction or restraining order against continu ed or 
imminent violation;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil 
remedies. 

16  
 
(c)   direction for the removal or rectification of unl awful AI 
systems or data processing activities that has caus ed or contributed to 
the violation; or 
(d) any other relief that the court may deem just and p roper 
taking into account the circumstances of the case. 
(2) In any proceeding under sub-section (1) , while awarding compensation, 
the court shall take into consideration the nature and extent of the violation, 
the degree of harm, and the whether the act or omission was wilful. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply without prejudice to the right 
of the aggrieved person to seek any other remedy un der this Act or under 
any other applicable law for the time being in force.  
5 
10 
Interim measures 
and relief. 
 
45. (1)  The Tribunal or the AI  Authority or any designate d officer authorised 
by it, may, in the interests of justice or to preve nt imminent harm, issue 
interim orders including but not limited to, — 
(a) suspension of any AI system or data activity; or  
(b) direction to cease and desist from specified actions; or  
(c) seizure or preservation of digital evidence.  
(2)  Interim orders issued under sub-section (1)  shall remain in force for a 
period not exceeding thirty days unless extended by  a competent court or 
the AI Authority upon sufficient cause being shown. 
(3) The procedure for seeking interim relief, as well a s the conditions 
governing the grant of such relief, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
15 
20 
 
Crediting sums 
realised by way 
of penalties to 
Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
 
46. All sums realised by way of penalties imposed under  the provisions of this 
Act, shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
  
   CHAPTER VII 
IMMUNITY AND EXEMPTION FROM LIABILITY  
25  
General 
immunity in case 
of action taken 
in good faith. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47. (1) No civil or criminal liability shall be imposed on any person or entity, 
who, in good faith and in compliance with the appli cable laws and 
prescribed standards, engages in the lawful develop ment, deployment, 
analysis, or disclosure of AI systems solely for th e purposes of ethical 
research, transparency, public interest, open innov ation, or regulatory AI 
Sandbox testing. Provided that such activity is und ertaken with due 
diligence, adheres to the principles of proportiona lity and minimal harm 
and does not contravene the provisions of this Act or any law for the time 
being in force. 
(2) The immunity under sub-section (1)  shall not apply in cases where —  
(i)  the activity is undertaken maliciously, for materi al gain, or to 
defame, deceive, or cause harm; or 
(ii) there is wilful violation of data protection laws o r security 
protocols; or 
(iii)  the developer knowingly fails to address major or critical 
flaw in open-source AI models, once alerted; or   
(iv)  the AI Sandbox participants exceed the scope, term s, or time 
limitations of regulatory approval. 
Illustration  
 A developer releases an open-source AI tool capable of generating 
synthetic speech. The tool includes a watermarking system, ethical use 
policy, and technical guardrails to prevent misuse.  The developer is 
immune from liability if the tool is misused by a t hird party to imitate the 
voice of a celebrity or a public figure. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
 

17 
5
 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
48. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the following acts shall
not constitute an infringement of any machine created intellectual assets or
proprietary right recognised under this Act in respect of any AI-generated
work, model, dataset, or digital artefact, —
(a) f air dealing with any AI-generated work, not being an
algorithmic system itself, for the purposes of — 
(i) private or personal use, including academic research and
innovation; or 
(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or any other
related work; or 
(iii) reporting of current events or developments in science
and technology. 
(b) the use of AI-generated data or content for training, testing, or
improving AI models, where such use is — 
(i) non-commercial, academic, or public interest-oriented;
(ii) accompanied by appropriate acknowledgement of
source and authorship, where applicable; and 
(iii) does not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests
of the rights holder. 
Provided that prior permission from the data holder shall be 
required for the use of data in the training, testing, or improvement of 
AI models, subject to the approval of the AI Authority: 
Provided further that it shall be the duty of the AI Authority to 
assess and ensure that such use does not perpetuate or introduce bias 
within the system. 
(c) transient or incidental storage or caching of AI-generated
works during the process of electronic transmission or communication 
to the public, where such storage — 
(i) is automatic and technical in nature; and
(ii) is temporary in nature; and
(iii) does not involve modification or unauthorized use of
the protected work. 
(d) use of AI-generated datasets or metadata for the purposes of
verifying accuracy, traceability, or compliance with law, by regulatory 
or judicial authorities. 
(e) reproduction or communication of any AI-generated work in
any accessible format by — 
(i) a person with disability for private, educational, or
research use; or 
(ii) a non-profit organisation serving the needs of persons
with disabilities, provided such reproduction is done on a cost-
recovery basis and does not enter ordinary commercial channels. 
(f) the observation, study, or reverse engineering of any AI
system or output for the purpose of interoperability, transparency, or 
ensuring safety and accountability in AI deployment, provided that 
such activity does not result in substantial reproduction of proprietary 
code or datasets. 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, “fair dealing” shall 
be interpreted in accordance with the evolving technological standards and 
public interest considerations. 
Certain uses 
n
ot to 
constitute 
infringement 
of machine 
created 
intellectual 
assets. 

18  
 
Exemption from 
liability of AI 
intermediary in 
certain cases. 
 
 
 
49. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or a ny law for the time 
being in force, but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), and (4),  
an AI Intermediary shall not be held liable for any  third-party information, 
AI-generated content, datasets, prompts, models, ou tputs, or 
communication links made available, transmitted, or  hosted by it, subject to 
compliance with the provisions of this Act. 
(2)  The exemption under sub-section (1)  shall apply only where ––  
(a) the role of the AI Intermediary is confined to, ––  
(i) facilitating access to AI systems or computing 
infrastructure;  
(ii) hosting or enabling access to AI models or datasets  
developed by third parties; or 
(iii) transmitting or storing user-generated prompts, que ries, 
or outputs on a passive or temporary basis;  
(b) the AI Intermediary does not, — 
(i) initiate the generation of the AI-generated content  in 
question;  
(ii) exercise control over the selection of the receiver  of the 
output; or 
(iii) modify the content, prompt, dataset, or model excep t 
for technical or performance optimization; 
(c) the AI Intermediary exercises due diligence in cont ent 
moderation, traceability, safety measures, and obse rves such technical 
protocols or ethical standards as may be prescribed  by the Central 
Government or the AI authority established under this Act. 
(3)  The exemption conferred by sub-section (1)  shall not apply where —  
(a) the AI Intermediary has —   
(i) knowingly abetted, or conspired in; or  
(ii)  facilitated the commission of any unlawful act thr ough 
the AI system; or 
(iii)  gained monetary benefit directly from specific act s of 
infringement, defamation, or other actionable wrongs;  
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge or a written notice  from the 
Central Government, the AI Authority, or a competen t court or 
Tribunal regarding any unlawful activity, the AI In termediary fails to 
expeditiously disable access to or remove such cont ent, dataset, tool or 
output while ensuring preservation of digital evide nce for legal and 
regulatory scrutiny. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obligations of 
AI 
intermediaries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50. Every AI intermediary seeking exemption under section 49 shall — 
(i)  establish and publicly disclose a comprehensive co ntent 
governance policy, including permitted and prohibit ed uses of the 
platform, and redressal mechanisms for users and th ird parties, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed;  
(ii)  implement technical safeguards for detection and red-flagging 
of outputs constituting hate speech, child sexual a buse material, non-
consensual deepfakes, copyright infringement or any unlawful act; 
(iii)  logging and preserving metadata consistent with “o rigin tag” 
standards as specified under this Act;  
40 
45 
 

19 
5 
10 
(iv) maintain and submit periodic transparency reports, in such
form and manner and at such duration, as may be prescribed, detailing 
therein, –– 
(a) content removal actions;
(b) Government and regulatory requests; and
(c) reported abuse cases and response times;
(v) cooperate in good faith with investigations initiated by law
enforcement or regulatory authorities; and 
(vi) ensure interoperability with the AI authority registry systems
and standardised AI auditing protocols. 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the expression “third 
party information” means information dealt with by an AI intermediary in 
his capacity as such. 
1
5 
C HAPTER VIII 
 ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT 
51. The Central Government may, after due appropriat ion made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the AI
Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central 
G
overnment to 
provide funds. 
20 
25 
52. (1) The AI Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may
be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India.
(2) The accounts of the AI Authority as audited and certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India or any other person appointed by
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be
forwarded annually by the Authority to the Central Government, which
shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before
each House of Parliament.
Accounts and 
A
udit. 
30 
53. (1) The AI Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such
time, for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving
a full account of its activities during the previous financial year, and
forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as
soon as may be after  it is received, before each House of Parliament.
Annual 
R
eport. 
35 C HAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
4
5 of 2023. 
40 
54. The Chairperson, Members and officers and staff of the AI Authority and
Special Tribunals shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants
within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
Members, 
o
fficers and 
staff of the AI 
Authority and 
Special 
Tribunals to be 
public 
servants. 
45 
55. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the
Government or any officer of the Government or any member or any
officer or employees of the AI Authority or the Special Tribunals in respect
of anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith in pursuance
of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
Protection of 
a
ction taken  
in good faith. 

20  
 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules and 
of the AI 
Authority to 
make 
regulations. 
 
56. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the  Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generali ty of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the  following matters, 
namely, — 
(a) the manner and procedure for registration, audit, a nd 
accountability of AI systems under sub-section (3)  of section 12, 
section 13, section 19 and sub-section (3)  of section 25;  
(b) the standards for testing, certification, and expla inability of 
AI systems before deployment;  
(c) the process for applying for and granting digital s ignatures 
to AI systems under section 10;  
(d) the form and manner of attribution of authorship an d 
ownership of AI-generated content under section 14;  
(e) the procedure for identifying, designating, and reg ulating 
high-risk AI systems;  
(f) the format and content of notices and disclosures r equired 
under this Act under sub-section (2)  of section 19; 
(g) the requirements and process for registration of AI  
developers, providers, and deployers under section 19; 
(h) the safeguards for the protection of data used in A I training 
and deployment; and 
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescri bed under 
this Act.  
(3) The AI Authority, may from time to time, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette, make 
regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, 
for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 
(4) Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parli ament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days, which m ay be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or th e successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica tion in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or re gulation should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validit y of anything previously 
done under that rule or regulation. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
 
Savings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57. (1)  Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to —  
(a)  affect the operation of any other law for the time  being in 
force in India, including laws relating to intellec tual property, 
information technology, data protection, consumer p rotection, or 
public safety, unless such law is inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act;  
(b)  limit or interfere with any right or remedy availa ble to any 
person under any other law or contract for the time being in force;  
(c)  affect any act done, liability incurred, or right accrued under 
any other law prior to the commencement of this Act , provided such 
act, liability, or right is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.  
40 
45 
50 
 

21 
5 
(2) In the event of any inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of
this Act and any other law for the time being in force, the provisions of this
Act shall, unless otherwise expressly provided in such other law, prevail to
the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as invalidating any
notification, circular, direction, guideline, or order issued by the Central
Government or any competent authority under any existing law, which is
consistent with the objectives and purposes of this Act.
10 
Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 
15 
58. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
59. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
appropriate Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,  
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as 
may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of the period of two years from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 

22  
 
  STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS 
The exponential advancement of Artificial Intellige nce (AI) technologies 
has given rise to novel forms of intellectual and c reative output that challenge the 
traditional foundations of Intellectual Property Ri ghts (IPR). Existing legal 
frameworks, which are predominantly anthropocentric , were never designed to 
accommodate the non-human authorship, automated cre ation, or autonomous 
decision-making that characterises AI-generated works and inventions. 
This Bill seeks to address these unprecedented deve lopments by creating a 
sui generis  legal framework that diverges from conventional do ctrines of 
authorship, originality, and inventorship. It ackno wledges that assets created by AI 
systems, be it in the form of text, images, inventi ons, data models, or any form of 
creative or functional expression—constitute a new class of intellectual property, 
which cannot be adequately governed under the exist ing Copyright Act, 1957, the 
Patents Act, 1970, or other analogous laws. 
Recognising the transformative economic, cultural, and technological 
significance of AI-generated content, this legislat ion aims to provide legal status, 
ownership rights, and regulatory mechanisms for AI- generated intellectual output. 
It proposes a distinct classification of rights tha t balances innovation, 
accountability, and public interest while fostering  trust in AI technologies and 
protecting stakeholders' rights, including developers, users, and society at large. 
This Bill seeks to pioneer a sui generis  model of intellectual property 
governance that reimagines the contours of ownershi p, authorship, liability, and 
enforcement in the age of machine-generated creatio n, thereby, ensuring that 
Indian law remains responsive, adaptive, and forwar d-looking in the face of 
technological evolution. 
Hence this Bill. 
  SUJEET KUMAR. 
 
  
 
  

23  
 
  FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM 
Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the establishmen t of a National Artificial 
Intelligence Data Governance Authority whereas Clau se 21 provides for the 
composition of the Authority and for the salaries a nd allowances payable to as 
well as other terms and conditions of service of th e Chairperson and Members 
thereof.  Clause 22 provides that the Central Gover nment shall appoint such 
number of officers and employees to the Authority a s may be required for its 
efficient functioning and for the salaries and allo wances payable to and other 
terms and conditions of their service. Clause 26 pr ovides for the establishment of 
a Special Tribunal and Clause 28 provides for its c omposition and the salaries and 
allowances payable to and other terms and condition s of service of the 
Chairperson and Members thereof. Clause 34 provides  that the Central 
Government shall provide the Tribunal with such num ber of officers and staff as 
required to assist it in the performance of its dut ies and for the salary and 
allowances payable to them as well as the terms and  conditions of their service.  
Clause 51 provides that the Central Government shal l make available adequate 
funds to the National Artificial Intelligence Data Governance Authority, as may 
be deemed necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expe nditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fun d of India and the 
Consolidated Fund of the respective States. However , it is difficult to estimate the 
exact quantum of expenditure likely to be involved at this stage.  
  
 
  

24 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 56 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and 
the AI Authority, with the previous approval of the Central Government to make 
regulations, for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 59 of the Bill 
empowers the appropriate Government to make such provisions through an order, 
as may be considered necessary or expedient, to remove any difficulty that may 
arise in giving effect to any of the provisions of the Bill. 
As the rules or regulations or orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
to establish a legal framework for the recognition of content, attribution of authorship 
and protection of intellectual property right in AI-generated works, addressing 
the interests of creators, developers, users, and the public, with a focus 
on ensuring access, transparency, fairness, and the ethical use 
of AI technologies and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
_____________ 
(Shri Sujeet Kumar, M.P .) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–327–08.12.2025. 