As Inrropucep IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No, XLIV of 2001

THE FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION TO GIRLS
BELONGING TO FAMILIES LIVING BELOW POVERTY
LINE BILL, 2001

A
BILL

to provide for free and compulsory primary, middle and senior secondary education
for girls of families living below poverty line throughout the country and for
matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1, (1) This Act may be called the free and compulsory education to girls belonging to Short title,
families living below poverty line Act, 2001. extent and
commence-
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India. ment.

(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(a) ‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government
10 of that State and in other cases, the Central Government;

(b) ‘‘education’’ means education upto senior secondary class in a school;
(०) ‘‘family living below poverty line’’ means family whose income is below
rupees three thousand per month;
(@) ‘‘girl’’ means any female human being who is below the age of twenty five
15 years;
(९) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;


2

(f) ‘‘school’’ includes every educational institution imparting primary education
or higher education to the children,
Free and 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force it
Compulsory —_ shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide every girl of a family living below
Bivcotion 272 poverty line residing in its territorial jurisdiction —
to Girls. (a) free and compulsory primary, middle and higher secondary education;
(6) stationery helpful to her studies such as books, note-books, writing
materials etc, free of cost;

(c) School uniform, free of cost;

(४) free hostel facilities and meals during the school period upto senior
secondary class;

(e) Provide a financial assistance of rupees one hundred per month upto
primary level, rupees two hundred upto middle level and rupees five hundred per
month upto senior secondary level.

Appropriate 4, Jt shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to establish and maintain or
Government to cause to be established or maintained such primary, middle and senior secondary schools
provide within its territorial jurisdiction as the appropriate Government may deep necessary so as to
eae of provide compulsory education upto higher secondary to every girl belonging to families
schools. living below poverty line residing in such jurisdiction.

Parents to admit 5. Notwithstanding any custom, usage or belief every parent shall admit his girl child
their child to on completion of five years of age to a school and shall not restrain the girl from attending
school on the school.

completion of .

five years.

Girls not to be 6. No parent or person shall engage a girl child in household chores or employ a girl

engaged in child in a manner which shall prevent her from attending a school.
household

chores.

Penalty. 7. If any parent of a girl, for any reasons, prevents, restrains or otherwise obstructs his
girl child from receiving primary, middle and higher secondary education in a school, such
a parent shall be liable to simple imprisonment which may extend to one year.

Power to 8. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make

make rules.

tules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It is necessary that girls belonging to the below poverty line should be provided
higher secondary education to make them self-supporting so that they can lead a respect-
able life in society. The people living below poverty line force the girl child to help in
household affairs as the parents cannot afford to spend money on her education, providing
books, uniform and other school expenses. There is a common feeling that a girl child does
not remain useful for parents after marriage. In poor families, specially higher education
becomes a taboo for girls as they face difficulty in finding suitable match. Even after 50 years
of Independence, the attitude of parents have not changed. In the whole world, girls have
become brilliant in all aspects of life and have successfully earned their name in the field of
sports, have become pilots, doctors, advocates and judges. In fact, at present, all the girls
have brought pride to their nations in all the fields. Therefore, in India also it is must that
beginning should be made for providing compulsory higher secondary education to the
girls belonging to the families of below poverty line.

Hence this Bill.

RUMANDLA RAMACHANDRAIAH


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clauses 3(e) and 4 of the Bill provide that appropriate Government shall provide
Rs. 100 per month upto Primary level, Rs. 200 per month upto Middle level and Rs. 500 per
month upto Higher Secondary level to each girl child and establish requisite number of
higher secondary schools within its jurisdiction respectively. The Bill if enacted and brought
into operation will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a sum of rupees five thousand crores from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum
as recurring expenditure.

It is also likely to involve a sum of rupees eight hundred crores from the Consolidated
Fund of India as non-recurring expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for free and compulsory primary, middle and senior secondary education for
girls of families living below poverty line throughout the country and for matters
connected therewith.

(Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—899RS—4-7-2001