Bill No. XLIV of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 22ND NOVEMBER, 2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE RIGHTS OF DWELLERS AS OWNERS OF THE LAND BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to identify the dwellers like farmers, labourers, artisans, tribes living in non-revenue
 or un-recognised villages and to provide those identified dwellers, to be
entitled for registration as owners in respect of dwelling house,
built on  land not belonging to them  and  for  matters
connected  therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Constitution of India guarantees to secure all its citizens justice, social
and economic, and equality of status;
AND WHEREAS in the past the revenue and non-revenue villages were created by the
British to avoid the voting rights to the backward classes of India and the exploited class and
their families were left with no land rights till date;
N
OW THEREFORE, it is expedient to make law for land reform to provide land rights to
those deprived classes.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rights of Dwellers as owners of the Land  Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "competent authority" means such officers or authority appointed as the
competent authority by the Central Government or State Governments as the case may
be, or Central Government in consent with the State Governments, by notification in
the Official Gazette, for the purpose of this Act.
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) ‘‘identified dweller’’ means a person whom the Commissioner and the Assistant
Commissioner or the officer authorized by the competent authority, shall after such
enquiry as may be prescribed, by order, determine to be entitled for registration as
owner of the dwelling house and land in respect of which he is entitled to be so
registered ;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "unrecorded habitation’’ means a non-revenue or unrecognised village.
3. The Central Government and the State Governments shall within their territorial if
Jurisdiction appoint competent authority within six months from the commencement of this
Act, in such manner as may be prescribed, for the purposes of this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being
in force, where an agricultural labourer, artisan or a labourer is ordinarily residing in a dwelling
house, on a land not belonging to him, in an unrecorded habitation on the date of
commencement of this Act, upon notification by the competent authority, specifying the
survey number and boundaries in the precribed manner, such a dwelling house along with
the site thereof and land immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for its social and
economical survival, shall on the date of such notification by the competent authority, vest
absolutely with the concerned State Government free from all encumbrances and the identified
dweller shall be entitled to be registered as owner thereof.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this Section, an identified dweller residing in a
dwelling house which is a portion of the house of an owner or which is a temporary residence
on such land shall not be regarded as ordinarily residing therein.
5. The competent authority shall submit a report of its findings from every survey  and
the action taken in each case to the Central Government and to the concerned State
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) An identified dweller entitled to be registered as an owner under section 4, may
make an application to the Assistant Commissioner or any other officer authorized by the
State Government, in the prescribed manner before completion of one year from the date of
notification by the competent authority under section 4.
(2) The Assistant Commissioner or the officer authorized by the State Government,
shall after such enquiry as may be prescribed, by order, determine the person entitled to be
registered as owner of the dwelling house and land and such other matters as may be
prescribed and forward a copy of the Order to the Tehsildar.
(3) The Tehsildar shall, on receipt of the order passed under sub-section (2) determine,
in such manner as may be specified, the amount which the owner shall be entitled to for the
extinguishment of his rights in such land and on payment of such amount to the State
Government, by the, identified dweller, the Tehsildar shall issue a notification to this effect
and also issue a certificate to such dweller specifying the extent and such other particulars as
may be prescribed relating to such dwelling house and land and that he shall be registered as
owner thereof.
(4) A copy of the certificate shall be forwarded by the Tehsildar to the sub-registrar
who shall notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908 register the
same.
7. An identified dweller or group of identified dwellers shall be entitled to receive free
legal aid if he/she so chooses and to engage any advocate who he or she chooses from
among those enrolled in the legal aid panel under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
and the Legal Aid Services Authority established under the said Act shall pay all costs,
expenses and fees of the advocate appointed by the identified dweller in accordance with
relevant rules.
Appointment
of competent
authority.
Identifications
of dwellers by
the
competent
authority.
Report by the
competent
authority.
Application
by identified
dweller.
Rights of
identified
dwellers.
16 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
39 of 1987.

3
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in concurrence with the State Governments, may by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force except to the extent the provisions of other laws are inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government in concurrence with the State Governments make rules
to give effect to the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if  before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified from or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
10
5
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Father of the Constitution Dr. B.R. Ambedkar said ''Without equality, liberty would
produce the supremacy of the few over the many. Equality without liberty would kill individual
initiative.''
After Independence of India, dependent communities for various reasons settled at
one place. Their domain has not been recognized as recorded revenue village. The concept
of revenue and non-revenue villages is a creation by the British to avoid the voting rights to
the backward classes of India, i.e., agricultural labourers, artisans, daily wage earners, adivasis,
nomadic, semi-nomadic tribes, hilly areas, forest areas settlers. Their settlements are treated
as un-recognised, un-recorded non-revenue villages. Due to their unrecognized status, basic
facilities like drinking water, roads, transport, upgradation of technical education, health
food distribution, public distribution system and other connectivity do not reach these
areas. The dwellers of these areas are not given rights in the form of title deeds, occupancy
rights or enjoyment rights. Keeping the above in view the State Should, in a federal structure,
do away with discriminatory classification of revenue and non-revenue, planning and non-
planning and enusre that various facilities under National Programmes are equitably
distributed based on the needs of the hamlets and habitats of India. Otherwise, their inhabitants
will be treated a second rate citizens of the country due to denial of every rights in the forest,
hilly border regions. Even today many unrecorded villages are without schools, teachers,
health centers, postal and other communicating facilities.
The Constituion of India gives many rights to every citizen including  the fundamental
rights. Majority of the population which lives in the outskirts of the villages and peripheral
of the forest land are not brought under the revenue records. Due to this, they will not be
counted under the census and ultimately all the rights are  denied to them.
In such situation, the State should not ill-treat these settlers as they are called in
different traditional names, as in Karnataka such as Thanda, Hatti, Basti, Camp, Colony Adi,
Wadi, Doddi, Palya, Puram or any other such un-recognised, un-recorded, un-surveyed, non
boundaries, un-numbered domains. They number lakhs and lakhs in India. Land is a subject
of State, But, the Central Government has every right to obtain the information and pass
such law which deemds fit to the dependent citizen of the country.
Constitution of India guarantees to secure all its citizens, justice, social, economic and
equality of status. But, still there are several lakhs oppressed and exploited humans who
have till date not been able to claim their rights and to safeguard constituional intentions and
their belief towards betterment of their families. It is deemed necessary to enact legislation
for land reform which is an unfinished business of India till 2019, by giving ownership rights
to the dweller who have spent their ages in their dwelling land/house without land ownership.
Hence this Bill.
B.K. HARIPRASAD
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill inter alia provides for the appointment of Competent Authority for
survey and investigations to identify dwellers under this Bill. The expenditure relating to
States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of respective States. The expenditure
relating to Union territories shall be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill,
therefore, it enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum would
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about
rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of  the Bill empowers the Central Government in concurrerce with the State
Governments to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate
to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to identify the dwellers like farmers, labourers, artisans, tribes living in non-revenue
or un-recognised villages and to provide those identified dwellers to be
entitled for registration  as owners in respect of dwelling house,
built on land non belonging to them and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri B. K. Hariprasad, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3614RS(S3)—22-11-2019.