AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No XLIV of 2025 
THE CENTRAL PROTECTION OF HEALTHCARE WORKERS AND MEDICAL 
ESTABLISHMENTS FROM VIOLENCE BILL, 2025 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
_________ 
CLAUSES  
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Sh
ort title, application and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHA
PTER II 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
3. Prohibition of violence against healthcare workers and damage to property of medical establishments.
4. Penalties for violence against healthcare workers and damage to property of medical establishments.
5. Information and Registration of offence.
6. Offence to be cognizable and non-bailable.
7. Investigation, supervision and trial of cases.
8. Presumption as to certain offences.
9. Compensation for acts of violence.
10. Presumption of culpable mental state.
11. Prohibition of carrying weapons into a medical establishment.
12. Punishment for false charge.
CH
APTER III 
SAFETY STANDARDS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
13. Saf
e working environment in medical establishments.
14. Basic safety measures in medical establishments.
15. Responsibilities of healthcare workers and medical establishments.

(ii) 
CLAUSES  
CHAPTER IV 
STATE HEALTHCARE PROTECTION BOARD AND DISTRICT HEALTHCARE VIGILANCE COMMITTEES 
16. C
onstitution of State Healthcare Protection Board.
17. Functions of the Board.
18. Officers and staff of the Board.
19. Constitution of District Healthcare Vigilance Committee.
20. Functions of the District Committee.
21. Officers and staff of the District Committee.
22. Central Government Oversight and Monitoring.
CH
APTER V 
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT 
23. C
entral Government to provide funds.
24. Grants and loans by the State or Union territory Government.
25. Accounts and audit.
26. Annual Report.
C
HAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
27. P
ower to remove difficulties.
28. Power of the appropriate Government to make rules and of the Board to make regulations.
29. Act to supplement other laws.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XLIV of 2025 
THE CENTRAL PROTECTION OF HEALTHCARE 
WORKERS AND MEDICAL ESTABLISHMENTS 
FROM VIOLENCE BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
to prohibit violence against healthcare workers and professionals and 
damage or loss to the property of medical establishments across 
 the country by constituting an institutional mechanism and 
 for matters connected therewith and 
 incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of  India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Protection of Healthcare Workers
and Medical Establishments from Violence Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall apply to all medical establishments as defined and registered
Short title, 
application and 
commencement. 

 2 
under the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 
2010 or under any State Act for the time being in force relating to 
registration of medical establishments. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 5 
 
23 of 2010. 
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, −
(a) “appropriate Government” means−
(i) in relation to medical establishment located
in a Union territory without a legislature, the Central
Government; and 
(ii) in all other cases, the State Government, as
the case may be, within whose jurisdiction such medical 
establishment, is situated. 
(b) “Board” means the State Healthcare Protection Board
constituted in each State and Union territory under section 16; 
(c) “District Committee” means the District Healthcare
Vigilance Committee constituted in each district under section 19; 
(d) “medical establishment” means any healthcare institution
or facility that offers services, facilities, or care requiring diagnosis, 
treatment (including curative, palliative and preventive), or 
management of illness, injury, deformity, abnormality, or 
pregnancy in any recognized system of medicine under the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020 and may 
include, but not limited to: 
(i) a hospital, maternity home, nursing home,
dispensary, clinic, sanatorium, blood banks, dental clinics, all 
register
ed alternative medicine healthcare facilities, 
physiotherapy clinics, medical camps, first -aid posts, or any 
other premises offering healthcare services; 
(ii) institutions or facilities engaged in pathological,
bacteriological, genetic, radiological, chemical, biological 
investigations, or other diagnostic services, with the aid of 
laboratory or other medical equipment, usually carried on, 
established and administered or maintained by any person or 
body of persons, whether incorporated or not;  
(iii) any establishment offering healthcare services and
owned, controlled, or managed by: 
(a). the Central or State Government or a 
Department of such Government; 
(b). Public Sector Undertakings or 
Autonomous Bodies of the Central or State 
Government; 
(c). Public or private trusts; 
(d). Corporations or societies registered under 
Central, Provincial, or State Acts; 
(e). Local authorities; 
(f). Single doctors practicing independently; 
(iv) mobile medical units and ambulances that are fitted 
w
ith medical equipment  and  used for  providing  healthcare 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
14 of 2010. 

 3 
23 of 2010. 
30 of 2019. 
21 of 2023 
26 of 2023. 
10 of 2017. 
8 of 1948. 
5 
10 
15 
2
0 
25 
30 
35 
4
0 
45 
50 
services; 
(v) teaching institutes, primary health centers,
pharmacies, radiology and imaging centers, casualty and 
trauma care centers, health and wellness centers, 
management and consulting centers, e- medicine and 
telemedicine centers; and 
(vi) any clinical establ ishment as defined in the
Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 
2010. 
(e) “healthcare worker" or “healthcare personnel” or
“healthcare service personnel” means any individual engaged in 
delivering, supporting or facilitating medical and healthcare 
services, and includes, – 
(i) medical practitioners registered in accordance with
the provisions of the National Medical Commission Act, 
2019, and possessing a recog nized medical qualification 
within the meaning of clause (r) of section 2 of that Act;  
(ii) practitioners of Indian systems of medicine or
homeopathy registered under any law of appropriate 
Government, and recognized by the Ministry of AYUSH or 
any statutory body constituted for such purpose;
  
(iii) dentists, dental professionals, dental hygienists,
and dental mechanics registered under the National Dental 
Commission Act, 2023; 
(iv) nurses, midwives, auxiliary nurse -midwives, and
health visitors, registered under the National Nursing and 
Midwifery Commission Act, 2023; 
(v) mental health professionals registered under the
Mental Healthcare Act, 2017; 
(vi) a pharmacist registered under the Pharmacy Act,
1948; 
(vii) paramedical and allied health professionals and
students including physiotherapists, radiologists, dieticians, 
occupational and speech therapists, pharmacists, and 
diagnostic services providers, recognized under any law of 
appropriate Government or by any authority constituted by 
the such Government; 
(viii) medical and nursing students undergoing
education or training in any recognized systems of medicine 
or healthcare profession; 
(ix) community health workers such as polio workers,
lady health worker s, Accredited  Social Health Activist 
(ASHA) workers or  any such other individual deployed in 
public health outreach activities; 
(x) any person, including support staff, ambulance
drivers, paramedics, social workers, bereavement 
counsellors, transplant coordina tors, security personnel, or 
administrative and non -clinical staff, who by virtue of their 
employment in a medical establishment, directly or indirectly 
participates in healthcare delivery; 
(xi) any other person or class of persons notified by the
Central Government in the Official Gazette for the purposes 

 4 
of this Act; 
(f) “healthcare services” means any service relating to th e
provision, facilitation, curative, rehabilitative, preventive, 
promotive, supportive, or administrative functions aimed at 
managing any disease, injury, disability or overall health, and 
includes efforts to provide, facilitate, or ensure access to necessary 
healthcare for individuals, such as locating, treating, or transporting 
those in need, as well as the management and oper ation of 
healthcare facilities; 
(g) “p rescribed” means prescribed under the rules made under
this Act; 
(h) “property” means any movable or immovable asset,
including medical equipment or machinery, owned by, in 
possession of, or under the control of any healthcare professional, 
medical personnel, or medical establishment; and 
(i) "violence" means any act that causes or may cause harm,
injury, intimidation, or endangerment to the life of healthcare 
worker, whether occurring within a medical establishment o r 
outside it, and shall include, but  not limited to,– 
(i) physical harm through actions resulting in bodily
injury, grievous hurt, or death to healthcare worker; 
(ii) psychological abuse including verbal abuse or
harassment intended to insult, humiliate, or provo ke 
healthcare worker in the performance of their duties; 
(iii) any interference that obstructs or hinders or prevents
healthcare worker from carrying out their responsibilities, 
regardless of the location; 
(iv) loss or damage to any property, medical equipment,
or documents in the custody of or associated with healthcare 
worker or medical establishments; and 
(v) harassment including any unwanted conduct that
violates the dignity of healthcare workers, impacting their 
living and working conditions and affe cting their ability to 
perform their duties effectively; or 
(vi) any other activity that results in mental anguish,
physical injury, or death to the healthcare service providers or 
beneficiary of healthcare services. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Prohibition of 
violence 
against 
healthcare 
workers and 
damage to 
property of 
medical 
establishments. 
3. 
CHAPTER II 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
(1) No individual shall, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or
by visible representations or otherwise,  engage in any act of violence 
against a healthcare worker, whether during the discharge of their 
professional duties or otherwise, or cause any damage or loss to any 
property, within or   associated with, a medical establishment.  
(2) Any act of violence against a healthcare worker or damage to the
property of a medical establishment under sub -section (1), which is 
motivated, whether wholly or in part, by considerations of  caste, gender, 
religion, language, or place of birth,  is hereby prohibited. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Central
Government, notify and implement such measures, as may be necessary
or expedient to prevent and mitigate any act of violence against
4
0 
45 
50 

 5 
healthcare workers and damage to property of medical est ablishments, 
ensuring that such acts are addressed and remedied at all levels of 
governance, as expeditiously as possible. 
45
 of 2023. 
5 
10 
1
5 
4. (1)  Whoever commits, abets or incites commission of any act of violence
or damage in contravention of the provisions of  section 3, shall be
punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to five years, and with fine which shall not be less
than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend upto five lakh rupees;
(2) Whoever, while committing violence or damage as referred to under
sub-section (1) of section 3, causes grievous hurt, as defined under
section 116 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, to any he althcare
worker, shall upon conviction be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to ten
years and with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees but which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Penalties for 
violence against 
healthcare 
workers and 
damage to 
property of 
medical 
establishments. 
46 of 2023. 
46
 of 2023. 
20 
25 
30 
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, upon receipt of a written
complaint from the aggrieved healthcare worker  the person in charge or
head of  the medical establishment, as the case may be, in which the
healthcare worker is working, shall, within such period as may be
prescribed, notify  the officer in charge of the  police station having
territorial jurisdiction, regarding the commission of an offence under this
Act, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2)  I n the event of any violence against healthcare workers while on
duty, the head of the establishment shall be responsible for causing an
institutional First Information Report to be filed, within a period not
exceeding six hours from the time of occurrence of such incident.
(3) U pon receipt of a complaint or information under sub -section (1),
either from the medical establishment or an aggrieved healthcare worker,
the police officer shall,  notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Samhita, 2023,  register a
First Information Report within one hour of receiving such complaint or
information.
Information and 
registration of 
offence. 
46 of 2023. 35 
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023, an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable 
and non-bailable.  
Offence to be 
cognizable and 
non-bailable. 
46 of 2023. 
46 of 2023. 
4
0 
45 
50 
55 
7. (1) (i) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, any case registered under this Act 
shall be investigated by a police officer not below the rank of 
Inspector; 
(ii) The investigation of each such c ase shall be completed
within a period of thirty days from the date of  registration of the 
First Information Report; 
(iii) Each such investigation shall be supervised by a senior
police officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of 
Police, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) (i) All inquiries and trials under this Act shall be conducted
as expeditiously as possible and once examination of witnesses has 
commenced, the same shall proceed on a day-to-day basis until all 
witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless a court -
ordered adjournment is necessary for reasons to be recorded in 
writing by the Court; 
(ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, efforts shall be made to ensure 
that the inquiry or trial is concluded within a period of one year 
Investigation, 
supervision and 
trial of cases. 

 6 
from the date of filing of charge-sheet: 
    Provided that such period may be extended by such 
further period, for reasons to be recorded in writing, but not 
exceeding six months at a time: 
    Provided further that where the trial is not concluded 
within the said period, the Judge shall record the reasons for 
delay in writing. 
(3) (i) For the purpose of ensuring speedy trial in all cases
registered under this Act, the appropriate Govern ment shall, 
with the concurrence of the High Court, establish by notification 
in the Official Gazette, one or more Special Courts  in each 
district, to try offences under this Act; and  
(ii) The  appropriate Government shall, by notification in
the Official Gazette, designate for every such Special Court, a 
Special Public Prosecutor for the purpose of conducting cases 
under this Act in that Court. 
5 
10 
15 
Presumption as 
to certain 
offences. 
8. Where an individual is charged with commission of an offence under
section 3, the Court shall presume that the individual has committed the 
offence, unless proven otherwise. 
Compensation 
for acts of 
violence. 
9. In addition to the penalties provided under section 4, any individual
found guilty of an offence under this Act shall be required to pay 
compensation, as follows, – 
(i) an amount equal to twice the fair market value of the
property damaged or the loss incurred, as adjudicated by the 
competent court; 
(ii) a sum of one lakh rupees for inflicting hurt on a healthcare 
worker and five lakh rupees for inflicting grievous hurt on a 
healthcare worker, or as determined by the competent court: 
      Provided that if the convicted individual fails to remit the 
compensation provided under this section, the amount shall be 
recoverable as arrears of land revenue in accordance with the 
provisions of the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890. 
 
20 
25 
30 
1 of 1890. 
Presumption of 
culpable mental 
state. 
10. In any prosecution for an offence under section 3, wherein the
commission of the offence necessitates a culpable mental state on the part
of the accused, the Court shall presume the existence of such culpable
mental state, however, it shall be open to th
e accused to rebut this
presumption by proving that  he did not possess such mental state with
respect to the act constituting the alleged offence.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,– 
(a) a fact is said to be proved only when the Court
believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely 
when its existence is established by a preponderance of 
probability.  
(b) "culpable mental state" includes intention, motive,
knowledge of a fact a nd the belief in, or reason to believe, a 
fact. 
35 
40 
45 
Prohibition of 
carrying 
weapons into a 
medical 
establishment. 
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, no person shall possess, carry, or display any
arms, including licensed weapons, within the premises of any medical
establishment:
Provided that no provision of this section shall apply to arms 
50 

 7 
54
 of 1959. 5 
10 
officially permitted for security purposes and carried by law enforcement 
agencies or security personnel on duty at the medical establishment.  
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, "arms" 
shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause (c) of section 2 
of the Arms Act, 1959. 
(2) Whosoever found in vio lation of sub-s ection (1) shall be liable to 
punishment with imprisonment of either description for a term of not less 
than one month but which may extend to six months, or with fine, which 
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to three 
lakh rupees, or with both. 
45
 of 2023. 
15 
12. Where, during any stage of the inquiry, investigation or trial under this
Act, it is established to the satisfaction of the court that no violation of 
the provisions of this Act was committed by the accused and that the 
complaint or the charge made agains t the accused was false and 
malicious, the individual making such false or malicious charge shall be 
liable to be prosecuted and punished under the relevant provisions of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
Punishment for 
false charge. 
CHAPTER III 
SAFETY STANDARDS AND RESPONSIBILIES 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
13. (1) Every medical establishment shall ensure the creation and
maintenance of a safe and secure working environment for all healthcare
workers within its premises, in accordance with the guidelines issued by
the Central Government under sub- section (2) and for 
this purpose,
undertake the following measures, namely, –
(i) All medical establishments including colleges and
hospitals thereunder shall develop a policy for ensuring a safe 
working environment within their campus; 
(ii) Any incident of violence within t he premises shall be
promptly investigated by the management, and a First Information 
Report shall be lodged as per the provisions of section 5 of this Act; 
(iii) A detailed action taken report on any incident of violence
shall be sent to the National Medi cal Commission within forty -
eight hours of the occurrence of the incident; 
(iv) All medical establishments shall be declared as 'Safe
Zones' where any act of violence or threats shall result in swift legal 
action;  
(v) All medical establishments shall develop and implement
internal policies to address workplace violence, including protocols 
for responding to and reporting such incidents; and 
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, issue guidelines on
the safety standards and measures to be dep loyed in all medical
establishments across the country.
Safe working 
environment in 
medical 
establishments. 
45 
50 
14. Every medical establishment shall implement such basic safety measures
as may be necessary to ensure the physical security of healthcare workers, 
patients, and attendants, and to prevent the occurrence of violence within 
its premises, which shall include but not be limited to, – 
(i) i mplementing advanced security measures, including but
not limited to improved lighting, monitore d CCTV cameras, and 
trained security personnel covering high- traffic areas like 
emergency rooms, operation theatres, connecting pathways, along 
with other such areas identified by the medical establishment;  
(ii) adequate CCTV surveillance within and outs ide the
Basic safety 
measures in 
medical 
establishments. 

(8)
premises; 
(iii) stationing Q uick Response Teams, equipped with
effective communication tools to respond to incidents of violence 
or threats in a timely manner; 
(iv) mandatory de-es calation and crisis management training
to healthcare workers to manage patient families in high -stress 
situations along with training on the legal recourses available in case 
of violence; 
(v) provision of safe and secure transportation fa cilities to
healthcare workers for traveling to and from hospitals and other 
relevant medical institutions, especially during night shifts;  
(vi) installing and maintaining CCTV cameras at all critical
e
ntry points to ensure the screening of individuals for weapons or 
prohibited items and secure storage and regular review of the footage 
in accordance with the security protocols issued by the Central 
Government, from time to time, as per sub-section (2) of section 13; 
(vii) addressing instances of violence,  disproportionately
affecting female and younger healthcare workers   by prioritizing 
their safety in medical establishment infrastructure design, including 
secure duty and rest rooms and separate facilities for female 
healthcare workers; 
(viii) designating  and deploying a trained security force which
shall be responsible for managing the safety of sensitive areas, 
including emergency rooms, Intensive Care Units, and entry points 
and impart training to them in handling violent situations, de -
escalation techniques, and healthcare-specific security challenges; 
(ix) ensuring establishment of emergency response protocols
f
or handling incidents of violence or threats to safety; 
(x) implementing access control measures or systems such as
identification checks and systems, visitor badges and screening, and 
security personnel at critical points to restrict entry  of unauthorized 
persons, particularly in sensitive zones such as Intensive Care Units, 
emergency wards, and healthcare professionals’ resting rooms;  
(xi) deploying a visitor management system to regulate the
flow of visitors and to ensure that only authorized personnel and 
family members are allowed in patient area; and 
(xii) ensuring the provision of adequate sanitation, nutrition
and hygiene measures to all healthcare workers. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Responsibilities 
of healthcare 
workers and 
medical 
establishments. 
15. (1) Before initiating any treatment or medical procedure, every doctor,
medical professional, or medical establishment, as the case may be, shall
provide an explanatory note to the patient, or their nearest kin or
attendant, outlining:
(i) the present medical condition of the patient;
(ii) expected procedures and treatments;
(iii) possible outcomes of the treatment;
(iv) expected recovery time;
(v) chances of failure of the prescribed procedures; and
(vi) estimated expenses for medication, procedures,
treatment, and services:
Provided that a confirmation of understanding must be
obtai
ned either in writing or recorded verbally in such form and
40 
45 
50 

 9 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
manner as may be prescribed in the presence of at least t wo 
witnesses. 
       Provided further that this requirement shall not delay 
emergency or trauma care, and the   explanatory note shall be given 
and written or verbal confirmation of understanding obtained as 
early as reasonably possible; 
(2) All healthcare service providers shall ensure that the treatment and
procedures are explained in a clear and comprehensible manner to the
patient or their designated attendant before and during treatment;
(3) A
ll medical establishments shall ––
(i) safeguard pat ient confidentiality, uphold the highes t
standards of ethical conduct, and provide emergency care without
discrimination, except on medical grounds; 
(ii) furnish, upon request, a copy of the patient’s medical
record or any part thereof to the patient or their designated 
attendant; 
(iii) ensure display of essential information for all
stakeholders, including patients, visitors, and healthcare staff, at 
noticeable places within their premises; 
( iv) provide separate duty rooms for male and female
healthcare workers and ensure basic amenities such as sanitation, 
resting spaces, and access to food and water during night shifts; 
( v) be equipped with CCTV survei llance at critical entry
points to monitor any unwanted access by attendants of patients 
into sensitive areas, such as Intensive Care Units and doctors' 
resting rooms; 
( vi) provide mental health counselling services for their staff,
especially those who have been victims of violence or face high-
stress work environments and institute peer support groups to offer 
ongoing emotional and psychological support; 
( vii) establish a clear, visible emergency reporting
mechanism that healthcare workers can use to al ert security 
personnel in the event of an emergency; 
( viii) abide by the safety standards and guidelines issue d
under sections 13 and 14 of this Act. 
(4) Any healthcare worker or medical establishment  found to be in
violation of any of provisions of sub-section (3) or refuses treatment to a
patient on malicious grounds, shall be punished by disciplinary action,
suspension, or revocation of licenses for medical practice or sealing of
the medical institution, as the case may be, as prescribed by the
appropriate Government in accordance with the relevant laws, rules, and
regulations in this regard.
45 
CHAPTER IV 
STATE HEALTHCARE PROTECTION BOARD AND DISTRICT HEALTHCARE 
VIGILANCE COMMITTEES 
50 
16. (1)  The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette constitute, a Board, to be known as the State 
Healthcare Protection Board in each State and Union territory to be 
known as the ––––(name of the State/Union territory) Healthcare 
Protection Board  for the purposes of overseeing and ensuring 
implementation of the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder within its territorial jurisdiction. 
Constitution of 
State Healthcare 
Protection Board. 

 10 
(2) The composition of the Board shall be as follows, -
(i) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of
Health and Family Welfare in the appropriate Government —
Chairperson, ex-officio; 
(ii) the Secretary or Principal Secretary to the appropriat e
G
overnment in the Ministry or Department of Health and Fa mily 
Welfare—Vice-Chairperson, ex-officio; 
(iii) one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary in the
Ministry or Department of Health and Family Welfare in the 
appropriate Government, to be nominated by that Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed; 
(iv) the Director of Health Services or Director of Medical
Education in the State, as decided by that Government - Member 
ex-officio; 
(v) a legal expert of repute to be nominated by the State
Advocate General or the Attorney General of India, as the case may 
be, in such manner as may be prescribed Member; 
(vi) a senior police officer not below the rank of
Superintendent of Police to be nominated by the appropriate 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed – Member ex-
officio; 
(vii) one person to be nominated by the State Medical Council
in such manner as may be prescribed – Member; 
(viii) three persons to be nominated by the appropriate
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, representing 
healthcare professionals, which may include doctors , nurses, 
paramedics – Members; 
(ix) one public health expert  or civil society representative
working in the field of healthcare to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government; in such manner as may be prescribed – 
Member; and 
(x) two representatives of the patient -community, to be
nominated by the appropriate Government, in such manner as may 
be prescribed – Member. 
(3) The qualifications and experience, term of office, salary and
allowances of the Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson and Members
specified in clauses ( f) to (j) of sub-section (4) of the Board shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Board shall regulate its own procedure with transaction to its
business and for discharge of its powers and functions under this Act
and for this purpose, may issue regulations in this regard.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Functions of 
the Board. 
17. The Board shall be responsible for overseeing the implementation of the
provisions of this Act within the States and Union territories, as the case
may be, and for that purpose, shall perform all of any of the following
functions,–
(i) monitor adherence to the prescribed  safety standards by
medical establishments; 
45 

 11 
5 
10 
15 
(ii) ensure institutional compliance with the provisions of
this Act and redressal of incidents of violence; 
(iii) coordinate with law enforcement and district authorities
for implementation of the provisions of this Act; 
( iv) constitute and supervise functioning of the District
Healthcare Vigilance Committees under section 19 and provide 
adequate funds for their efficient functioning; 
(
v) oversee and analyze reports from the District Committees
and forward the recommendations from District Committees for 
disciplinary and/or legal action against public officials for 
dereliction of duty under clause (ii) of section 20 to the appropriate 
Government for necessary action at their end;  
( vi) submit an annual report to the appropriate Government
on the activities undertaken by it for the implementation of the Act 
and including therein incident data, and recommendations to 
mitigate occurrence of such incidents etc.; and 
(
vii) perform such othe r functions as may be prescribed b y
t
he appropriate Government from time to time. 
20 
25 
18. (1) The appropriate Government, may appoint such number of
officers and staff to the Board, as may be required, for the efficient
discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The method of appointment, the salaries and allowances payable
to and other terms and conditions of service, of the officers and staff,
so appointed under sub- section (1), shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Officers and staff 
of the Board. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
19. (1) The   Board shall, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute
a District Healthcare Vigilance Committee in each district within the 
States and Union territories, to monitor the implementation of this 
Act and ensure compliance with the safety standards prescribed 
under sections 13 and 14 of this Act. 
(2) The composition of the District Committee shall be as follows, –
(i) the District Magistrate- Chairperson, ex-officio;
(ii) the Chief Medical Officer of the district - Member
S
ecretary ex-officio; 
(iii) one representative from the State Health
Department to be nominated by  the appropriate 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed – 
Member ex-officio; 
(iv) one representative of a recognized medical
association to be nominated by the appropriate Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed – Member; 
(v) one representative from a civil society organization 
working in the field of public health  to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed –Member; and 
(vi) two healthcare professionals, one from a
government and one from a private healthcare institution, to 
be nominated by the appropriate Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed – Members. 
(3) The term of office, the salary and allowances payable to and
other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson,
Member Secretary and Members of the District Committee shall
Constitution of 
District 
Healthcare 
Vigilance 
Committee. 

 12 
be such as may be prescribed. 
(4) The procedure to be followed by the District Committee with
regard to transaction of its business shall be such as may b e
pr
escribed by regulations, issued by the Board.
Functions of 
the District 
Committee. 
20. The District Committee shall perform all or any of the following
functions, namely–
(i) review and audit compliance with the prescribe d
healthcare safety standards and protocols in public and private 
medical establishments within the district; 
(ii) conduct regular investigations and inquiries into instances
of alleged dereliction of duty or willful negligence by public 
officials in enforcing the provisions of this Act and submit reports 
thereof to the Board with recommendations for disciplinary or legal 
action against them; 
(iii) conduct awareness campaigns across all medical
establishments and communities to promote understanding of the 
provisions of this Act, deter violent actions, and encourage 
compliance; 
(iv) maintain a district- level database to track incidents of
violence against healthcare workers in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed; 
(v) submit biannual reports to the Board constituted under
section 16, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Officers and 
staff of the 
District 
Committee. 
21. (1) The appropriate Government, may appoint such number of
officers and staff to the District Committee, as may be required, fo r
t
he efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The method of appointment, the salaries and allowances payable
to and other terms and conditions of service, of the officers and staff,
so appointed under sub- section (1), shall be such as may be
prescribed.
25 
3
0 
Central 
Government 
Oversight and 
Monitoring. 
22. (1) The Central Government shall ensure that the provisions of this Act,
and the guidelines framed under sections 13 and 14, are properly 
implemented across all States and Union territories. 
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, issue such
guidelines, advisories, and model protocols as may be necessary for
the effective implementation of this Act
.
(3
) The Central Government shall have the power to require States a nd
U
nion territories to submit compliance reports annually or at such
intervals as may be prescribed, and may conduct periodic reviews of
their performance under this Act.
35 
40 
CHAPTER V 
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.  
23. The Central Government may. after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law on this behalf, provide, from time to time,
adequate funds to the Board of the Union territories without 
Legislature, for the implementation of the provisions and purposes
of this Act.
45 
Grants and 
loans by the 
State or Union 
territory 
Government. 
24. The State or Union territory Government may, after due appropriation
made by State or Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, by law
in this behalf, make to the State Board concerned, grants and loans of 50 
. 

 13 
such sums of money as the State or Union te rritory Government may 
think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or by any person so appointed by him in this
behalf, annually or at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by
the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually
to the appropriate Government by the Board and the appropriate
Government shall cause the annual accounts along with the audit report
thereon to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each
House of Parliament or, as the case may be, before the State Legislatur
e
or
 the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or
where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Accounts and 
audit. 
25 
26. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during 
the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the appropriate 
Government. 
(2) A copy of the report received under sub- section (1) shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament or,
as the case may be, before each House of the State Legislature or th
e
U
nion territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or wher e
s
uch legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Annual Report. 
30 CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
35 
27. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to remove 
difficulties.  
40 
45 
50 
28. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Board, may from time to time, with the approval of the
appropriate Government, by notification in the Official Gazette , make
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is
necessary or expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions
of this Act.
(3) Every rule or regulation made by the Central Government under this
section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session  or in two or more successive sessions,
Power of the 
appropriate 
Government to 
make rules and of 
the Board to 
make regulations. 

 14 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation. 
(4) Every rule made by the State Government or the Union territory
Government, as the case may be and every regulation made by the Board, 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before
each House of the State Legislature or the Union territory Legislature,
where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature consists of
one House, before that House.
5 
10 
Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 
29. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law in this regard, for the time being in force. 
15 

 15 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Violence against healthcare workers is a growing and systemic issue in 
India, encompassing physical assaults, verbal abuse, bullying and sexual 
harassment. According to the Indian Medical Association, healthcare workers 
are four times more likely to face injury or require time away from work due to 
violence compared to other sectors. Shockingly, over 75per-cent. of doctors have 
reported experiencing some form of violence, with 68.33per -cent. of incidents 
having been perpetrated by patients' attendants or escorts. 
    The violence manifests in multiple forms, including verbal abuse, 
telephonic threats, physical assaults, murder and arson. These attacks have 
severe psychological consequences for healthcare workers, causing insomnia, 
anxiety, depression and fear, ulti mately affecting their ability to perform their 
duties effectively. The repercussions are not limited to the healthcare workers 
alone but extend to the patients, as such incidents undermine the quality of 
healthcare services and fuel more violence in a vicious cycle. 
    In response to the increasing incidents of violence, there have been 
multiple strikes and protests led by medical professionals across the country. The 
medical community has repeatedly called for stronger protection for healthcare 
workers, 
recognizing that violence against healthcare workers weakens the 
health system, affects patient care and needs urgent attention from all societal 
stakeholders. 
    Although some States have enacted laws to address the issue, this legal 
framework remains fr agmented. There is, therefore, an urgent need for a 
comprehensive national legislation that uniformly protects healthcare 
professionals across the country and ensures a zero- tolerance approach towards 
any form of violence against them. The object of this Bill is to establish a strong 
legal deterrent against all forms of violence against healthcare workers, ensuring 
a safe and conducive working environment in the healthcare sector. The Bill 
aims to provide uniform protection across States, filling the legislative gaps that 
currently exist and reinforcing the safety, security and dignity of healthcare 
workers in India. 
Hence, this Bill. 
FAUZIA KHAN. 

 16 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 16 of the Bill provides for the constitution of State Healthcare 
Protection Boards by the appropriate Government in each State and Union 
territory for ensuring the implementation of the provisions of this Act its 
composition and for the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and Members 
thereof.  Clause 18 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government may 
appoint such number of officers and staff to the Board as deemed necessary and 
for the salaries and allowances payable to them as well as other terms and 
conditions of their service.  Clause 19 provides for the constitution of District 
Healthcare Vigilance Committees in each district, its composition and for the 
salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of ser vice of 
the Chairperson and Members thereof. Clause 21 provides that the appropriate 
Government may appoint such number of officers and staff to the District 
Committee as deemed necessary and for the salaries and allowances payable to 
them as well as other terms and conditions of their service.  Clause 23 provides 
for the provision of adequate funds by the Central Government to the Board of 
the Union territory without Legislature for the implementation of the Act. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non-
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved.  

 17 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 empowers the Central Government to make such provisions 
through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to 
the provisions of the Bill.  Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the appropriate 
Government to make rules and the  Board, with the approval of the appropriate 
Government to make regulations for carrying out the purpose of this Bill.  
As the orders or rules or regulations relate to the matters of procedural and 
administrative details only, the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_________ 
A 
BILL 
to prohibit violence against healthcare workers and professionals 
and damage or loss to the property of medical establishments across  
the country by constituting an institutional mechanism  
and for matters connected therewith 
 and incidental thereto.  
_________ 
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)―301―08.12.2025. 