Bill No. XLIV-F of 2008
THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJY A SABHA ON 30TH APRIL, 2010
LOK SABHA ON 6TH MAY, 2010)
ASSENTED TO
ON 18TH MAY, 2010
ACT NO. 17 OF 2010

THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Plantations Labour  (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and for different States and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall, in relation to any State, be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision in that State.
2. In section 2 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(a) in clause (e), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “the person who has
the ultimate control over the affairs of the plantation” means in the case of a
plantation owned or controlled by—
(i) a company, firm or other association of individuals, whether
incorporated or not, every director, partner or individual;
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
69 of 1951.
Bill No.  XLIV-F of  2008

(ii) the Central Government or State Government or any local
authority, the person or persons appointed to manage the affairs of the
plantation; and
(iii) a lessee, the lessee;’;
(b) in clause (ee), for the words “and includes, where the worker is a male, his
parents dependent upon him”, the words “and includes parents and widow sister,
dependent upon him or her” shall be substituted;
(c) in clause (k),—
(i) in the opening portion, after the words “manual or clerical”, the words
“and includes a person employed on contract for more than sixty days in a
year” shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-clause (ii), for the words “rupees seven hundred and fifty”, the
words “rupees ten thousand” shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-clause (iii), for the words “managerial capacity, notwithstanding
that his monthly wages do not exceed rupees seven hundred and fifty”, the
words “managerial or administrative capacity, notwithstanding that his monthly
wages do not exceed rupees ten thousand” shall be substituted.
3. In section 7 of the principal  Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (b), for the words “and
children are, or are to be”, the word “are” shall be substituted.
4. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for the words “chief
inspector”, the words “State Government upon a request by the chief inspector” shall be
substituted.
5. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
“CHAPTER IV A
P
ROVISIONS AS TO SAFETY
18A. (1) In every plantation, effective arrangements shall be made by the employer
to provide for the safety of workers in connection with the use, handling, storage and
transport of insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances.
(2) The State Government may make rules for prohibiting or, restricting
employment of women or adolescents in using or handling hazardous chemicals.
(3) The employer shall appoint persons possessing the prescribed qualifications
to supervise the use, handling, storage and transportation of insecticides, chemicals
and toxic substances in his plantation.
(4) Every employer shall ensure that every worker in plantation employed for
handling, mixing, blending and applying insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances,
is trained about the hazards involved in different operations in which he is engaged,
the various safety measures and safe work practices to be adopted in emergencies
arising from spillage of such insecticides chemicals and toxic substances and such
other matters as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(5) Every worker who is exposed to insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances
shall be medically examined periodically, in such manner as may be prescribed, by the
State Government.
(6) Every employer shall maintain health record of every worker who is
exposed to insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances which are used, handled,
stored or transported in a plantation, and every such worker shall have access to
such record.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment of
section 10.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IVA.
Safety.
2

(7) Every employer shall provide—
(a) washing, bathing and clock room facilities; and
(b) protective clothing and equipment,
to every worker engaged in handling insecticides, chemicals or toxic substances in
such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(8) Every employer shall display in the plantation a list of permissible
concentrations of insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances in the breathing zone
of the workers engaged in the handling and application of such insecticides, chemicals
and toxic substances.
(9) Every employer shall exhibit such precautionary notices as may be prescribed
by the State Government indicating the hazards of insecticides, chemicals and toxic
substances.
18B. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the restriction on employment of women and adolescents for handling
hazardous chemicals under sub-section ( 2) of section 18A;
(b) the qualifications of supervisor appointed under sub-section ( 3) of
section 18A;
(c) the matters for training of workers under sub-section ( 4) of section
18A;
(d) the medical examination of workers under sub-section (5) of section
18A;
(e) the facilities and equipment to be provided to the workers engaged in
handling insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances under sub-section (7) of
section 18A;
(f) the precautionary notices to be exhibited under sub-section ( 9) of
section 18A.”.
6. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words “or child” shall be
omitted.
7.  After section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“24. No child shall be employed to work in any plantation.”.
8. In section 25 of the principal Act,—
(a) the words “or child” shall be omitted;
(b) in the marginal heading, the words “and children” shall be omitted.
9. In section 26 of the principal Act,—
(a) in the opening portion, the words “child and no” shall be omitted;
(b) in clause (b), the words “child or” shall be omitted.
10. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words “either as a child
or” shall be omitted.
Power of
State
Government
to make
rules.
Amendment
of section 19.
Insertion of
new section 24.
Amendment
of section 25.
Amendment
of section 26.
Amendment
of section 27.
Prohibition
of employ-
ment of
Children.
3

11. After section 32B of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“32C. The employer shall give compensation to a worker in plantation in case of
accident and the memorandum relating to such compensation shall be got registered
by the employer with the Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of the
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923.”.
12. In sections 33, 35 and 36 of the principal Act, for the words “three months, or with
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both”, wherever they occur, the
words “six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both”
shall be substituted.
13. In section 34 of the principal Act, for the words “one month, or with fine which
may extend to fifty rupees, or with both,” the words “two months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both” shall be substituted.
14. In section 37 of the principal Act, for the words “six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both”, the words “one year, or with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with
both” shall be substituted.
15. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“39. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a
complaint made by any worker or an office bearer of a trade union of which such
worker is a member or an inspector and no court inferior to that of a metropolitan
magistrate or a judicial magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable
under this Act.
39A. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.”.
16. In section 43 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall, as soon as
may be after it is made, be laid before the State Legislature.”.
Insertion of
new section
32C.
Compensation.
Amendment
of sections
33, 35 and
36.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of section 37.
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 39.
Cognizance
of offences.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Amendment
of section 43.
8 of 1923.
4

A
BILL
further to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1951.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—2620LS(S5)—25-05-2010.