THE COMPULSORY REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of all marriages irrespective of caste, religion and
creed in the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a state, the Government of
that state and other cases, the Central Government.
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill No. XLIV of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2009
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.5

2
3. (1) Every marriage performed in the country shall be compulsorily registered within
one month of the date of marriage.
(2) The age of marriage shall be twenty four years for male and eighteen years for
female.
4. The marriages shall be registered—
(a) in the office of village Panchayat in the rural areas;
(b) with the Sub-Registrar or Tehsildar, or such Municipal Authority, who may
be authorized by the appropriate Government in this behalf, in the urban areas:
Provided that where there is no Panchayat, the marriage shall be registered with the
nearest Sub-Registrar or Tehsildar who may be authorized in this behalf.
5. (1) The particulars of the marriage to be entered in the marriage register to be
maintained by the Panchayat, Sub-Registrar or Tehsildar or Municipal Authority, as the
case may be, and the form and manner in which such particulars shall be entered, shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall also prescribe the documents relating to marriage
to be furnished for record at the time of registration.
6. The registering authority shall issue a certificate of marriage recording the age of
the male or female and this certificate shall be valid proof of marriage for all practical
purposes.
7. The marriage solemonised without the registration shall  be null and void.
8. Any person violating the previous of this Act the rules there under shall be debarred
from such government schemes, as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government in
this behalf.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Registration
of marriage.
Authorities
for
registration of
marriages.
Maintenance
of marriage
register.
Issuance of
marriage
certificate.
Penalties.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
Marriage
solemonised
without
registration to
be null and
void.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are number of people who are married and are not registered with any Government
agency. There have been reports that large sections of men desert women after marriage.
Thus, a lot of women are being unnecessarily harassed. There are people who take money
from the foreigners, sell their daughters, get them married, who are later on deserted. Number
of such cases have come to the notice of the Central and State Governments. Large number
of foreigners come and marry only to desert their wives later.
There are number of States where child marriages are still taking place and there is no
check on these child marriages by the Central Government or the State Governments. These
marriages are mostly unsuccessful. Many women organizations in the country have opposed
such practice and have demanded that the Government should check child marriages.
As there is no such compulsion for registration of marriage, it is necessary that the
State Governments and the Central Government should make a provision to register all the
marriages that have taken place in the country. So, all marriages, in whatever form they are
performed should be registered in all the States/UTs in the country. To save women from
harassment, it is necessary to have a law for registration of marriages.
The Supreme Court has also urged the Central Government and State Governments to
enact a law registration of marriages.
Hence this Bill.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of all marriages irrespective of caste, religion and
creed in the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr . T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5605RS(S-5)—18-12-2009.