10

As INTRODUCED IN THE Ratya SABHA

Bill No, XLIV of 2000
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL

Surther to amend the Constitution of India

Be it enacted by the Parliament in the fifty first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) this Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 17th June, 1995.

2. After clause (2) of article 15 of the constitution, the following clause shall be
inserted namely:—

(2A) Notwithstanding any other provision in this constitution to the contrary, any
Judgement, decree, order or direction of any Court of law or Tribunal to the contrary, and
subject to the law that may be made by Parliament in this behalf specifying the qualifica-
tions and eligibility including the percentage of reservation, relaxation to ensure filling up
all seats and clubbing of single posts, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes citizens
shall be entitled for reservation in all courses of study including advanced courses of
study, professional courses in all categories or disciplines to advance their social status, to
provide educational opportunities and for their intellectual excellence.

Short title
and Com-
mencement.

Amendment of
article 15.


Amendment of
article 16.

2
3. () After clause 2, the following clauses shall be inserted namely:—

(2A) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, judgment, decree, order or di-
rection of any court of law or Tribunal to the contrary, the Scheduled Castes and Sched-
uled Tribes citizens shall be entitled for reservation in matters of appointment, promotion
or upgradation to any post or classes of posts in the services under the State in accordance
with any law, rules made under the proviso to article 309 or order which shall specify the
qualification, eligibility and percentage of reservation.

(2B) A citizen belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes promoted to
any post shall be entitled to count his seniority in that post from the date of such promo-
tion.

(2C) Notwithstanding any Judgment, decree, order or direction of any Court of law
or Tribunal to the contrary, the State shall make provision in favour of the members of
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for relaxation in qualifying marks in any
examination or lowering the standards of evaluation for reservation in matters of recruit-
ment and promotion to any post or classes of posts or service in connection with the
affairs of the Union or of a State.

(2D) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, any Judgement, decree, direc-
tion or order of any court of law or Tribunal to the contrary, the State shall club single
posts carrying equal scale of pay or duties or responsibilities and provide reservation to
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes accordingly.

(2E) Notwithstanding anything in the Constitution, the State, shall by law provide
reservation to the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes iri Private Sec-
tor, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the Act made in this behalf.

(2F) Notwithstanding anything in any Judgement, decree, order or direction of a
Court of law or Tribunal or Authority to the contrary, the prohibition that there shall be no
reservation for more than 50% of the posts/vacancies in a recruitment year shall not apply
to any recruitment/promotion or special recruitment drive to fill the backlog vacancies/
posts for appointment/promotion/appointment by transfer/upgradation, in a service under
any establishment.

(ii) Clause (4A) shall be omitted.

10

15

20

25

30


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Preamble of the Constitution assures every citizen equality of status and of
opportunity and secures justice—social and economic which has been declared in
S.R. Bommai's case as basic structure of the Constitution.

Article 46 enjoins that the State shall promote with special care the educational and
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and, in particular, of the Sched-
uled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice;

Article 38 directs the State to secure social order for promotion of the welfare of the
people by securing and protecting an effective social order in which social, economic and
political justice shall inform all the institutions of national life and that the State, in
particular, shall strive to minimise the inequalities in income and endeavour to eliminate
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities among individuals as well as groups of
the people;

Article 51-A(h) imposes fundamental duty on every citizen to strive towards
excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly
rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement; even then the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes are the most disadvantaged and deprived weaker sections Of the
society;

The Constitution laid special emphasis and duty of the State to take care of them to
minimise the inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities;

It is the fundamental duty of the State to effectively implement the above directives
in the Constitution to enable the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes to reap social
and economic justice, secure equality of opportunity and of status and to enjoy dignity of
the person.

After the State adopted open economy, to increase the chances/avenues of appoint-
ment/promotion in Public Sector to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes it is necessary
to make an express provision in the Constitution and a separate Act in that behalf.

With a view to effectively implementing the above directives and to achieve the
above objects, reservation in education and public services etc. as guaranteed in Articles
15, Article 29(2) and 16, are the two public policy programmes being implemented from
the beginning of the Independence (August 15, 1947) and, in particular, after the Consti-
tution came into force (26th January, 1950) as Constitutional duties.

Even after implementing the reservations since 50 years of the Constitution came
into force, the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes do not have proper representation for
variegated reasons in various posts or classes of post or in the services under the State or
appointed in connection with the affairs of the Union of India and due to social, educa-
tional and economic backwardness and other disadvantages and disabilities, the Sched-
uled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are not able to compete on equal merit with the
general category candidates;

The recent judgements of the Supreme Court in Inder Sawheny versus Union of
India 1992 Supplemen&3 SCC 217, Dr. Preeti Srivastava versus State of Madhya Pradesh
1999 7 SCC (page 120), and Ajit Singh & Others (II) versus State of Punjab IA 1-3 in
Civil Appeal No. 3782-94 of 1999 etc. dated September 16, 1999 caused hindrance for the
Government for effectively implementing the policy of reservation in imparting of educa-
tion in all courses of study, in particular, at the stage of higher learning, specialities,
super-specialities, technical, scientific courses, etc. and reservation in the posts/classes of


4

posts in the services under the State or in the affairs of the State in particular at-promo-
tions and consequential seniority and in the Private Sector etc.

Therefore, with a view to give effect to the Constitutional objectives referred to
above, duty of the State in that behalf, and to suitably remedy the defect pointed out by
the judgements in the reservation policies, this Bill proposes to suitably amend the Con-
stitution for the said purpose.

R.S. GAVAI


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri R.S. Gavai, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2047RS—27.07.2000.