Bill No. XLIV of 2010
THE DRUGS AND MAGIC REMEDIES (OBJECTIONABLE
ADVERTISEMENTS) AMENDMENT BILL,  2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954.
Be  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India, as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisement) Amendment Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force, at once.
2. In the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) (Amendment)
Act, 1954, for section 7, the following section shall be substituted namely:—
“7.  Penalty. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder shall, on conviction, be punishable—
“(a) in the case of a first conviction, with imprisonment which may extend
to one year and fine;
(b) in the case of a subsequent conviction, with imprisonment which may
extend to five years and fine.”
Substitution of
new section for
section 7 of
Act 21 of
1954.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH AUGUST, 2010
Short title and
commencement.
5
1
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 is an
important piece of legislation which is not being implemented in this country in its letter and
spirit. The illiterate masses of this country are taken for a ride by quacks and touts who claim
magical remedies for various diseases. They publicise and market their drugs which are
either harmful or contain no medical ingredients.
Medical remedies which includes a talisman, mantra, kavacha, and any other charm of
any kind which is alleged to possess miraculous powers for or in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment or prevention of any disease in human beings or animals, are claimed by certain
practitioners openely either in their 'dispensaries' which they open in hotels or even on
streets.
Women folk of the country are lured to make them believe that various medical problems
related to them can be cured with these 'medicines' that these quacks prescribe. Unfortunately,
some practitioners blend their treatment with divine blessings thus spreading superstitions
at the same time.
Section 7 of the Drugs and Megical Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements)
Act, 1954, as it exists today, provides in the case of a first conviction, with imprisonment
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both and in the case of a subsequent
conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. This
gives option to the magistrate to impose a mere fine on the accused in the event of his or her
conviction. Considering the damage, that, those who claim magical remedies, cause to the
social frabric, the penalty clause has to be made more stringent and harsher to act as a
detorent.
Hence this bill.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE DRUGS AND MAGIC REMEDIES (OBJECTIONABLE ADVERTISEMENTS)
 ACT, 1954
(ACT NO. 21 OF 1954)
* * * * * *
7. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder shall, on conviction, be punishable—
(a) in the case of a first conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to six months,
or with fine, or with both;
(b) in the case of a subsequent conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * * *
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisement) Act, 1954.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4347RS(S-3)—27.08.2010.