Short title
and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (i) This Act may be called the Constitution  (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(ii)  It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“16A Every citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years shall have the
right to employment:
Provided that any such citizen, who is not provided with employment shall be
entitled to unemployment allowance at such rate as Parliament may, by law, determine.”.
Bill No. XLIV of  2016
Insertion of new
article 16A.
5
Right to
employment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 18TH NOVEMBER, 2016

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after sixty-nine years of independence, twenty-seven per cent population of India
is living below poverty line and a large number of people in starving every year. Although
poverty has been controlled to some extent, a large section of our society is unemployed and
they do not have any source of income. Due to unavailability of adequate employment
opportunities the youth indulge in fanatic, terrorist and criminal actions to sustain themselves
and get involved in other anti-social activities such as abduction, banditry, hijacking etc.
which is not good for the unity and integrity of the country. Hence, it is high time to amend
the Constitution for making employment a fundamental right so that young generation does
not get involved in anti-national activities. Besides, provision of payment of unemployment
allowance has also been made until the citizens are provided with employment. This will
help the young generation financially and refrain them from engaging in anti-national activities
and will dedicate themselves in the nation building activities.
Hence this Bill.
VISHAMBHAR PRASAD NISHAD

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the right of employoment a fundamental
right. It further provides that every citizen who has not got any employment shall be entitled
to get an unemployment allowance at such rate as may be prescribed by the Parliament by
law. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. Initially, it is estimated to incur recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand
crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
incurred.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3194RS(S3)—18.11.2016.