1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Amendment
of Section 53
of Act.
Bill No. XLIV of 2014
5
10
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE AND OTHER LAWS
(AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 and the Army Act, 1950.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called  the Indian Penal Code and Other Laws (Amendment)
Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In Section 53 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the words "First Death" shall be
omitted.
3. Section 31A of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, shall
be omitted.
4. Section 34 of the Army Act, 1950 shall be omitted.
45 of 1860
Omission of
Section 31A
of Act.
Omission of
Section 34 of
Act.
61 of 1985
46 of 1950
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The death penalty is the ultimate denial of human rights. It is pre-meditated and cold
blooded killing of human being by the State. This cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment
is done in the name of justice. It violates the right to life enshrined in the Constitution as well
as in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. According to the National Crime Records
Bureau, a total of 1455 convicts or an average of 132 convicts per year were given death
penalty during 2001 to 2011. During the same period, sentence for 4321 convicts were commuted
from death penalty to life imprisonment.
Section 53 of the Indian Penal Code provides for death sentence and life imprisonment
as alternative punishment under certain circumstances. This is not a single offence in the
Indian Penal Code which is punishable with mandatory death penalty. In section 53 of the
Indian Penal Code death sentence sets the upper limit of punitive strategy. There is no
guidelines as to when capital punishment in preference to imprisonment for life or lesser
sentence of life imprisonment be awarded. In addition to the Indian Penal Code other laws
like the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 and the Army Act, 1950 also
have similar provisions. Further, in India the mode of execution of death sentence is by
hanging. The Supreme Court in Attorney General of India versus Lachma Devi, AIR 1980 SC
467 held that hanging even if permitted under rule would violate article 21 of the Constitution
being barbaric, disgraceful and bringing shame on any civilized society. So far Ninety-eight
countries have already abolished death penalty. Now, it is the time for India to follow suit by
amending related laws.
The Bill seeks to abolish the death penalty in all cases without exception regardless of
the nature of the crime, the characteristic of the offender or the method used by the State to
kill the prisoner.
P. RAJEEVE
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES ACT, 1985
(61 OF 1985)
* * * * *
31A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 31, if any person who has
been convicted of the commission of, or attempt to commit, or abetment of, or criminal
conspiracy to commit, any of the offences punishable under  section 19, section 24, section
27A and for offences involving commercial quantity of any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance, is subsequently convicted of the commission of, or attempt to commit, or abetment
of, or criminal conspiracy to commit, an offence relating to,—
(a) engaging in the production, manufacture, possession, transportation, import
into India, export from India or transhipment, of the narcotic drugs or psychotropic
substances specified under column (1) of the Table below and involving the quantity
which is equal to or more than the quantity indicated against each such drug or
substance, as specified in column (2) of the said Table:
TABLE
Particulars of narcotic drugs/ Quantity
psychotropic substances
(1) (2)
(i) Opium 10 kgs.
(ii) Morphine 1 kg.
(iii) Heroin 1 kg.
(iv) Codeine 1 kg.
(v) Thebaine 1 kg.
(vi) Cocaine 500 grams
(vii) Hashish 20 kgs.
(viii) Any mixture with or without any neutral lesser of the quantity between
material of any of the above drugs the  quantities    given   against    the
respective narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances mentioned
above forming part of the mixure
(ix) LSD, LSD-25(+)-N,N-Diethyllysergamide 500 grams
(d-lysergic acid diethylamide)
(x) THC Tetrahydrocannabinols, the 500 grams
following isomers: 6a(10a), 6a(7),
7, 8, 9, 10, 9) and their stereo-
chemical variants)
(xi) Methamphetamine(+)-2-methyhamine-1- 1,500 grams
Phenylpropane
(xii) Methaqualone (2-Methyl-3-o-tolyl-4-(3H)- 1,500 grams
quinazolinon)
3
Death
penalty for
certain
offences after
previous
conviction.

4
(1) (2)
(xiii) Amphetamine(+)-2-amino-1-phenylpropane 1,500 grams
(xiv) Salts and preparations of the Psychotropic 1,500 grams;
substances mentioned in (ix) to (xiii)
(b)  financing, directly or indirectly, any of the activities specified in clause “shall
be punished with punishment which shall not be less than the punishment specified in
section 31 or with death” outside India under any law corresponding to the provisions
of section 19, section 24 or section 27A and for offences involving commercial
quantity of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance], such person, in respect of
such conviction, shall be dealt with for the purposes of sub-section ( 1) as if he had
been convicted by a court in India.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE ARMY ACT, 1950
(46 OF 1950)
* * * * *
34. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any garrison, fortress, post, place or
guard, committed to his charge, or which it is his duty to defend, or uses any means to
compel or induce any commanding officer or other person to commit any of the said
acts; or
(b) intentionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to
military, naval or air force law to abstain from acting againt the enemy, or to discourage
such person from acting against the enemy; or
(c) in the presence of the enemy, shamefully casts away his arms, ammunition,
tools or equipment or misbehaves in such manner as to show cowardice; or
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to,
the enemy or any person in arms against the Union; or
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy with money, arms, ammunition, stores
or supplies; or
(f) treacherously or through cowardice sends a flag of truce to the enemy; or
(g) in time of war or during any military operation, intentionally occassions a
false alarm in action, camp, garrision or quarters, or spreads reports calculated to
create alarm or despondency; or
(h) in time of action leves his commanding officer or his post, guard, picquet,
patrol or party without being regularly relieved or without leave; or
(i) having been made a prisoner of war, voluntarily serves with or aids the
enemy; or
(j) knowingly harbours or protects an enemy not being a prisoner; or
(k) being a sentry in time of war or alarm, sleeps upon his post or is intoxicated;
or
(l) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of the military, naval
or air forces of India or any forces co-operating therewith or any part of such forces;
Offences in
relation to the
enemy and
punishable
with death.

5
shall, on conviction by court-martial be liable to suffer death or such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned.
* * * * *
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENEL CODE
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * *
53.  The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provision of this Code
are—
First. — Death;
Secondly— Imprisonment for life;
* * * * * *
Fourthly.—Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely : —
(1)  Regorous, that is, with hard labour;
(2)  Simple;
Fifthly. — Forfeiture of property;
Sixthly.— Fine.
* * * * * *
Punishments.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
Further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 and the Army Act, 1950.
————
(Shri P . Rajeeve, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3808RS(S3)—18.12.2014.