1
Bill No. XLIV of  2022
THE ALL-INDIA SERVICES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
 further to amend the All-India Services Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the All-India Services (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022
5

2
5
10
15
20
2. After section 3 of the All-India Services Act, 1951, the  following sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
“3A.(1) It shall be the special responsibility and duty of a person appointed to
an All-India Service to ensure that the plans or projects or any development work
under his jurisdiction or charge or administrative control or for the execution or
completion or carrying out of which he is responsible in any way, are executed or
completed or carried out efficiently, economically and within the scheduled time.
(2) It shall be the responsibility and duty of a person appointed to an All-India
Service to ensure that plans and projects recommended by the Members of Parliament
or of the State Legislatures under any special scheme are executed within the schedule
and such a person shall take special care to inform the Member of Parliament or of the
State Legislature about the progress of the project from time to time.
3B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, at the end of every year, the
performance of every person appointed to an All-India Service shall be evaluated, with
particular reference to the execution or carrying out of the specific plans or projects or
development works under his jurisdiction or in his charge or administrative control or
for the execution or carrying out of which he is responsible in a way, and a performance
report shall be prepared thereon, in such manner as may be prescribed.
3C. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the Central Government
shall, in consultation with the State Government concerned and parent department or
Ministry, as the case may be, ensure periodic review of persons appointed to an
All-India Service on completion of five years of tenure through a procedure to be
conducted by the Union Public Service Commission in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that if the periodic review has not been conducted after five years of
service in respect of a person appointed to an All-India Service, such review may be
conducted at any other time as the Central Government may deem fit.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the term “periodic review”
shall mean the review of the entire service record including the Annual Confidential
Report (ACR) of the person appointed to an All-India Service regarding suitability or
otherwise of such person for further retention in the Service, to be conducted regularly
for each person appointed to such Services.
(2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Union Public Service
Commission and on conclusion of the periodic review of persons appointed to an
All-India Service as specified under sub-section (1), may recommend for the lowest
fifteen per cent. of such persons from each batch of such Services.
(a) the dismissal or pre-mature retirement of five per cent. of lowest of
such persons from each batch; or
(b) administrative training, for the ten per cent. of such persons who have
achieved a higher rank than the lowest five per cent., which includes and is not
limited to, sending such persons for a compulsory career training program for a
period of at least six months at the Academy concerned, in such manner as may
be prescribed.
Insertion of
new sections
3A, 3B and
3C.
Special
responsibility
and duty of a
person
appointed to
an All-India
Service t o
execute
projects under
his jurisdiction
within
scheduled
time.
Evaluation
of
performance
of every
person
appointed to
an All-India
Service.
Periodic review
of persons
appointed to
the All-India
Services on
completion
of five years.
61 of 1951.
25
30
35
40

3
(3) The Central Government after consultation with the Government of the State
concerned, Union Public Service Commission and the parent department or the Ministry,
as the case may be, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for regulating the
manner and procedure for the conduct of periodic review of persons appointed to an
All-lndia Service.
(4) The Central Government after consultation with the Director of Academy
concerned and Union Public Service Commission frame guidelines on the method and
evaluation of administrative training as provided under clause (b) of sub-section (2).”
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
For creating smooth administrative machinery, there is a need of effective accountability
standards. The persons appointed to the All-India Services are a vital cog in the wheel of
development of India. They are selected through a rigorous method of examination and are
entrusted with the responsibility of development at district, State, National as well as
international level. The need is to weed out the deadwood in order to maintain a high
standard of efficiency and initiative in the All-India Services. It is not necessary that a good
officer may continue to be efficient for all times to come. It may be that there may be some
officers who may possess a better initiative and higher standard of efficiency and if they are
given chance, the work of the Government might show marked improvement.
There are a number of judicial pronouncements in support of total assessment of the
performance of the persons appointed to the All-India Services. There have also been
observations that have approved any measure by which the assessment by superiors, with
an opportunity to watch the work and conduct of an officer, is taken into account while
deciding about premature retirement. It is sometimes found that a few officers of the All-India
Services do tend to become mere passengers in the post or at the level in which he is placed
for the time being. They become either listless or do not exhibit any creativity or innovativeness
and do not achieve the desired results. The need is to strike a just balance between the
termination from the service of a tired employee and maintenance of top efficiency in the
diverse activities of administration.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the All-India Services Act, 1951 with a view to
provide for periodic review of performance of persons appointed to the All-India Services on
completion of five years of tenure. It also provides for dismissal or pre-mature retirement of
bottom five per cent. of officers at the periodic review and compulsory training to the other
bottom ten per cent. officers who have achieved a higher rank than the bottom five per cent.
of such officers of All-India Services at Academy concerned.
Hence, this Bill.
DR.  ASHOK  KUMAR  MITTAL
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the All-India Services Act, 1951.
————
(Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—859RS(S3)—8-8-2022.