(CLAUSES

PraAWaAw

10.

11,
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17,
18.
19,
20.

21.

22.
23.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAIYA SABHA

Bill No. XLIV of 1999
THE DESIGNS BILL, 1999

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

Short title, extent and commencement.
Definitions.
CHAPTER II

REGISTRATION OF DESIGNS
Controller and other officers.
Prohibition of registration of certain designs.
Application for registration of designs.
Registration to be in respect of particular article.
Publication of particulars of registered designs.

Power of Controller to make orders regarding substitution of application,
etc,

Certificate of registration.
Register of designs.

CHAPTER III

COPYRIGHT IN REGISTERED DESIGNS

Copyright on registration.
Restoration of lapsed designs.
Procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of lapsed designs,
Rights of proprietor of lapsed design which have been restored.
Requirements before delivery on sales.
Effect of disclosure on copyright.
Inspetion of registered designs.
Information as to existence of copyright.
Cancellation of registration.
Designs to bind Government.

CHAPTER IV

INDUSTRIAL AND INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITIONS

Provisions as to exhibitions.

CHAPTER V

‘LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

Piracy of registered design.

Application of certain provisions of the Act as to patents to designs.

@


CLausEs
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.

32.
33.
34,
35.
36.

37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

43.

44.

45.
46.
47.

48.

(ii)
CHAPTER VI
GENERAL,

Fees

Fees.
Provisions as to Registers and other documents in the Patent Office
Notice of trust not to be entered in registers.
Inspection of and extracts from registers.
Privilege of reports of Controller.

Prohibition and publication of specification, drawings, etc., where application
abandoned, etc.

Power of Controller to correct clerical errors.
Entry of assignment and transmissions in registers.
Rectification of register.

CHAPTER VII

POWERS AND DUTIES OF CONTROLLER
Powers of Controller in proceedings under Act.
Exercise of discretionary power by Controller.
Power of Controller to take directions of the Central Government.
Refusal to register a design in certain cases.
Appeals to the High Court.
CHAPTER VIII

EVIDENCE, ETC.
Evidence before the Controller.
Certificate of Controller to be evidence.
Evidence of documents in Patent Office.
Applications and notices by post.
Declaration by infant, lunatic, etc.
Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions.

CHPATER IX

AGENCY

Agency.

CHAPTER X

Powers, ETC., OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT

Reciprocal arrangement with the United Kingdom and other Convention
countries or group of countries or inter-governmental organisations.

Report of the Controller to be placed before Parliament.
Protection of security of India.
Power of Central Government to make rules.
CHAPTER XI
REPEAL AND SAVINGS

Repeal and savings.


RAJYA SABHA
ERRATA
TO
THE DESIGNS BILL, 1999
(To be /As introduced in the Rajya Sabha)

Page 2,-
(i) 116 22, for “offfice” read “office”.
(ii) line 42, for “officers and with” read “officers with”.

Page 3, line 19, for “applicaiton” read “application”.

Page 5, lines 17-18, for “under floppies or diskettes” read “floppies
or diskettes under”.

Page 7, line 5, for “India any” read “India or in any”.

Page 8,-
(i) 116 19, for “defence sub-section” read “defence under
sub-section”.
(ii) line 21, for “07 read “or”.

Page 9,-
(i) 176 4, for “Controller other” read “Controller under
this Act other”.
(ii) 116 5, “under this Act” be omitted,

Page 10, line 38, for “egister” read “register”.

Page 11, line 45, for “purchase” read “purchaser”.

Page 13, -
(i) _ line 15, add “and” after “may be”.
(ii) line 23, for “must be” read “has been”.

Page 14, line 3, for “it” read “he”.

Page 15,-
(i) ॥6 2, for “articles any” read “articles and any”.
(ii) 176 18, for “shall made” read “shall be made”.
(iii) line 39, for “condition” read “conditions”.


12,

13.

14,

15.

ade

Page 17, in the “STATEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS”,-
(i) 1764, for “disigns” read “designs”.
(ii) 176 18, for “follwed” read “followed”.

Page 19, in the “NOTES ON CLAUSES” line 11, for “incorporatied”
read “incorporated”.

Page 20, line 22, for “existign” read “existing”.

Page 21,-
(i) line 2, for “priorietor” and “wiring” read “proprietor”
and “writing” respectively.
(ii) line 4, for “beign” read “being”.
(iii) line 28, for “maner” read “manner”.
Page 23, line 20, for “production documents”
documents”.

read “production of

Page 24,-
(i) line 37, for “Countires” read “Countries”.
(ii) ॥॥6 40, for “Countires” read “Countries”.
eee 4, 6, + १) 6६, 1 29
, .
(iii) line 45, for “countires” read “countries’
(iv) line 46, for “countires” read “countries”.


THE DESIGNS BILL, 1999
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to protection of designs.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as fol-
lows:—

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1. (7) This Act may be called the Designs Act, 1999.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for dif-

ferent provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the commencement
10 of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.

2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, —
(a) “article” means any article of manufacture and any substance, artificial, or

partly artificial and partly natural; and includes any part of an article capable of ‘being
made and sold separately;

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions


Controller and
other officers.

2

(b) “Controller” means the Controller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade
Marks referred to in section 3;

(c) “copyright” means the exclusive right to apply a design to any article in
any class in which the design is registered;

(d) “design” means only the features of shape, configuration, pattern, ornament
or composition of lines or colours applied to any article whether in two dimensional
or three dimensional or in both forms, by any industrial process or means, whether
manual, mechanical or chemical, separate or combined, which in the finished article
appeal to and are judged solely by the eye; but does not include any mode or principle
of construction or anything which is in substance a mere mechanical device, and
does not include any trade mark as defined in clause (v) of sub-section (/) of section
2 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 or property mark as defined in
section 479 of the Indian Penal Code or any artistic work as defined in clause (c) of
section 2 of the Copyright Act, 1957.

(e) “High Court” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (i) of
section 2 of the Patents Act, 1970;

(f) “legal representative” means a person who in law represents the estate of a
deceased person;

(g) “original”, in relation to a design, means originating from the author of such
design and includes the cases which though old in themselves yet are riew in their
application;

(h) “patent office” means the patent offfice referred to in section 74 of the Pat-
ents Act, 1970.

() “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(J) “proprietor of a new or original design”,—

(# where the author of the design, for good consideration, executes the
work for some other person, means the person for whom the design is so ex-
ecuted;

(ii) where any person acquires the design or the right to apply the design
to-any article, either exclusively of any other person or otherwise, means, in
the respect and to the extent in-and to which the design or right has been so
acquired, the person by whom the design or right is so acquired; and

(iii) in any other case, means the author of the design; and where the
property in or the right to apply, the design has devolved from the original
proprietor upon any other person, includes that other person.

CHAPTER IL
REGISTRATION OF DESIGNS
3. (1) The Controller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks appointed
under sub-section (/) of section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958
shall be the Controller of Designs for the purposes of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may appoint as many
examiners and other officers and with such designations as it thinks fit.

(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under sub-section
(2) shall discharge under the superintendence and directions of the Controller such functions
of the Controller under this Act as he may, from time to time, by general or special order in
writing, authorise them to discharge.

10

43 of 1958.
45 of 1860.
14 of 1957.

15
39 of 1970.

20

39 of 1970.

25

30

35

43 of 1958.
40

45


3

(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (3), the Con-
troller may, by order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein, withdraw any matter
pending before an officer appointed under sub-section (2) and deal with such matter him-
self either de novo or from the stage it was so withdrawn or transfer the same to another

5 officer appointed under sub-section (2) who may, subject to special directions in the order
of transfer, proceed with the matter either de novo or from the stage it was so transferred.

4. A design which—
(a) is not new or original; or

(8) has been disclosed to the public any where in India or in any other country
10 by publication in tangible form or by use or in any other way prior to the filing date,
or where applicable, the priority date of the application for registration; or

(c) is not significantly distinguishable from known designs or combination of
known designs; or

(d) comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter,
15 ‘shall not be registered.

5. (1) The Controller may, on the application of any person claiming to be the
proprietor of any new or original design not previously published in any country and
which is not contrary to public order or morality, register the design under this Act:

Provided that the Controller shall before such registration refer the applicaiton for

20 examination, by an examiner appointed under sub-section (2) of section 3, as to whether

such design is capable of being registered under this Act and the rules made thereunder and
consider the report of the examiner on such reference.

(2) Every application under sub-section (/) shall be in the prescribed form and shall

be filed in the patent office in the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by the
25 prescribed fee.

(3) A design may be registered in not more than one class, and, in case of doubt as
to the class in which a design ought to be registered, the Controller may decide the
question.

(4) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse to register any design presented to

30 him for registration; but any person aggrieved by any such refusal may appeal to the High
Court.

(5) An application which, owing to any default or neglect on the part of the applicant,
has not been completed so as to enable registration to be effected within the prescribed
time shall be deemed to be abandoned.

35 (6) A design when registered shall be registered as of the date of the application for
registration. .

6. (1) A design may be registered in respect of any or all of the articles comprised in
a prescribed class of articles.

(2) Any question arising as to the class within which any article falls shall be

40 determined by the Controller whose decision in the matter shall be final.

(3) Where a design has been registered in respect of any article comprised in a class
of article, the application of the proprietor of the design to register it in respect of some
‘one or more other articles comprised in that class of articles shall not be refused, nor shall
the registration thereof invalidated—

45 (a) on the ground of the design not being a new or original design, by reason
only that it was so previously registered; or

Prohibition of
registration of
certain
designs.

Application
for registration
of designs.

Registration to
be in respect
of particular
article,


Publication of
particulars of
registered
designs.
Power of
Controller to
make orders
regarding
substitution of
application,
etc,

4

(b) on the ground of the design having been previously published in India or in
any other country, by reason only that it has been applied to article in respect of which
it was previously registered:

Provided that such subsequent registration shall not extend the period of copyright
in the design beyond that arising from previous registration.

(4) Where any person makes an application for the registration of a design in respect
of any article and either—

(a) that design has been previously registered by another person in respect of
some other article; or

(b) the design to which the application relates consists of a design previously
registered by another person in respect of the same or some other article with
modifications or variations not sufficient to alter the character or substantially to
affect the identity thereof,

then, if at any time while the application is pending the applicant becomes the registered
proprietor of the design previously registered, the foregoing provisions of this section shall
apply as if at the time of making the application, the applicant had been the registered
proprietor of that design.

7. The Controller shall, as soon as may be after the registration of a design, cause
publication of the prescribed particulars of the design to be published in such manner as
may be prescribed and thereafter the design shall be open to public inspection.

8. (1) If the Controller is satisfied on a claim made in the prescribed manner at any
time before a design has been registered that by virtue of any assignment or agreement in
writing made by the applicant or one of the applicants for registration of the design or by
operation of law, the claimant would, if the design were then registered, be entitled thereto
or to the interest of the applicant therein, or to an undivided share of the design or of that
interest, the Controller may, subject to the ‘provisions of this section, direct that the
application shall proceed in the name of the claimant or in the names of the claimants and
the applicant or the other joint applicant or applicants, accordingly, as the case may require.

(2) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any assignment or agree-
ment made by cne of two or more joint applicants for registration of a design except with
the consent of the other joint applicant or applicants.

(3) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any assignment or agree-
ment for the assignment of the benefit of a design unless—

(a) the design is identified therein by reference to the number of the applica-
tion for the registration; or

(b) there is produced to the Controller an acknowledgment by the person by
whom the assignment or agreement was made that the assignment or agreement
relates to the design in respect of which that application is made; or

(c) the rights of the claimant in respect of the design have been finally
established by the decision of a court; or

(@) the Controller gives directions for enabling the application to proceed or
for regulating the manner in which it should be proceeded with under sub-section

(5).

(4) Where one of two or more joint applicants for registration of a design dies at any
time before the design has been registered, the Controller may, upon a request in that
behalf made by the survivor or survivors, and with the consent of the legal representative
of the deceased, direct that the application shall proceed in the name of the survivor or
survivors alone.

15

20

25

30

35

45


"5

(5) If any dispute arises between joint applicants for registration of a design whether
or in what manner the application should be proceeded with, the Controller may, upon
application made to him in the prescribed manner by any of the Parties, and after giving to
all parties concerned an opportunity to be heard, give such directions as he thinks fit for

5 enabling the application to proceed in the name of one or more of the parties alone or for
regulating the manner in which it should be proceeded with, or for both those purposes, as
the case may require.

9. (1) The Controller shall grant a certificate of registration to the proprietor of the
design when registered.

10 (2) The Controller may, in case of loss of the original certificate, or in any other case
in which he deems it expedient, furnish one or more copies of the certificate.

10. (7) There shall be kept at the patent office a book called the register of designs,
wherein shall be entered the names and addresses of proprietors of registered designs,
notifications of assignments and of transmissions of registered designs, and such other

15 matter as may be prescribed and such register may be maintained wholly or partly on com-
puter floppies or diskettes, subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed.

(2) Where the register is maintained whoily or partly on computer under floppies or
diskettes sub-section (/), any reference in this Act to any entry in the register shall be con-
strued as the reference to the entry so maintained on computer floppies or diskettes.

20 (3) The register of designs existing at the commencement of this Act shall be incor-
porated with and form part of the register of designs under this Act.

(4) The register of designs shall be prima facie evidence of any matter by this Act
directed or authorized to be entered therein.

CHAPTER III
25 COPYRIGHT IN REGISTERED DESIGNS

11. (7) When a design is registered, the registered proprietor of the design shall,
subject to the provisions of this Act, have copyright in the design during ten years from
the date of registration.

(2) If, before the expiration of the said ten years, application for the extension of the

30 period of copyright is made’ to the Controller in the prescribed manner, the Controller

shall, on payment of the prescribed fee, extend the period of copyright for a second period
of five years from the expiration of the original period of ten years.

12. (7) Where a design has ceased to have effect by reason of failure to pay the fee
for the extension of copyright under sub-section (2) of section 11, the proprietor of such
35 design or his legal representative and where the design was held by two or more persons
jointly, then, with the leave of the Controller one or more of them without joining the
others, may, within one year from the date on which the design ceased to have effect,
make an application for the restoration of the design in the prescribed manner on payment

of such fee as may be prescribed.

40 (2) An application under this section shall contain a statement, verified in the
prescribed manner, fully setting out the circumstances which led to the failure to pay the
prescribed fee, and the Controller may require from the applicant such further evidence as
he may think necessary.

13. (J) If, after hearing the applicant in cases where the applicant so desires or the
Controller thinks fit, the Controller is satisfied that the failure to pay the fee for extension

45 of the period of copyright was unintentional and that there has been no undue delay in the
making of the application, the Controller shall upon payment of any unpaid fee for extension
of the period of copyright together with prescribed additional fee restore the registration of
design.

Certificate of
registration.

Register of
designs.

Copyright on

registration.

Restoration of
lapsed designs.

Procedure for
disposal of
applications
for restoration
of lapsed
designs.


Rights of
proprietor of
lapsed design
which have

been re-stored,

Requirements
before
delivery
sales,

Effect of
disclosure on
copyright.

Inspection of
registered
designs.

Information as
to existence of
copyright.

6

(2) The Controller may, if he thinks fit as a condition of restoring the,design, require
that any entry shall be made in the register of any document or matter which under the
provisions of this Act, has to be entered in the register but which has not been so entered.

14. (1) Where the registration of a design is restored, the rights of the registered
proprietor shall be subject to such provisions as may, be prescribed and to such other
provisions as the Controller thinks fit to impose for the protection or compensation of
persons who may have begun to avail themselves of, or have taken definite steps by contract
or otherwise to avail themselves of, the benefit of applying the design between the date
when the registration of the design ceased to have effect and the date of restoration of the
registration of the design.

(2) No suit or other proceeding shall be commenced in respect of piracy of a registered
design or infringement of the copyright in such design committed between the date on
which the registration of the design ceased to have effect and the date of the restoration of
the design. :

15. (1) Before delivery on sale of any articles to which a registered design has been*
applied, the proprietor shall—

(4) (if exact representations or specimens were not furnished on the application
for registration) furnish to the Controller the prescribed number of exact
representations or specimens of the design; and, if he fails to do so, the Controller
may, after giving notice thereof to the proprietor, erase his name from the register
and thereupon the copyright in the design shall cease; and

(b) cause each such article to be marked with the prescribed mark, or with the
prescribed words or figures denoting that the design is registered; and, if he fails to do
so, the proprietor shall not be entitled to recover any penalty or damages in respect of
any infringement of his copyright in the design unless he shows that he took all proper
steps to ensure the marking of the article, or unless he shows that the infringement
took place after the person guilty thereof knew or had received notice of the existence
of the copyright in the design.

(2) Where a representation is made to the Central Government by or on behalf of
any trade or industry that in the interest of the trade or industry it is expedient to dispense
with or modify as regards any class or description of articles any of the requirements of
this section as to marking, the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, by rule under this
Act, dispense with or modify such requirements as regards any such class or description
of articles to such extent and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit.

16. The disclosure of a design by the proprietor to any other person, in such
circumstances as would make it contrary to good faith for that other person to use or
publish the design, and the disclosure of a design in breach of good faith by any person,
other than the proprietor of the design, and the acceptance of a first and confidential order
for articles bearing a new or original textile design intended for registration, shall not be
deemed to be a publication of the design sufficient to invalidate the copyright thereof if
registration thereof is obtained subsequently to the disclosure or acceptance.

17. (1) During the existence of copyright in a design, any person on furnishing such
information as may enable the Controller to identify the design and on payment of the
prescribed fee may inspect the design in the prescribed manner.

(2) Any person may, on an application to the Controller and on payment of such fee as
may be prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any registered design.

18. On the request of any person furnishing such information as may enable the
Controller to identify the design, and on payment of the prescribed fee, the Controller
shall inform such person whether the registration still exists in respect of the design, and.
if so, in respect of what classes of articles, and shall state the date of registration, and the
name and address of the registered proprietor.

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50


39 of 1970.

7

हे 19. () Any person interested may present a petition for the cancellation of the
registration of a design at any time after the registration of the design, to the Controller on
any of the following grounds, namely:—

(a) that the design has been previously registered in India; or

5 (9) that it has been published in India any other country prior to the date of
registration; or

(c) that the design is not a new or original design; or
(d) that the design is not registrable under this Act; or
(९) that it is not a design as defined under clause (d) of section 2.

10 (2) An appeal shall lie from any order of the Controller under this section to the
High Court, and the Controller may at any time refer any such petition to the High Court,
and the High Court shall decide any petition so referred.

20. A registered design shall have to all intents the like effect as against the
Government as it has against any person and the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Patents
15 Act, 1970 shall apply to registered designs as they apply to patents.

CHAPTER IV

INDUSTRIAL AND INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITIONS

21. The exhibition of a design, or of any article to which a design is applied, at an
industrial or other exhibition to which the provisions of this section have been extended
20 by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, or the publication of a
description of the design, during or after the period of the holding of the exhibition, or the
exhibition of the design or the article or the publication of a description of the design by
any person elsewhere during or after the period of the holding of the exhibition, without the
privity or consent of the proprietor, shall not prevent the design from being registered or
25 invalidate the registration thereof:

Provided that—

(a) the exhibjtor exhibiting the design or article, or publishing a description of
the design, gives to the Controller previous notice in the prescribed form; and

(b) the application for registration is made within six months from the date of
30 first exhibiting the design or article or publishing a description of the design.

CHAPTER V

‘LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

22. (1) During the existence of copyright in any design it shall not be lawful for any
person—

35 (a) for the purpose of sale to apply or cause to be applied to any article in any
class of articles in which the design is registered, the design or any fraudulent or
obvious imitation thereof, except with the licence or written consent of the registered
proprietor, or to do anything with a view to enable the design to be so applied; or

(9) to import for the purposes of sale, without the consent of the registered
40 proprietor, any article belonging to the class in which the design has been registered,
and having applied to it the design or any fraudulent or obvious imitation thereof; or

(c) knowing that the design or any fraudulent or obvious imitation thereof has
been applied to any article in any class of articles in which the design is registered

Cancellation
of registration.

Designs to
bind

Provisions as
to exhibitions.

Piracy of

design.


Application of
certain
provisions of
the Act as to
patents to
designs

Fees.

Notice of trust
not to be
entered in
registers

Inspection of
and extracts
from registers

8

without the consent of the registered proprietor, to publish or expose or cause to be
published or exposed for sale that article.

(2) If any person acts in contravention of this section, he shall be liable for every
contravention—

(a) to pay to the registered proprietor of the design a sum not exceeding twenty-
five thousand rupees recoverable as a contract debt, or

(b) if the proprietor elects to bring a suit for the recovery of damages for any
such contravention, and for an injunction against the repetition thereof, to pay such
damages as may be awarded and to be restrained by injunction accordingly:

Provided that the total sum recoverable in respect of any one design under clause (a)
shall not exceed fifty thousand rupees:

Provided further that no suit or any other proceeding for relief under this sub-section
shall be instituted in any court below the court of District Judge.

(3) In any suit or any other proceeding for relief under sub-section (2), every ground
on which the registration of a design may be cancelled under section 19 shall be available as
a ground of defence.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the second proviso to sub-section (2), where
any ground on which the registration of a design may be cancelled under section 19 has
been availed of as a ground of defence sub-section (3) in any suit or other proceeding for
relief under sub-section (2), the suit or such other proceeding shall be transferred by the
court, in which the suit of such other proceeding is pending, to the High Court for decision.

(5) When the court makes a decree in a suit under sub-section (2), it shall send a
copy of the decree to the Controller, who shall cause an entry thereof to be made in the
register of designs.

23. The provisions of the Patents Act, 1970 with regard to certificates of the validity
of a patent, and to the remedy in case of groundless threats of legal proceedings by a paten-
tee shall apply in the case of registered designs in like manner as they apply in the case of
patents, with the substitution of references to the copyright in a design for reference to a
patent, and of references to the proprietar of a design for references to the patentee, and of
references to the design for references to the invention.

CHAPTER VI
GENERAL
Fees
24, (1) There shall be paid in respect of the registration of designs and applications

therefor and in respect of other matters relating to designs under this Act such fees as may
be prescribed.
(2) A proceeding in respect of which a fee is payable under this Act or the rules made
thereunder shall be of no effect unless the fee has been paid.
Provisions as to registers and other documents in the patent office

25. There shall not be entered in any register kept under this Act, or be receivable by
the Controller, any notice of any trust expressed, implied or constructive.

26. Every register kept under this Act shall at all convenient times be open to the
inspection of the public, subject to the provisions of this Act; and certified copies, sealed
with the seal of the patent office, of any entry in any such register shall be given to any
person requiring the same on payment of the prescribed fee.

15

20.

25 39 of 1970.

30

35

40

45


9

Provided that where such register is maintained wholly or partly on computer, the
inspection of such register under this section shall be made by inspecting the computer
print out of the relevant entry in the register so maintained on computer.

27, Reports of or to the Controller other than the report referred to in section 45 made
5 under this Act shall not in any case be published or be open to public inspection.

28. Where an application for a design has been abandoned or refused, the application
and any drawings, photographs, tracings, representations or specimens left in connection
with the application shall not at any time be open to public inspection or be published by
the Controller.

10 29, The Controller may, on request in writing accompanied by the prescribed fee,
correct any clerical error in the representation of a design or in the name or address of the
proprietor of any design, or in any other matter, which is entered upon the register of
designs,

30. (1) Where a person becomes entitled by assignments, transmission or other

15 operation of law to the copyright in a registered design, he may make an application in the

prescribed form to the Controller to register his title, and the Controller shall, on receipt

of such application and on proof of title to his satisfaction, register him as the proprietor

of such design, and shall cause an entry to be made in the prescribed manner in the
register of the assignment, transmission or other instrument affecting the title.

20 (2) Where any person becomes entitled as mortgagee, licensee or otherwise to any
interest in a registered design, he may make an application in the prescribed form to the
Controller to register his title, and the Controller shall, on receipt of such application and on
proof of title to his satisfaction, cause notice of the interest to be entered in the prescribed
manner in the register of designs, with particulars of the instrument, if any, creating such

25 interest.

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), an assignment of a design
or of a share in a design, a mortgage, licence or the creation of any other interest in a design
shall not be valid unless the same were in writing and the agreement between the parties
concerned is reduced to the form of an instrument embodying all the terms and conditions

30 governing their rights and obligation and the application for registration of title under such
instrument is filed in the prescribed manner with the Controller within six months from the
execution of the instrument or within such further period not exceeding six months in the
aggregate as the Controller on the application made in the prescribed manner allows:

Provided that the instrument shall, on entry of its particulars in the register under sub-
35 section (1) or sub-section (2), have the effect from the date of its execution.

(4) The person registered as the proprietor of a design shall, subject to the provisions
of this Act and to any rights appearing from the register to be vested in any other person,
have power absolutely to assign, grant licences as to, or otherwise deal with, the design and
to give effectual receipts for any consideration for any such assignment,

40 licence or dealing:

Provided that any equities in respect of the design may be enforced in like manner as
in respect of any other movable property.

Previlege of
reports of
Controller.

Prohibition
and publica-
tion of
specification,
drawings, etc.,
where
application
abandoned,
ete.

Power-for
Controller to
correct clerical

Entry of
assignment
and transmis-
sions in
registers.


Rectification
of register.

Powers of
Controller in
proceedings
under Act.

Exercise of
discretionary
power by
Controller

Power of
Controller to
take directions
of the Central
Government.

Refusal to
register a
design 1n
certain cases.

Appeals to the
High Court

10

(5) Except in the case of an application made under section 31, a document or
instrument in respect of which no entry has been made in the register in accordance with
the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not be admitted in evidence in any court in
proof of the title to copyright in a design or to any interest therein, unless the court, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, otherwise directs.

31. (1) The Controlier may, on the application in the prescribed manner of any
person aggrieved by the non-insertion in or omission from the register of designs of any
entry, or by any entry made in such register without sufficient cause, or by any entry
wrongly remaining on such register, or by an error or defect in any entry in such register,
make such order for making, expunging or varying such entry as he thinks fit and rectify
the register accordingly.

(2) The Controller may, in any proceeding under this section, decide any question
that may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the rectification of a regis-
ter.

(3) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from any order of the Controller under this
section and the Controller may refer any application under this section to the High Court for
decision, and the High Court shall dispose of any application so referred.

(4) Any order of the Court rectifying a register shall direct that notice of the rectifica-
tion be served on the Controller in the prescribed manner who shall upon the receipt of such
notice rectify the register accordingly.

(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to empower the Controller to make any
such order cancelling the registration of a design as is provided for in section 19.

CHAPTER VII
POWERS AND DUTIES OF CONTROLLER

32. Subject to any rules in this behalf, the Controller in any proceedings before him
under this Act shall have the powers of a civil court for the purpose of receiving evidence,
administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the discovery and
production of documents, issuing commissions for the examining of witnesses and award-
ing costs and such award shall be executable in any court having jurisdiction as if it were
a decree of that court.

33. Where any discretionary power is by or under this Act given to the Controller,
he shall not exercise that power adversely to the applicant for registration of a design
without (if so required within the prescribed time by the applicant) giving the applicant an
opportunity of being heard.

34. The Controller may, in any case of doubt or difficulty arising in the administra-
tion of any of the provisions of this Act, apply to the Central Government for directions in
the matter.

35. (1) The Controller may refuse to register a design of which the use would, in his
opinion, be contrary to public order or morality.

(2) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order of the Controller under this
section.

36. (1) Where an appeal is declared by this Act to lie from the Controller to the High
Court, the appeal shall be made within three months of the date of the order passed by the
Controller.

5

10

20

25

30

35


20

25

30

35

40

45

i

(2) In calculating the said period of three months, the time (if any) occupied in grant-
ing a copy of the order appealed against shall be excluded.

(3) The High Court may, if it thinks fit, obtain the assistance of an expert in decid-
ing such appeals, and the decision of the High Court shall be final.

(4) The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act as to the conduct and
procedure of all proceedings under this Act before it.

CHAPTER VIII
EVIDENCE, ETC.

37, Subject to any rules made under section 44, in any proceeding under this Act
before the Controller, the evidence shall be given by affidavit in the absence of directions
by the Controller to the contrary; but in any case in which the Controller thinks it right so to
do he may take evidence viva voce in lieu of or in addition to evidence by affidavit or may
allow any party to be cross-examined on the contents of his affidavit.

38. A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the Controller as to any entry,
matter or thing which he is authorized by this Act, or any rules made thereunder to make or
do, shall be prima facie evidence of the entry having been made, and of the contents
thereof, and of the matter or thing having been done or left undone.

39. Printed or written copies or extracts, purporting to be certified by the Controller
and sealed with the seal of the patent office, of documents in the patent office, and of or
from registers and other books kept there, shall be admitted in evidence in all courts in
India, and in all proceedings, without further proof or production of the originals:

Provided that a court may, if it has reason to doubt the accuracy or authenticity of the
copies tendered in evidence, require the production of the originals or such further proof as
it considers necessary.

40. Any application, notice or other document authorized or required to be left, made
or given at the Patent Office or to the Controller, or to any other person under this Act, may
be sent by post.

41. (1) If any person, is by reason of infancy, lunacy or other disability, incapable of
making any statement or doing anything required or permitted by or under this Act, the
lawful guardian, committee or manager (if any) of the person subject to the disability, or, if
there be none, any person appointed by any court possessing jurisdiction in respect of his
property, may make such statement or a statement as nearly corresponding thereto as cit-
cumstances permit, and do such thing in the name and on behalf of the person subject to the
disability.

(2) An appointment may be made by the court for the purposes of this section upon
the petition of any person acting on behalf of the person subject to the disability or of any
other person interested in the making of the statement or the doing of the thing.

42. (1) It shall not be lawful to insert—
(i in any contract for or in relation to the sale or lease of an article in respect of
which a design is registered; or

(ii) in a licence to manufacture or use an article in respect of which a design is
registered; or
(iii) in a licence to package the article in respect of which a design is registered,
acondition the effect of which may be—
(a) to require the purchase, lessee, or licensee to acquire from the vendor,

lessor, or licensor or his nominees, or to prohibit him from acquiring or to
restrict in any manner or to any extent his right to acquire from any person, or to

Evidence
before the
Controller.

Certificate of
Controller to
be evidence.

Evidence of
documents in
patent office.

Applications
and notices by
post.

Declaration by
infant, lunatic,
ete.

Avoidance of
certain
restrictive
conditions.


Agency.

12

prohibit him from acquiring except from the vendor, lessor, or licensor or his
nominees any article other than the article in respect of which a design is regis-
tered; or

(6) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using or to restrict
in any manner or to any extent the right of the purchaser, lessee or licensee, to
use an article other than the article in respect of which a design is registered
which is not supplied by the vendor, lessor or licensor or his nominee,

and any such condition shall be void.

(2) A condition of the nature referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (7)
shall not cease to be a condition falling within that sub-section merely by reason of the
fact that the agreement containing it has been entered into separately, whether before or
after the contract relating to the sale, lease or licence of the article in respect of which a
design is registered.

(3) In proceeding against any person for any act in contravention of section 22, it
shall be a defence to prove that at the time of such contravention there was in force a
contract relating to the registered design and containing a condition declared unlawful by
this section:

Provided that this sub-section shall not apply if the plaintiff is not a party to the
contract and proves to the satisfaction of the court that the restrictive condition. was in-
serted in the contract without his knowledge and consent, express or implied.

(4) Nothing in this section shall—

(a) affect a condition in a contract by which a person is prohibited from sell-
ing goods other than those of a particular person;
(b) validate a contract which, but for this section, would be invalid;

(c) affect a condition in a contract for the lease of, or licence to use, an article
in respect of which a design is registered, by which the lessor or licensor reserves to
himself or his nominee the right to supply such new parts of the article, in respect of
which a design is registered, as may be required or to put or keep it in repair.

(5) The provision of this section shall also apply to contracts made before the com-
mencement of this Act if, and in so far as, any restrictive conditions declared unlawful by
this section continue in force after the expiration of one year from such commencement.

CHAPTER IX
AGENCY

43. (1) All applications and communications to the Controller under this Act may
be signed by, and all attendances upon the Controller may be made by or through a legal
practitioner or by or through an agent whose name and address had been entered in the
register of patent agents maintained under section 125 of the Patents Act, 1970.

(2) The Controller may, if he sees fit, require—
(a) any such agent to be resident in India;
(b) any person not residing in India to employ an agent residing in India;

(c) the personal signature or presence of any applicant or other person.

20

25

30

35

39 of 1970.

40


20

25

30

35

40

45

CHAPTER X
POWERS, ETC., OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT

44, (1) Any person who has applied for protection for any design in the United
Kingdom or any of other convention countries or group of countries or countries which
are members of inter-governmental organisations, or his legal representative or assignee
shall, either alone or jointly with any other person, be entitled to claim that the registra-
tion of the said design under this Act shall be in priority to other applicants and shall have
the same date as the date of the application in the United Kingdom or any of such other
convention countries or group of countries or countries which are members of inter-gov-
ernmental organisations, as the case may be:

Provided that—

(a) the application is made within six months from the application for
protection in the United Kingdom or any such other convention countries or
group of countries or countries which are members of inter-governmental or-
ganisations, as the case may be;

(0) nothing in this section shall entitle the proprietor of the design to
recover damages for pircy of design happening prior to the actual date on
which the design is registered in India,

(2) The registration of a design shall not be invalidated by reason only of the
exhibition or use of or the publication of a description or representation of the design in
India during the period specified in this section as that within which the application may
be made.

(3) The application for registration of a design under this section must be made in
the same manner as an ordinary application under this Act.

(4) Where it is made to appear to the Central Government that the legislature of the
United Kingdom or any such other convention country or a country which is member of
any group of countries or inter-governmental organisation as may be notified by the Cen-
tral Government in this behalf has made satisfactory provision for the protection of de-
signs registered in India, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, direct that the provisions of this section, with such variations or additions, if any,
as may be set out in such notification, shall apply for the protection of designs registered
in the United Kingdom or that other convention country or such country which is member
of any group of countries or inter-governmental organisation, as the case may be.

Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “convention coun-
tries”, “group of countries” or “inter-governmental organisation” means, respectively,
such countries, group of countries or inter-governmental organisation to which the Paris
Convention for Protection of Industrial Property, 1883 as revised at Stockholm in 1967
and as amended in 1979 or the Final Act, embodying the results of the Uruguay Round of
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, provided for the establishment of World Trade Organisa-
tion applies.

Explanation 2.— Where more than one application for protection referred to in sub-
section (1) has been made for similar protections in the United Kingdom or one or more
convention countries, group of countries or countries which are members of inter-govern~
mental organisations, the period of six months referred to in cluase (a) of that sub-section
shall be reckoned from the date of which the earlier or the earliest application, as the case
may be, of such applications has been made.

45. The Central Government shall cause to be placed before both Houses of Parlia-
ment once a year a report respecting the execution of this Act by or under the Controller.

13

Reciprocal
‘arrangement
with the
United
Kingdom and
other
convention
countries or
group of
countries or
inter-
governmental
organisations,

Report of the
Controller to
be placed
before
Parliament,


Protection of
secunty of
India

Power of

Government to
make rules

14
46. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall-—

(a) not disclose any information relating to the registration of a design or any appli-
cation relating to the registration of a design under this Act, which it considers prejudicial
to the interest of the security of India; and

(0) take any action regarding the cancellation of registration of such designs regis-
tered under this Act which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify in the interest of the security of India.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the expression “security of India”
means any action necessary for the security of Indian which relates to the application of
any design registered under this Act to any article used for war or applied directly or
indirectly for the purposes of military establishment or for the purposes of war or other
emergency in international relations.

47. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the form of application for registration of design, the manner of filing it at
the patent office and the fee which shall accompany it, under sub-section (2) of
section 5;

(b) the ume within which the registration is to be effected under sub-section
(5) of section 5;

(c) the classification of articles for registration under sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 6;

(d) the particulars of design to be published and the manner of their publica-
tion under section 7;

(०) the manner of making claim under sub-section (J) of section 8;

(f) the manner of making applications to the Controller under sub-section (5)
of section 8;

(g) the additional matters required to be entered in the register of designs and
the safeguards to be made in maintaining such register in computer floppies or
diskettes under sub-section (1) of section 10;

(h) the manner of making application and fee to be paid for extension of the
period of copyright under and the fee payable thereto, sub-section (2) of section 11;

(i) the manner of making application for restoration of design and the fee to
be paid with it under sub-section (/) of section 12;

(j) the manner of verification of statement contained in an application under
sub-section (2) of section 12;

(k) the additional fee to be paid for restoration of the registration of design
under sub-section (1) of section 13;

(1) the provisions subject to which the right of the registered proprietor shall
be under sub-section (1) of section 14.

(m) the number of exact representation or specimen of the design to be fur-
nished to the Controller under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 15;

(n) the mark, words or figures with which the article is to be marked denoting
that the design is registered under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 15;

20

25

30

35

45


20

25

30

35

40

45

15

(०) the rules to dispense with or modify as regards any class or description of
articles any of the requirements of section 15 as to marking under sub-section (2) of
that section;

(p) the fee to be paid for and the manner of inspection under sub-section (1) of
section 17;

(4) the fee to be paid to obtain a certified copy of any design under sub-section
(2) of section 17;

(r) the fee on payment of which the Controller shall inform under section 18;

(s) the form for giving notice to the controller under clause (a) of the proviso
to section 21;

(t) the fee to be paid in respect of the registration of designs and application
therefor, and in respect of other matters relating to designs under sub-section (1) of
section 24;

(u) the fee to be paid for giving certified copy of any entry in the register
under section 26;

(v) the fee to be accompanied with the requests in writing for correcting any
clerical error under section 29;

(४) the form in which an application for registration as proprietor shall made
and the manner in which the Controller shall cause an entry to be made in the
register of the assignment, transmission or other instrument effecting the title under
sub-section (1) of section 30;

(x) the form in which an application for title shall be made and the manner in
which the Controller shall cause notice of the interest to be entered in the register of
designs with pariticulars of the instrument, if any, creating such interest under sub-
section (2) of section 30;

(y) the manner of filing an application for registration and for making applica-
tion for extension of time as referred to in sub-section (3) of section 30;

(z) the manner of making application to the Controller for rectification of
register under sub-section (7) of section 31;

(za) the manner in which the notice of rectification shall be served on the
Controller under sub-section (4) of section 31;

(zb) the rules regulating the proceedings before the Controller under section
32; .

(ze) the time which shall be granted to the applicants for being heard by the
Controller under section 33;

(zd) the fee to be accompanied with an appeal under sub-section (7) of section
36;
(ze) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) The power to make rules under this section shall be subject to the condition of
the rules being made after previous publication.

(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive ses-
sions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses


Repeal and
savings

16

agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that Act.

CHAPTER XI
REPEAL AND SAVING
48. (1) The Designs Act, 1911 is hereby repealed.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the General Clauses Act, 1987
with respect to repeals, any notification, rule, order, requirement, registration, certificate,
notice, decision, determination, direction, approval, authorisation, consent, application,
request or thing made, issued, given or done under the Designs Act, 1911, shall, in force at
the commencement of this Act, continue to be in force and have effect as if made, issued,
given or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to all applications for registration of
designs pending at the commencement of this Act and to any proceedings consequent
thereon and to any registration granted in pursuance thereof.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any proceeding pending in any
court at the commencement of this Act may be continued in that court as if this Act has not
been passed.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the date of expiration of
the copyright in the designs registered before the commencement of this Act shall, sub-
ject to the provisions of this Act, be the date immediately after the period of five years for
which tt was registered or the date immediately after the period of five years for which the
extension of the period of copyright for a second period from the expiration of the original
period has been made.

10

20

25

2of 1911

10 of 1897

2of 1911


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Since the enactment of the Designs Act, 1911 considerable progress has been
made in the field of science and technology. The legal system for the protection of
industrial designs requires to be made more efficient in order to ensure effective protection
to registered disigns. It is also required to promote design activity in order to promote
the design element in an article of production. The proposed Designs Bill is essentially
aimed to balace these interests. It is also intended to ensure that the law does not
unnecessarily extend protection beyond what is necessary to create the required incentive
for design activity while removing impediments to the free use of available designs. To
achieve these purposes, the Bill incorporates inter alia, the following, namely:

(a) it enlarges the scope of definition of “article” and “design” and introudces
definition of “original”;

(b) it amplifies the scope of ‘prior publication’;

(c) it incorporates the provisions for delegation of powers of the Controller -
to other officers and duties of Examiners;

(d) it contains provision for identification of non-registrable designs;

(8) it contains provision for substitution of application before registration of
a design;

(f) it introduces internationally follwed system of classification in the place
of Indian classification.

(g) it contains provision for maintaining the Register of design on computer;
(h) it contains provision for restoration of lapsed designs;

(i) it. contains provision for appeal against order of the Controller before the
High Court instead of Central Government as existing;

(j) it revokes the period of secrecy of two years of a registered design;
(k) it provides for compulsory registration of any document for transfer of right
in the registered design;

(1) it introduces additional grounds in cancellation proceedings and makes pro-
vision for initiating the cancellation proceedings before the Controller in place of
High Court;

(m) it enhances the quantum of penalty imposed for infringement of registered
design.

(n) it contains provisions for grounds of cancellation to be taken as defence in

the infringement proceedings to be initiated in any court not below the court of the
District Judge;

(0) it enhances initial period of registration from 5 to 10 years, to be followed
by a further extension of a period of five years;

(p) it contains provisions for allowing of priority to other convention countries
and countries belonging to the group of countries or inter-governmental organiza-
tions apart from United Kingdom and other Commonwealth coutnries;

17


18

(q) it contains provisions for avoidance of certain restrictive conditions for the
control of anti-competitive practices in contractual licences;

(2) it contains specific provisions to protect the security of India.

2. In view of the extensive amendments necessitated in the Designs Act, 1911, ithas
been thought fit to repeal and re-enact the said Act incorporating the necessary changes.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. The Notes on clauses explain the
various provisions of the Bill.

New Deut; RAMAN SINGH.
The 4th December, 1999


NOT ES ON CLAUSES

Clause 1.— This clause corresponds to section 1 of the Designs Act, 1911 (here-
after referred to as the existing Act) and deals with the short title of the Bill, the area of
its operation and the date of commencement. As adequate steps are required to be taken
for administering the proposed legislation, provision has been made to bring different
provisions of the Act on different dates.

Clause 2.—This clause contains definitions of various expressions used in the Bill.
While most of the definitions in the existing Act have been retained, the definition of
“original” has been incorporated vide clause (0). According to this definition, “original”,
in relation to a design, means originating from the auther of such design and includes the
cases which though old in themselves yet are new in their application. The definition of
“original” has been incorporatied in order to specify the registerable designs. The defini-
tions of “article” and “design” have been amplified to align them with similar definitions
internationally accepted for providing wider protection to the intellectual property. The
definition of “article” has been amplified for inclusion of parts of articles sold separately
within its scope. The definition of “design” has been amplified to incorporate therein
the composition of lines and colours so as to avoid overlapping with the Copyright Act,
1957 regarding definition of “design” in respect of artistic work.

Clause 3,—This clause enables the Controller General of Patents, Designs and
Trade Marks appointed under the Trade Marks the legislation to function as the Controller
of Designs under the proposed legislation. It also enables the Central Government to
appoint as many examiners and other officers with such designations as it may think fit.
This clause also empowers the Controller to issue orders authorising his subordinates to
discharge functions under his superintendence and directions. It is proposed to utilise
the services of the existing administrative machinery in the Patent office for the
present,

Clause 4.— This clause is a new one and it relates to prohibition of registration of
certain designs. This clause prohibits designs which lacks novelty or originality. It also
prohibits registration of designs which had been disclosed to the public anywhere in
India or in any other country by publication in a tangible form or in any other way prior
to the filing date or which is not significantly distinguishable from non designs or
combination of non-designs or comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter.

Clause 5.— This clause corresponds to section 43 of the existing act and deals with
application of registration of designs. The existing clause has been modified in order to
register any design which is new or original or not previously published in India or in any
other country and which is not contrary to public order and morality. This clause also seeks -
to provide for the application for registration of every design to be referred to an examiner
appointed under clause 3 of the proposed legislation for ascertaining the registrability of
the design. In view of introduction of classification of articles based on International Sys-
tem of classification, the designs need not be registered in more than one class unlike under
the existing Act. This clause also seeks to provide that the appeals may be preferred to the
High Court instead of the Central Government as specified under the existing Act.

Clause 6. — This clause is a new one and it deals with the registration of particular
articles. This clause seeks to allow the proprietor of any design, who has already registered
the design in any particular class or article, to register the design in respect of some one or
more classes of articles comprised in that class of articles since the classification of that
design is based on the article to which the design has been applied and it follows the
International System of classification i.e. Lucerne Classification.

19


20

Clause 7.—This clause is a new one and it relates to publication of registered
designs which shall allow publication of the design as soon as the design is registered
and thereafter it becomes open for public inspection. The clause has been introduced
keeping in view of that any person can come to know of the particulars of the design
through its publication.

Clause 8.—This clause is a new one and it deals with the powers of the Controller
to make orders regarding substitution of applications, etc. This clause allows applica-
tions for registration of a design to proceed, subject to the restrictions contained in therein,
in the name of the claimant or in the name of the claimants application to any new name
by operation of law. Sub-clause (4) deals with joint applicants when any of such applicants
dies. Sub-clause (5) deals with disputes between joint applicants for registration of a
design before the Controller.

Clause 9.—This clause corresponds to section 45 of the existing and provides for
grant of certificate to the proprietor of the design, when registered. In case of loss of
original certificate or in any other case, the Controller is competent to furnish one or
more copies of the certificate of registration.

Clause 10.—This clause corresponds to section 46 of the existing Act and it pro-
vides for keeping, at the patent office, of a book called the Register of Designs containing
the applicant’s name, address of the proprietor, notifications of assignments and of trans-
missions and such other matters as may be specified in the rules. This clause also enables
maintenance of the Register of Designs either wholly or partly in computer floppies or
diskettes subject to the safe guards as may be specified in the rules. The existign section
has been modified in the manner stated above so as to enable the Controller to maintain the
register in computer readable form for better retrieval.

Clause 11.—This clause corresponds to section 47 of the existing Act and it deals
with copyright on registration of designs with the exception that the initial period of five
years has been extended to ten years. However, in the present clause, the total period of
fifteen years of copyright 185 been kept unchanged, as under the Agreement on Trade
Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) the protection for the period of at least ten
years has been stipulated.

Clause 12—This clause is a new one and it deals with the registration of lapsed
designs. It enables the Controller to restore registration of lapsed designs, if such regis-
tration had ceased to have effect by reason of failure to pay the fee for extension of
copyright, on receipt of necessary application, statement verified in the prescribed manner
and the fee as may be specified in the rules. This clause has been introduced with a view
to help the registered proprietors for genuine lapses in not filing the request for extension
of copyright within the prescribed period. Similar provision is also available in the Patents
Act, 1970.

Clause 13.—This clause is a new one and deals with the procedure for disposal of
applications for restoration of lapsed designs. This clause is consequential to clause 12
and it empowers the Controller to restore the registration of designs upon payment of
fees and additional fees as may be specified by rules.

Clause 14,—This clause is a new one and it provides for the rights of proprietors
of lapsed designs which have been restored. This clause is consequential to Clause 12.

Clause 15.—This clause corresponds to section 48 of the existing Act and it deals
with the requirements before delivery of articles on sale. The existing provision has been
modified to include giving of prior notice when the Controller may erase any name from
the register to comply with the various requirements before delivery on sale.

Clause 16. —This clause corresponds to section 49 of the existing Act and deals
with the effect of disclosure of a design by the proprietor to any other person.

Clause 17.—This clause corresponds to section 50 of thé existing Act and it deals


21

with inspection of registered designs. Under the existing provision, a design shall not be
open to inspection except by the priorietor or a person authorised in wiring by him or a
person authorised by a Controller or court during the existence of Copyright ina design or
such shorter period not beign less than two years from the registration of the design as
may be prescribed.

‘The present clause removes the said period of secrecy and it enables the publig to
inspect any registered design and to obtain their certified copies on payment of the fees as
may be prescribed in the 1ules. The proposed provision removes considerable hardship of
interested persons in ascertaining the designs during initial period of existence of the reg-
istration. -

Clause 18.—This clause corresponds to section 51 of the existing Act and it deals
with information as to existence of copyright. This clause enables the Controller on the
request of any person on furnishing of such information as may enable the Controller to
identify the design, and on payment of the fees as may be prescribed in the rules to furnish
the person information about the existence of the registration of the design, the classes of
articles in respect of which the registration subsists, the date of registration and the name
and address of the registered proprietor.

Clause 19.—This clause corresponds to section 51A of the existing Act and it deals
with cancellation of registration of designs. In addition to the grounds of cancellation pro-
vided in the existing provisions, the following grounds have been added, namely:— '

(i) that the design is not registrable under the proposed legislation;

(ii) that it is not a design as defined in clause (b) of clause 2 of the proposed
legislation,

the provision contained in sub-clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 51A of the existing
Act is proposed to be amplified in order to consider the prior publication on global basis
instead of regional basis i.e. in India.

The said additional grounds will help interested person to get cancelled the regis-
tered design in better comprehensive maner. All grounds of cancellation can be taken up
before the Controller irrespective of any particular time limit in place of restricted ground
and specific time limit under the existing Act. Such amplification will avoid expenses and
time involved in High Court as mandatory under the existing Act.

Clause 20.—This clause corresponds with section 51B of the existing Act and it
states that a registered design shall have to all intents the like effect as against the Gov-
ernment as it has against any person and the provisions of Chapter XVII, relating to use
of inventions for purposes of Government and acquisition of inventions by Central
Government, of the Paternts Act, 1970 shall apply to registered designs as they apply to
patents,

Clause 21.—This clause corresponds to section 52 of the existing Act and it deals
with Industrial and International Exhibitions of Designs. This clause provides that the
exhibition of a design or of any article to which a design is applied at an industrial or
other exhibition to which the provisions of this clause have been extended by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette shall not prevent the design from
being registered or invalidate any registration thereof subject to the fulfilment of the
conditions stipulated therein.

Clause 22.—This clause corresponds to section 53 of the existing Act relating to
piracy of registered designs. This clause modifies the said section 53 so as to incorporate
therein enhancement of quantum of penalty for any infringement of the registered design.
No suit for infringement under this clause can be initiated in any court below the court of
District Judge. In the infringement proceeding, grounds under cancellation proceeding shall
be available as a ground for defence. Under the existing section 53, if any person acts in
contravention of that section he shall be liable for every such contravention to pay to the


22

registered proprietor of the design a sum not exceeding five hundred rupees recoverable
as a contract debt or if the proprietor elects to bring a suit for the recovery of the damages
for any such contravention, and for any injunction against the repetition thereof, to pay
such damages as may be awarded and to be restrained by injunction and the total sum
recoverable shall not exceed one thousand rupees. It is proposed to enhance the aforesaid
maximum damage of five hundred rupees to twenty five thousand rupees and total sum
recoverable from one thousand rupees to fifty thousand rupees. Provision has also been
made for making entry in the register of designs by the Controller in case a Court makes
a decree in a suit under sub-clause (2) of this clause.

Clause 23.—This clause corresponds to section 54 of the existing Act and it deals
with application of certain provisions of the proposed legislation as to patents to designs.
This clause states that the provisions of the Patent Act, 1970 with regard to certificates of
the validity of a patent, and to the remedy in case of groundless threats of legal proceedings
by a patentee shall apply in the case of registered designs in like manner as they apply in the
case of patents, with the substitution of references to the copyright in a design for reference
to a patent, and of references to the proprietor of a design for references to the patentee,
and of references to the design for references to the invention.

Clause 24,—This clause corresponds to section 57 of the existing Act and it deals
with fees. This clause enables the Central Government to prescribe fee payable in respect
of registration of designs and applications therefor, and in respect of other matters relating
to designs. Sub-clause (2) of this clause states that the proceeding in respect of which a fee
in payable under the proposed legislation are the rules made there under shall be no effect
unless such fee has been paid.

Clause 25.——This clause corresponds to section 58 of the existing Act and it pro-
hibits the notice of trust to be entered in the Register. This clause provides that no notice
of any trust expressed, implied or constructive shall be entered in the register kept under
the proposed legislation or are receivable by the Controller.

Clause 26.—This clause corresponds to section 59 of the existing Act. This clause
provides that every register kept under the proposed legislation shall at all convenient times
be opened to inspection of the public and they could obtain certified copies of any entry in
the register on making necessary request accompanied by the fees as may be prescribed by
rules. The provision has been amplified to incorporate the inspection of registrar main-
tained on Computer by inspecting the Computer print outs.

Clause 27,— This clause corresponds to section 60 of the existing Act and it deals
with the privilege of reports of Controller. Clause 45 provides for laying of report of the
Controller before Parliament. All reports of the Controller other than the report mentioned
in clause 45 and all reports to the controller made under the proposed legislation shall not
be published or shall be opened to public inspection.

Clause 28—This clause corresponds to section 61 of the existing Act and it prohibits
of publication of specification, drawing, etc. where application has been abandoned, etc.
This clause states that where an application for a design has been abandoned or refused,
the application and any drawings, photographs, tracings, representations or specimens

-left in connection with the application will not be opened to public inspection or be
published by Controller at any time.

Clause 29.—This clause corresponds to section 62 of the existing Act and it provides
that the Controller may, on request in writing accompanied by requesits fee, correct any
clerical error in the representation of a design or in the name and address of any design,
address of the proprietor of any design or in any other matter which is entered upon the
register of designs.

Clause 30. —This clause corresponds to section 63 of the existing Act, relating to
entry of assignments and transmission in registers. This clause modifies section 63 of the
existing Act by addition of a new sub-clause namely sub-clause (3) making compulsory


23

Tegistration of documents conveying such assignment or share in design, mortage, license
or any other interest in the design with the Controller within six months from the execution
of the instrument or within such further period not exceeding six months in the aggregate 85
the Controller may, on an application made to him in the prescribed manner allow. Unless
such registration has been made, the assignment or transmission shall not be valid. This
clause enables the public to ascertain the details of transfer of rights from the register of
designs.

Clause 31.—This clause corresponds to section 64 of the existing Act relating to
rectification of register. This clause lays down the procedure for rectification of any entry
in the register of designs, Sub-clause (3) provides that an appeal against the order of the
Controller under this clause shall be to the High Court. Provisions has also been made to
the effect that any order of the Court rectifying the register shall direct that notice of the
rectification should be served on the Controller as per the rules and on receipt of such
notice, the controller is required to rectify the register accordingly.

Clause 32.—This clause corresponds to section 65 of the existing Act relating to
power of controller in proceedings under the proposed legislation. It provides that, subject
to any rules as may be made by the Central Government the Controller shall have, in any
proceedings before him under the proposed legislation, the power of the civil court for the
purpose of receiving evidence, administering oath, enforcing the attendance of witnesses,
compelling the discovery and production documents, issuing commissions for the examin-
ing of the witnesses and awarding courts. The award of courts by the Controller shall be
executable as if it were a decree of a court.

Clause 33.—This clause corresponds to section 67 of the existing Act. This clause
provides that the Controller has to give an opportunity of being heard to the person or
persons before exercising his discretionary powers adverse to such person or persons.

Clause 34.—This clause corresponds to section 68 of the existing Act and it deals
with power of Controller to take directions of the Central Government. It provides that the
Controller may take directions of the Central Government in case of any doubt or difficulty
arising in administration of the proposed legislation.

Clause 35.—This clause corresponds to section 69 of the existing Act with the
modification that appeal under this section shall lie to the High Court instead of to the
Central Government. This clause seeks to empower the Controller to refuse to register
the design, which , in his opinion, is contrary to public order or morality. Sub-clause (2)
of this clause provides that an appeal under this clause shall lie to High Court.

Clause 36.—This clause corresponds to section 70 of the existing Act with the
modification of the insertion of the words High Court for the words Central Government.
In this clause, appeal shall lie to the High Court and such appeal shall be made within
three months from the date of the order passed by the Controller. Such appeal shall be in
writing and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee.

Clause 37.—This clause corresponds to section 70A of the existing Act relating to
evidence Lefore the Controller with the addition that the High Court may make rules
consistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation in respect of procedure relating
to all proceedings before it under the legislation. This clause specifically provides that,
subject to any rules as may be made by the Central Government under clause 47, the
evidence in any proceedings before the Controller shall be given by affidavit and the
Controller may take evidence by viva voce in lieu of or in addition to evidence by affidavit.
He may also allow any party to be cross-examined on the contents of an affidavit.

Clause 38.—This clause corresponds to section 71 of the existing Act relating to
certificate of Controller as to any entry, etc. to be evidence. This clause provides that any
certificate issued by the Controller in relation to any entry, matter or thing which he is
authorised by the proposed legislation or any rules made thereunder to make or do shall
be prima facie evidence of such entry, matter or thing.


24

Clause 39.—This clause corresponds to section 71A of the existing Act relating to
evidence of documents in Patent Office. This clause provides that any matter certified by
the Controller and sealed with the seal of Patent Office can be admitted as evidence in all
courts. However, a court may, if it has reason to doubt the accuracy or authenticity of
copies tendered in evidence, require the production of the originals or such further proof as.
it considers necessary. {

Clause 40.—This cause corresponds to section 73 of the existing Act relating to
applications and notices by post. It provides that any application, notice or other document
authorised or required to be left, made or given at the Patent Office or to the Controller
or to any other person under the proposed legislation may be sent by post.

Clause 41.—This clause contains the same provision as contained in section 74 of
the existing Act and it deals with declaration by infant, lunatic, etc. It allows for making
statement or doing anything permitted under the proposed legislation on behalf of a
person incapacitated to make or do so due to the infancy, lunacy or other disabilities by
lawful guardian, Committee or manager (if any) of such applicant or any person ap-
pointed by the court of competent jurisdiction.

Clause 42.—This clause deals with avoidance of certain restrictive conditions in
contracts, leases and certain licenses, to be imposed inview of article 40 of the TRIPS
which provide the control of anticompetitive practice in contracted licences. It prohibits
insertion of a condition, requiring purchase or giving on lease or licensz to acquire from
a vendor, lessor, licensor or his nominees or prohibiting any of them from acquiring or
restricting them in any manner or to any extend the right to acquire from any person or to
prohibit them from acquiring except from the vendor, lessor, licensor or his nominee any
article other than the article in respect of which a design is registered, in any contract for
or in relation to the sale or lease of an article in respect of which a design is registered or
in a license to manufacture or use any article in respect of a design is registered or in a
license for packaging an article in respect of a design is register. Sub- clause (5) of this
clause provides that the provisions of the proposed clause shall also apply to contracts
made before the commencement of the proposed legislation if and in so far as any
restrictive conditions declared as unlawful by this clause continue in force after the
expiration of one year from such commencement.

Clause 43.—This clause corresponds to section 76 of the existing Act relating to
agency. The existing provision has been modified to define the agent who can act before
the Controller for any proceeding whose name and address has been entered in the register
of patent agents maintained under section 125 of the Patents Act, 1970.

Clause 44—This clause corresponds to section 78A of the existing Act relating to
reciprocal arrangements with the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth Countires.
The provision is proposed to be extended to countries which are members of any group of
countries or Inter-Governmental organisations. The existing Act provides priority to the
United Kingdom and other Commonwealth Countires, but in view of India’s accession to
the Paris Convention and India being a signatory to the World Trade Organisation (WTO),
the same has been modified by this clause so that the right of priority can be extended to the
convention countries and Inter-Governmental Organisations. In view of above an explana-
tion has been provided to this clause explaining that “convention countries”, “group of
countires” or “Inter-Governmental Organisation” means respectively, such countries, group
of countires or Inter-Governmental Organisations to which the Paris Convention to protec-
tion of Industrial Property, 1883 so revised at Stockholm in 1967 and as amended in 1979
or the Final Act, embodying the results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade nego-
tiations, provided for the establishment of World Trade Organisations applies. Another
Explanation has been provided for reckoning the date of priority from the date on which
the earlier or the earliest application of the reciprocity applications has been made.


25

Clause 45.—This clause is the new one requiring the Central Government to place
a report respecting the execution of the proposed legislation by or under the Controller
every year before Parliament. This provision will ensure greater transparency of the
system of administration of designs.

Clause 46.—This clause is a new one and corresponds to similar provision relating
to protection of security of India available under the Patents Act, 1970. It is proposed to be
incorporated for protection of security of India in relation to certain types of designs which
may be prejudicial to the interest of the security of India. This provision enables the Cen-
tral Government to direct the Controller to take suchaction including non-disclosure of
information and cancellation of registration of designs if the Central Government by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette so specify. Such action would be in the interest of the secu-
tity of India. The Explanation to this clause defines the expression “security of India”.

Clause 47.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make, by notification
in the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various matters in respect of which such rules may be made.
These matter, inter alia, include the form of application for registration of designs, the
manner of filing of such applications in the patents office and the fee which shall accom-
pany such applications, the classification of articles for registration, the manner of publica-
tion of particulars of designs, and the manner of giving notice of rectification to the Con-
troller. Sub-clause (3) provides that the power to make rules under this clause shall be
subject to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication. Sub-clause (4)
provides that every rule made by the Central Government under this clause shall be laid
before Parliament.

Clause 48.—This clause deals with repeal and savings. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause seeks to repeal the Designs Act, 1911. Sub-clause (2) seeks to save notifications,
tules, orders, certificates, applications etc. issued, given or done under the Act sought to
be repealed. Sub-clause (3) provides that the proposed legislation shall be applicable to
the pending applications. Sub-clause (4) saves continuance of pending proceedings in
courts as if the new legislation has not been passed. Sub-clause (5) clarifies the date of
expiration of copyright in the designs registered before the commencement of the proposed
legislation.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Designs Bill, 1999 proposes to repeal and re-enact the Designs Act, 1911. Clause
3 of the Bill provides that the Controller-General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks
(CGPDTM) appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958 shall be the Controller of Designs for the purposes of the proposed legis-
lation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause makes provision for the Central Government to
appoint as many Examiners and other officers and with such desgnations, as it thinks fit.
The provisions contained in clause 3 of the Bill envisage only the method of appointment
of the Controller-General and Examiners who are already discharging their functions under
the Designs Act, 1911. The other infrastructure and the staff required for the administra-
tion and enforcement of the proposed legislation shall be the existing infrastructure and the
staff under the Designs Act, 1911 which is being dealt with by the Patent Office. Hence
no financial liabilities are envisaged for the enforcement of the proposed legislation in
the present Bill.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 47 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by notification in
the Official Gazette, rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2) of that clause enumerates the matters with respect to which rules may be made
under this clause. These matters, inter alia, relate to the manner of making applications and
the fee payable for such applications; the manner of advertisement of a registered design,
the manner of making entry in the register of assignment, transmission or other instrument
effecting the title and other matters of a procedural nature. Sub-clause (3) of that clause
provides that the power to make rules is subject to the condition of their previous-publica-
tion. The rules are required to be laid before Parliament.

2. The aforesaid matters relate to matters of procedure or administrative details and
it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power, is therefore, of a normal character.


RAJYA SABHA.

A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to protection of designs.

(Dr. Raman Singh, Minister of Siate for Commerce and Industry)

,
MGIP(PLU)MRND—2540RS—09-12-1999,