AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH JUL Y, 2006.
THE  CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This  Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. After article 38 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
38A (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Union shall strive to
promote and develop with special care,—
(a) sports and sports persons right from the grass root levels to enable them to
compete at international competitions;
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No.   VII  of  2006
Insertion of
new article
38A.
5

2
(b) sports infrastructure such as stadia with necessary facilities, gadgets and
tracks of international standards with sufficient number of coaches and allied services
to groom up players;
(c) sports at school and college levels by making it compulsory for all the students;
(d) sports at village to national levels by holding sports melas and competitions
from time to time;
(2) Parliament may by law regulate the sports associations and federations so
that they seriously promote the sports for which they have been set up.
3. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List I — Union List, after entry 68, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘68A. Sports.’’; and
(ii) in List II — State List, in entry 33, the word ‘‘sports’’ shall be omitted.
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule. 10
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Ours is the second most populous Country in the globe after China. Though China has
a dominant presence in sports at international level, we have not made even our presence felt
in international sports activities except in cricket, which is played only in few countries of the
Commonwealth. In the Olympics and other international sports meet, our performance is
very dismal. In fact, no sincere efforts have ever been made by us to arrest the declining
standards of sports in the country.  Our sports bodies have been politicized and instead of
promoting sports they generally promote individual interests and are marred with politics. It
is a pity that though our country is endowed with various climatic conditions suitable for
developing all kinds of sports and games, we are nowhere in the arena of sports in the world.
One common reason cited for this poor state of affairs in sports is that the subject is in
the state list of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and because of poor economic
condition of most of states, sufficient focus is not being given to sports activities in the
country both by the Centre as well as the States. It is felt that in order to give proper attention
and promotion to sports, the subject of 'Sports' should be transferred to Union List from the
State List. It is also necessary to have a national sports policy to encourage all sports
activities and games in the country.
Hence this Bill.
SANTOSH  BAGRODIA.
3

                                                   ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
SEVENTH  SCHEDULE
(Article 246)
LIST I—UNION  LIST
* * * * * *
68. The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological and Anthropological
Surveys of India, Meteorological Organizations.
* * * * * *
LIST II—STATE  LIST
* * * * * *
33. Theatres and dramatic performances, cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60
of List I: sports, entertainments and amusements.
* * * * * *
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Santosh Bagrodia, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1762RS(S3)—28-07-2006.