1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. For article 346 of the constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
"346. Hindi language shall be the official language for communication between one
State and another State and between a State and the Union".
Bill No.  XLIX of  2011
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH APRIL, 2012
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Substitution of
new article for
article 346.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Hindi, certainly being distinct from other Indian languages in many ways and having
specific potential for development, was accorded the status of official language in the
Constitution. But, since Hindi had never been official language in India before, the founders
of Constitution felt it necessary to provide for its adequate dissemination and development.
Moreover, in order to disseminate Hindi, it was clearly directed that its use be done in such
a manner that Hindi could become the medium of expression of all the elements of the
composite culture i.e., mixed culture of India.
But, the present form of article 346 is a hindrance in providing Hindi the status of
official language of the Union. Hindi has to become the medium of expression of all the
elements of the composite culture of the country. Therefore, it is high time that this article be
amended to pave the way for the development of official language Hindi.
Hence, this Bill.
PRABHAT  JHA
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill, require financial resources for providing training of Hindi language
to the officers and staff in many States. The expenditure will be borne from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that the Bill, if enacted,  I will involve a recurring expenditure of
rupees ten crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five crore may also involve.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
346. The language for the time being authorised for use in the Union for official
purposes shall be the official language for communication between one State and another
State and between a State and the Union:
Provided that if two or more States agree that the Hindi language should be the official
language for communication between such States, that language may be used for such
communication.
* * * * * *
Official
language for
communication
between one
State and
another or
between a
State and the
Union.

GMGIPMRND—437RS(S3)—27-04-2012.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P.)