1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, be notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in section 77 clause ( 3) shall be
deleted.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill  No.  XLIX of  2009
Amendment
of section 77
of Act 43 of
1951.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 18TH DECEMBER, 2009
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Quiet often than not, the present ceiling on election expenses for State Assemblies and
Parliament is flouted by the candidates, and incorrect affidavits are filed by them of all the
expenditure incurred in connection with the election process. There is an urgent need to
amend the Representation of the People Act so as to make election process and spending of
money more transparent and to see that more accounted money flows in the election process
and the role of unaccounted money in election process is reduced. The upper ceiling on
expenses should be removed, so that a candidate who wants to reveal his entire expenses
can do so. The amendment will make the entire election process more truthful and transparent.
Hence this Bill.
Y . P .  TRIVEDI
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE  ACT, 1951
*** *** *** *** *** ***
77. Account of election expenses and maximum thereof.—(1) Every candidate at an
election shall, either by himself or by his election agent, keep a separate and correct account
of all expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorized by him or by his
election agent between [the date on which he has been nominated] and the date of declaration
of the result thereof, both dates inclusive.
Explanation  1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that—
(a) the expenditure incurred by leaders of a political party on account of travel by
air or by any other means of transport for propagating programme of the political party
shall not be deemed to be the expenditure in connection with the election incurred or
authorised by a candidate of that political party or his election agent for the purposes
of this sub-section.
(b) any expenditure incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities
provided or any other act or thing done by any person in the service of the Government
and belonging to any of the classes mentioned in clause (7) of section 123 in the
discharge or purported discharge of his official duty as mentioned in the proviso to
that clause shall not be deemed to be expenditure in connection with the election
incurred or authorised by a candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of this
sub-section.
Explanation  2.—For the purposes of clause (a) of Explanation 1, the expression
"leaders of a political party", in respect of any election, means,—
(i) where such political party is a recognised political party, such persons not
exceeding forty in number, and
(ii) where such political party is other than a recognised political party, such
persons not exceeding twenty in number, whose names have been communicated to
the Election Commission and the Chief Electoral Officers of the States by the political
party to be leaders for the purposes of such election, within a period of seven days
from the date of the notification for such election published in the Gazette of India or
Official Gazette of the State, as the case may be, under this Act:
Provided that a political party may, in the case where any of the persons referred to in
clause (i) or, as the case may be, in clause (ii) dies or ceases to be a member of such political
party, by further communication to the Election Commission and the Chief Electoral Officers
of the States, substitute new name, during the period ending immediately before forty-eight
hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of the last poll for such election, for the
name of such person died or ceased to be a member, for the purposes of designating the new
leader in his place.
(2) The account shall contain such particulars, as may be prescribed.
(3) The total of the said expenditure shall not exceed such amount as may be prescribed.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Y.P . Trivedi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5621RS(S5)—18-12-2009.