AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. XLIX of 2024 
THE RELEASE OF MORTAL REMAINS BY CLINICAL 
ESTABLISHMENTS BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to protect the right of the next of kin or authorized persons to 
receive the mortal remains of deceased individuals  
without undue delay and prevent harassment 
 by clinical establishments on account of  
outstanding dues and for matters 
 connected therewith or 
 incidental thereto. 
        BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Release of Mortal Remains by Clinical
Establishments Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) “
applicant” means any person making an application for claimi ng
t
he mortal remains of the deceased person under sub-section (1) of section 
4; 
(b) “cl inical establishment” shall have the same meaning as assigned
to it under clause (c) of section 2 of the C linical Establishments 
(Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010; 
(c) “deceased person” means any person admitted to a clinical
establishment for in -patient treatment due to an illness or admitted under 
casualty or emergency circumstances and passed away du ring treatment 
therein;  
(d
) “nodal officer” means a person appointed as such by the clinical
establishment under sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(
e) “outstanding dues” means any pending dues or charges claimed by
a clinical establishment for the provision of treatment or for costs incurred 
in respect of the deceased person or in relation to his treatment therein; and 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5 
1
0 
 
15 
2
3 of 2010 
CHAPTER II 
DUTIES OF CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS 
Appointment 
and functions of 
nodal officer.
3. (1) Every clinical establishment shall appoint a person from amongst its
staff, possessing such qualifications, expertise and experience as may b e
pr
escribed, as a nodal officer for discharging the duties as assigned under
this Act, within thirty days from its notification in the Official Gazette.
(2
) The nodal officer shall be responsible for,-
(a
) processing the application for handing over the mortal remains of
the deceased person; and 
(b
) ensuring that the mortal remains of the deceased person are handed 
over in a proper and dignified manner to the applicant immediately
after grant of consent,
i
n accordance with provisions of sub-section (2) of section 4 of this Act. 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
Procedure for 
claiming the 
mortal remains 
of a deceased 
person. 
4. (1) Any person who is the next of kin of the deceased person or any other
person authorized by law to receive the mortal remains of the deceased
person, seeking to claim such mortal remains, shall submit an application
to the nodal officer appointed for the said purpose under section 3 of this
Act, in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(2
) The nodal officer shall on receipt of such application, process the same
and grant the consent for handing over the mortal remains of the deceased
person immediately
:
P
rovided that in case of any delay in processing or rejection of the 
application made under sub- section (1), the nodal officer shall record 
the reasons for such delay or rejection, as the case may be, in writing 
and, provide the same to the applicant immediately. 
Provided further that the nodal officer shall not reject any application 
made under sub-section (1), solely on account of any outstanding dues 
3
5 
 
40 
 
45 

3 
in the name of the deceased person, as claimed by the clinical 
establishment.   
 
5 
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, no clinical establishment
shall withhold the release of mortal remains of any deceased person solely
on account of any outstanding dues in his name, as claimed by the clinical
establishment.
Duty to release the 
mortal remains of 
a deceased person. 
CHAPTER III 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
 
10 
 
15 
6. Any clinical establishment that fails to release the mortal remains of a
deceased person to the applicant in contravention of the provisions of this
Act shall be punishable for a first offence with imprisonment which may
extend to six months, or a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or
both, and for any second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which
may extend to one year, or a fine which may extend to twenty- five lakh
rupees, or both.
Punishment for 
failure to release 
the mortal remains 
of the deceased 
person solely on 
account of any 
outstanding dues. 
 
20 
7. Where, on a complaint made by the applicant, it is found after due process
that an application made under sub-section (1) of section 4 was rejected by
the nodal officer solely on account of any outstanding dues in the name of
the deceased person as claimed  by the clinical establishment, such  nodal
officer shall be punished for a first offence with imprisonment which may
extend to six months, or a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or
both, and for any second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which
may extend to one year, or a fine which may extend to twenty- five lakh
rupees, or both.
Punishment for 
refusal to grant 
consent for release 
of the mortal 
remains of the 
deceased person 
solely on account 
of any outstanding 
dues. 
 46 of 2023
 
 
25 8. Any offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and triable by a
court not inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or the Court of a
Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, exercising jurisdiction under the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 in the area where the applicant
resides or where the clinical establishment is situated.
Cognizance of 
Offences. 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
9. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of,
and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing in this sub- se ction shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that he exercis
ed all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where an
offence under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved
that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Ex
planation.—For the purposes of this section— 
(a) “
company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Offences by 
companies. 

4 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Right of clinical 
establishments 
to recover 
outstanding 
dues.
10. Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the right of any clinica l
establishment, whether statutory or contractual, to recover any outstanding
dues from any person.
 
5 
. 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
12. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
s
uch provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as ma y
a
ppear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
P
rovided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2
) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of
Parliament in such manner as may be prescribed.
 
10 
 
15 
Power to make 
rules.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2
) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the sessi on
or
 the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; however, any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
 
20 
 
25 

5 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The primary objective of the Release of Mortal Remains 
by Clinical Establishments Bill, 2024 is to ensure the dignified 
release of mortal remains from clinical establishments to the 
next of kin or authorized persons without undue delay or 
harassment solely on account of outstanding dues  in the name 
of the deceased person . This legislation aims to address the 
grievances of families , who face difficulties in claiming the 
bodies of their loved ones due to pending hospital bills.  It aims 
to uphold the dignity of the deceased and provide relief to 
grieving families by ensurin g a clear and efficient process for 
the release of mortal remains without any undue delay. The Bill 
also seeks to establish accountability and streamline procedures 
within clinical establishments  by making it imperative for the 
clinical establishments to appoint a nodal officer to process the 
application for release of mortal remains and ensure the handing 
over of the remains to the family of the deceased. The clinical 
establishments are also duty bound to not withhold the remains 
of a person solely on account of outstanding dues claimed by 
them. This Bill also provides for strict penalties for non -
compliance of its provisions. 
H
ence, this Bill. 
KARTIKEYA SHARMA 

6 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Cl
ause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
provisions through an order to remove any difficulties likely to arise in 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill, if enacted. Clause 13 of the 
Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
in the purposes of the Bill.  
2. A
s the orders and rules will relate to matters of details only, the
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to protect the right of the  next of kin or authorized persons to 
 receive the mortal remains of deceased individuals 
 without undue delay and prevent harassment 
 by clinical establishments on account of 
 outstanding dues and for matters 
 connected therewith or 
 incidental thereto.
__________ 
(Shri Kartikeya Sharma, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)—043–10.02.2025 