1
THE ORPHANS (RESERV ATION OF POSTS IN GOVERNMENT
ESTABLISHMENTS AND WELFARE) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts in Government Establishments and formulation of
welfare schemes and programmes for orphans and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Orphans (Reservation of Posts in Government
Establishments and Welfare) Act, 2018
(2) It shall apply to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XLIX of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 26TH JULY, 2019
5

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointing authority", means the authority empowered in an establishment
to make appoitment to service of post;
(b) "appropriate Government's means,—
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any established wholly or
substantially financed by that Government, the Central Government;
(ii)  in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or
substantially financed by that Government, or any local authority, the State
Government;
(c) "establishment" means every body or authoirty founded, owned, controlled,
managed or financed by the appropriate Government and includes the following,—
(i) any body or authority established by or under a Central Act or a State
Act or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the Government
or a local authority, or a Government company as defined in section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013, and includes a Department of the Government; or
(ii)  any company or body corporate of association or body of individuals,
firm, cooperative or other society, association, trust, agency or institution.
(d)  "Group 'A' post" means a post which is classified as such by the President
in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to aricle 309 of the Constitution or
by or under any Act of Parliament and includes an equivalent post in any establishment;
(e)  "orphan" means an individual who has lost both parents through death or
disappearance, abandonment or desertation by, or separation;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "scientific or technical post" includes, post for which qualification in natural
sciences or exact sciences or applied sciences or technology are essential and the
incumbent of such post shall have to use his or her knowledge in such sciences for
discharge of duties.
CHAPTER II
R
ULES AND REGULATIONS FOR RESERV ATIONS
3. (1) The appropraite Government shall reserve such percentage of posts for the
orphans for appointment in civil services by direct recruitment and promotion, in such
manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The vacancy reserved for orphans under sub-section (1) shall be filled in such
manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, there shall be no reservation
where appointments are made—
(i) for a period of less than forty-five days;
(ii) for work charged post required for any emergency relief work; and
(iii) to posts higher than the lowest grade of Group 'A' posts and to posts
classified as scientific or technical posts;
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, include or omit
any institution of national importance and Indian Institutes of Management from the purview
Definitions.
Reservation
of posts for
orphans
appointment
in civil
services.
No
reservations
in certain
cases.
18 of 2013.

3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
of this Act and on the publication of the notification, such institution shall be deemed to be
included in or as the case may be, omitted under this Act.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
5. Notwithstanding the provision of section 3, appointment to an unreserved vacancy
shall be open to all eligible persons including a person belonging to the orphan category.
6. (1) The maximum age limit fixed for direct recruitment to a service or post shall be
increased by five years for the orphans.
(2) The maximum age limit fixed for promotion to a post, if any, shall be increased by
five years for the orphans.
Provided that no relaxation shall be available where the maximum age limit for promotion
has been fixed above fifty years.
7. The examination fee or application fee, determined for recruitment to a service or
post through competitive examination or otherwise, may be reduced to such extent for the
orphans, as may be prescribed.
8. The vacancies reserved for the orphans shall be filled by the orphans only.
9. Where posts in an establishment are to be abolished and as a result thereof, the
services of certain persons are required to be either surrendered or terminated, no such
surrender or termination shall be made in respect of the orphans, if it results in lowering their
representatioin in relation to the percentage of reservation fixed for them.
CHAPTER III
M
EASURES BY GOVERNMENT
10. The appropriate Government shall take steps to secure full and effective participation
of orphans and their inclusion in society which may include:
(i) taking such measures as may be necessary to protect the rigths and interests
of orphans, and facilitate their access to reservations as framed by that Government by
issuing orphan certificate in such manner as may to prescribed.
(ii) formulation of welfare schemes and programmes which are sensitive and
non-discriminatory towards orphans.
(iii) taking steps for the rescue, protection and rehabilitation of orphans to
address the needs of such persons; and
(iv) developing and organzing training programmes to advance the competence
of the orphans for appointment to services and posts.
CHAPTER IV
O
BLIGATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS AND OTHER PERSONS
11.  (1) Every establishment shall designate an officer of such rank, as may be prescribed,
to function as a liaison officer for the purpose of ensuring that  the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder are not contravened.
(2) The liaison officer shall, from time to time, inspect and verify the documents,
records and reports with respect to appointments of the orphans made by the appointing
authority by direct recruitment or promotion.
(3) Where the liaision offier is satisifed that any establishment has contravened the
Appointment
to unreserved
vacancy.
Relaxations of
age.
Fees
concession.
Reserved
vacancies to
be filled by
orphans only.
Abolition of
posts in an
establishment.
Measures to
be taken by
appropriate
Government.
Appointment
of a Liaison
officer.

4
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any direction or instruction issued. he
shall submit a report of such contravention to the head of the establishment.
(4) On receipt of the report of contrventiion under sub-section ( 3), the head of
establishment shall take such disciplinary action against the person responsible for such
contravention as may be prescribed.
12. Every appointing authority, shall maintain documents and records, and furnish
every year a report on the appointments of the orphans made by direct recruitment and
promotion to the appropriate Government in such manner and at such time, as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER V
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
13. Whoever intentionally,—(i) makes a false claim that he is an orphan; or
(ii) issues a false orphans certificate shall be liable for punishment for a term, which
may extend to three years; and
14. Where any person responsible for implementing the provisions of this Act or the
rules made thereunder, intentionally breaches any of such provisions, he shall be liable for
disciplinary action under the service rules.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force.
16. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the appropriate
Government or any local authority or any officer of the Government in respect of anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act
and any rules made thereunder.
17. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the percentage of posts for reservation and the manner of reservation under
sub-section (1) of section 3;
(b) the manner of filling vacancies under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(c) the extent of reduction in examination fee and application fee under section 7;
(d) the rank of the officer to be designated as the liaison officer under
sub-section (1) of section 11.;
(e) the documents and records to be maintained and the time and manner of
furnishing report under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(f) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
Maintenance
of records by
appointing
authority.
Penalties for
false claim.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Protection
against legal
proceedings.
Power to
move rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As of 2017, India did not have an official figure on the number of orphans in this
country. The latest number is estimated around 20 million, based on a study carried out by
the SOS Children's Village Faridabad based NGO by analyzing data from the National Family
Health Survey-3, in 2011. This vacuum is itself a testament to the treatment orphans face.
Though orphans have an identity while staying at orphanages, once they turn 18,
society renders them useless. Without government identification, birth certificates, or
residential proofs, it is almost impossible for them to access higher opportunities for education
or employment. Therefore, it is important for the Government to recognize orphans as socially
and economically deprived groups and provide them with reservations. Additionally, given
that India has the world's largest youth population it is imperative that the Government,
through Job reservation, brings orphans one steps close towards empowerment and the
youth of our country towards a brighter future.
NARESH GUJRAL
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 10 of the Bill, inter alia, provides for formulation of welfare schemes and
programmes for the orphans, rehabilitation of orphans and developing and organizing training
programmes to advance the competence of the orphans for appointment to services and
posts.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
However, it is not possible at this stage as to the exact amount which is likely to be incurred
towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the purpose.
7

8
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the aforesaid provisions are
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—2362RS(S3)—02-08-2019.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts in Government Establishments and formulation of
welfare schemes and programmes for orphans and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Naresh Gujral,  M.P .)