Bill No. XLIX of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
Short title
and
commencement.
THE RIGHT OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the right of Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Act
2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by Notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the
Principal Act), For section 74 the following section shall be substituted, namely,—
(1) The Central Government shall constitute a body to be known as the National
Commission for Persons with Disabilities, to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform
the functions assigned to, under the Act.
Establishment
of National
Commission
for Persons
with
Disabilities.
5
10

2
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following Members nominated by the Central
Government,—
(a) a Chairperson, who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or High
Court and is a person with Benchmark Disability;
(b) two Commissioners, who have special knowledge and expertise in matters
relating to rehabilitation as Members; and
(c) a Member-Secretary, who is or has been an officer not below the rank of Joint
Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government of India;
(3) The Chairperson or the shall be assisted by an Advisory Committee comprising of
not more than eleven members drawn from the experts from different disabilities in such a
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) The Chairperson and the Members shall hold office as such for a term of three years
from the date of assumption of office.
Provided that no Chairperson or Member shall hold office for more than two terms;
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the service
including pension, gratuity, and other retirement benefits of the Chairperson and Members
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
3. In the Principal Act, for section 79, the following section shall be substituted namely:
(1) The State Government shall constitute a body to be known as the State Commission
for Persons with Disabilities to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the function
assigned to, under the Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following persons nominated by the State
Government:—
(a) a Chairperson who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court
and is a person with Benchmark disability;
(b) two Commissioners, who have special knowledge and expertise in matters
relating to rehabilitation as Members, and
(c) an officer not below the rank of the Secretary to the State Government as the
Member Secretary.
(3) The Chairperson or the Chief Commissioner shall be assisted by an Advisory
Committee comprising of not more than five members drawn from the experts from different
disabilities in such a manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(4) The Chairperson or the Chief Commissioner and the Members shall hold office as
such for a term of three years from the date of assumption of office and shall be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided that no Chairperson or Chief Commissioner or a Member shall hold office for
more than two terms.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the service
including pension, gratuity, and other retirement benefits of the Chairman or the Chief
Commissioner and Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Establishment
of State
Commission
for persons
with
Disabilities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In India, as per Census 2011, out of the 121 crore population, about 2.68 crore
persons, which is 2.21 percent of the total population, are recognized as "Persons with
Disabilities. In the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, many special provisions
have been made to promote the rights of Persons with Disabilities, under which the
Chief Commissioner or the State Chief Commissioner plays a crucial role in implementing
these provisions. For ensuring effective implementation of the provisions under this
Act, a strong institutional mechanism is required. This Bill seeks to amend the provisions
under sections 74 and 79 of the Act to establish the National Commission for persons
with Disabilities and the State Commission for Persons with Disabilities respectively.
The Bill aims to facilitate in meeting our international obligation to the United Nation's
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability and its national obligation to all
the fellow citizens.
Hence, this Bill.
KUMARI SELJA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clauses 2 and 3 of the Bill inter alia provide for salary and allowances payable to
the Commissioners and Members of the National Commission for Persons with
Disabilities and the State Commission for Persons with Disabilities respectively. The
Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However
it is not possible, at present, to quantify the funds that may be involved at this stage.
The expenditure for State Commission for persons with disabilities would be
borne by the State Govt.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITY ACT, 2016
CHAPTER XII
CHIEF COMMISSIONER AND STATE COMMISSIONER FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES
74. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Chief Commissioner
for persons with Disabilities (hereinafter referred to as the ‘‘Chief Commissioner’’ for
the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification appoint two Commissioners to
assist Chief Commissioner, of which one Commissioner shall be a persons with disability.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chief Commissioner
unless he has special knowledge or practical experience in respect matters relating to
rehabilitation.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Chief
Commissioner and Commissioners shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(5) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of officers
and other employees required to assist the Chief Commissioner in the discharge of his
functions and provide the Chief Commissioner with such officers and other employees
as it thinks fit.
(6) The officers and employees provided to the Chief Commissioner shall discharge
their functions under the general superintendence and control of the Chief Commissioner.
(7) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and
employees shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(8) The Chief Commissioner shall be assisted by an advisory committee comprising
of not more than eleven members drawn from the experts from different disabilities in
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
* * * * * *
79. (1) The State Government may, by notification, appoint a State Commissioner
for Persons with Disabilities (hereinafter referred to as the "State Commissioner") for
the purposes of this Act.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the State Commissioner
unless he has special knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to
rehabilitation.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the State
Commissioner shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(4) The State Government shall determine the nature and categories of officers
and other employees required to assist the State Commissioner in the discharge of his
functions and provide the State Commissioner with such officers and other employees
as it thinks fit.
(5) The officers and employees provided to the State Commissioner shall discharge
his functions under the general superintendence and control of the State Commissioner.
5
Appointment
of Chief
Commissioner
and
Commissioners.
Appointment
of State
Commissioner
in States.

6
(6) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and
employees shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(7) The State Commissioner shall be assisted by an advisory Committee comprising
of not more than five members drawn from the experts in the disability sector in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
* * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
————
(Kumari Selja, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4331RS(S3)—11-12-2019.