THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE BUNDELKHAND
REGION OF THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the Bundelkhand region of the State of
Uttar Pradesh for the puprose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities and Poor farmers and for the
development, exploitation and proper utilization of its resources and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the Bundelkhand
region of the State of Uttar Pradesh Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XLIX of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH NOVEMBER, 2016
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriate by law provide, as special financial assistance
to the Bundelkhand region of the State of Uttar Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes
of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India, for the purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,
Other Backward Classes, Minorities and Poor farmers and for the development, exploitation
and proper utilization of the resources in the Bundelkhand region of the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law made by the Parliament or for time being in force.
Special
Financial
Assistance to
Bundelkhand
region of
State of Uttar
Pradesh.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Bundelkhand region of the State of Uttar Pradesh is socially, educationally and
economically backward. For the purposes of finding solutions to the problems of poverty,
unemployment, and illiteracy and for proper utilization of the resources of the region and for
the welfare of the weaker sections of the society, new developmental schemes are required to
be expeditiously started in a time bound manner. Being a border state, Bundelkhand region of
the State of Uttar Pradesh holds strategic importance and fulfilling its developmental needs
is in national interest. Therefore, it is necessary that the Central Government should provide
special financial assistance to the Bundelkhand region of the State of Uttar Pradesh for its
all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the development and
exploitation of its extensive natural resources. Such a step of providing financial assistance
to this regions shall help the nation to become more and more strong and developed.
Hence this Bill.
VISHAMBHAR PRASAD NISHAD
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India every year, as Parliament may be due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the region of Bundelkhand in the State of Uttar Pradesh to
meet the cost of such developmental schemes as may be undertaken by the State with the
approval of the Government of India. The Bill, therefore, if, enacted is likely to involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to
the Bundelkhand region of the State of Uttar Pradesh. As the sums of moneys which will
given to the Bundelkhand region of the State of Uttar Pradesh as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government are identified, it is not possible to give at this stage
the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated
Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of
India.

GMGIPMRND—3192RS(S3)—18.11.2016.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the Bundelkhand region of the State of
Uttar Pradesh for the puprose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities and Poor farmers and for the
development, exploitation and proper utilization of its resources and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad, M.P.)