AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XLIX of 2025
THE IMMORAL TRAFFIC (PREVENTION) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 2025 
A  
 BILL 
 further to amend the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956. 
      BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
 India as follows:– 
  5 
1. ( 1)  This Act may be called the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Amendment
Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
c
ommencement. 

2 
Amendment 
of section 2. 
 2. In the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 2, after clause ( i), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely,—
"(ia) “trafficking in person” means the recruitment, 
transportation, transfer, harbouring or obtaining of person, by means 
of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, 
kidnapping, fraud, deception, abuse of power or of a position of 
vulnerability or of giving or receiving of payments or benefits to 
achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, 
for the purpose of exploitation. 
Explanation 1 .—The expression "exploitation" includes, 
exploitation for prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation, 
forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, 
servitude or the removal of organs and the consent of a victim of 
trafficking in persons to the intended exploitation set forth in clause 
(ia) shall be irrelevant where any of the means mentioned in clause 
(ia) have been used. 
Explanation 2 .—The expression 'trafficking in person' includes 
recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or obtaining of a 
child for the purpose of exploitation even if it does not involve any of 
the means as mentioned in clause (ia)". 
5
 
1
0 
1
5 
2
0 
104  of  1956. 
Insertion of 
new section 
5A 
Punishment 
for 
trafficking  in 
person. 
3. I n the principal Act, after section 5, the following new section shall be
inserted, namely:—
"5A. Any person who commits trafficking in person shall be 
punished with imprisonment for life.". 2
5 

3 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
  The menace of child trafficking in our country has been growing at an 
alarming pace. The common reasons for child traffic king range from economic 
deprivation, lack of employment opportunities, low social status (more common 
for girls), low education level and general awarene ss, disadvantageous socio-
cultural norms, gender and minority discrimination etc. The prevalence of child 
trafficking is high in poverty stricken areas of the country. 
Traffickers force young girls into prostitution, an d other men, women, and 
children are held in debt bondage and face forced l abour working in brick kilns, 
rice mills, factories, homes as domestic servants, or as beggars or in hazardous 
occupations etc. The traffickers of young girls are  often those women who 
themselves have been trafficked and who use their p ersonal relationships and trust 
in people in their villages to recruit additional girls. 
A large number of children are abducted every year of which a sizeable 
number remain untraced according to a report by the  National Human Rights 
Commission of India. The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has 
estimated that the majority of children trafficked are engaged in hazardous 
occupations. 
Although the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956  is in place to address 
the issue of human trafficking. The Act only refers  to trafficking for prostitution, 
hence does not provide comprehensive protection for  children. The Act also does 
not provide clear definition of "trafficking". Thus , there is an imperative need to 
define, trafficking and to enhance the punishment f or the heinous offence to 
protect children and others against trafficking. 
Hence this Bill. 
 
                                                               KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU. 
 
  
  

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956. 
_____________ 
(Dr. Kanimozhi  NVN Somu, M.P.) 
  RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–347–08.12.2025 