AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XLIX of 1999

THE PATENTS (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
A
BILL
further to amend the Patents Act, 1970.
Bgit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Patents (Second Amendment) Act, 1999. Short title and

commence-
(2) It shall come into force’on such date as the Central Government may, by ment.

notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of
that provision.

39 of 1970. 2. In the Patents Act, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the Substitution of
words “High Court” occurring in sections 21, 43 and 71 and the word “Court” occurring certain words
in sections 21 and 71, the words “Appellate Board” and “Board” shall respectively be ae corte

substituted. and “Court”.


Amendment of
section 2.

2

3. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),—

(a) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—

“(a) “Appellate Board” means the Appellate Board referred to in section
116;

(ab) “assignee” includes an assignee of the assignee and the legal
representative of a deceased assignee and references to the assignee of any
person include references to the assignee of the legal representative or assignee
of that person;

(ac) “capable of industrial application”, in relation to an invention, means
that the invention is capable of being made or used in any kind of industry;’;
(b) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

‘(d) “convention country” means a country or a country which is member
of a group of countries or a union of countries or an Inter-governmental
organisation notified as such under sub-section (7) of section 133;’;

(c) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(g) “food” means any article of nourishment for human consumption
and also includes any substance intended for the use of infants, invalids or
convalescents as an article of food or drink;’;

(4) in clause (i),—

(i) in sub-clause (i), for the words “Union territory of Delhi”, the words -
“National Capital Territory of Delhi” shall be substituted;

(ii) for sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely:—

“(ii) in relation to the State of Arunchal Pradesh and the State of
Mizoram, the Gauhati High Court (the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh);”;

(iii) in sub-clause (v), for the words “Union territory of Goa, Daman
and Diu”, the words “State of Goa, the Union territory of Daman and Diu”
shall be substituted;

(०) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

‘(ia) “international application” means an application for patent made
in accordance with the Patent Cooperation Treaty;’;

“(f) for clause (j), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—

‘() “invention” means a new product or process involving an inventive
step and capable of industrial application;

(ja) “inventive step” means a feature that makes the invention not
obvious to a person skilled in the art;’;

(g) for clause (m), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(m) “patent” means a patent granted under this Act;
(h) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

(oa) “Patent Cooperation Treaty” means the Patent Cooperation Treaty «
done at Washington on the 19th day of June, 1970 as amended and modified
from time to time in terms of articles 47 and 69 of that Treaty;’;

(i) for clause (u), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

(४) “prescribed” means,—

(A) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed by
rales made by the High Court;


3
(B) in relation to proceedings before the Appellate Board,
prescribed by rules made by the Appellate Board; and
(C) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act.'.
4. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(a) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

" (b)an invention the primary or intended use or commercial exploitation
of which could be contrary to law or morality or which causes serious prejudice
to human, animal or plant life or health or to the environment;”;

(b) in clause (८), after words “an abstract theory”, the.words “or discovery of
any living thing or non-living substance occurring in nature” shall be added;
(०) clause (g) shall be omitted;
(4) in clause (i),—
(i) after the word “prophylactic”, the words “diagnositc, therapeutic”,
shall be inserted;
(ii) the words “or plants” shall be omitted;
(e) after clause (7), the following clauses shall be added, namely:—
“(j) plants and animals other than micro-organisms in whole or any part

thereof including seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological
processes for production or propagation of plants and animals;

(k) a mathematical or business method or a computer program or
algorithms;

(1) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic
creation whatsoever including cinematographic works and television
productions;

[89 mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or method
of playing game;

(n) a presentation of information;

(०) topography of integrated circuits.”.

5. In section 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following Explanation
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “chemical process” includes
biochemical, biotechnological and microbiological process.’;
6. In section 7 of the principal Act, after sub-section (J), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Every international application for a patent as may be filed designating
India shail be deemed to be an application under this Act.”.
7. In section 8 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—

(i) in the opening portion after the words “he shall file along with his
application”, the’ words “subsequently within such period as the Controller
may, for good and sufficient reasons allow” shall be inserted;

(ii) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(a) a statement setting out detailed particulars of such application;
and”;

Amendment of

of section 7.

of section 8.


4

(iii) in clause (b), the words “details of the nature referred to in”, the
words “detailed particulars as required under” shall be substituted;

(b) for sub-section (2), the following section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2) At any time after an application for patent is filed in India and till
the grant of patent or refusal to grant of patent is made thereon, the Controller
may also require the applicant to furnish details relating to the processing of
the application in a country outside India, and in that event the applicant shall
furnish information available to him to the Controller within thirty days from
the date of receipt of the communication requiring such furnishing of
information or within such further period as the Controller may, for good and
sufficient reasons, allow.”.

Amendment 8. In section 10 of the principal Act,—
of section 10. . .
(a) in sub-section (4), after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted,

namely:—

“(d) be accompanied by an abstract to provide technical information on
the invetion:

Provided that—

(i) the Controller may amend the abstract for providing better
information to third parties; and

(ii) if the applicant mentions a biological material in the
specification which may not be described in such a way as to satisfy
clauses (a) and (b), and if such material is not avilable to the public, the
application shall be completed by depositing the material to an authorised
depository institution as may be notified by the Central Government in
the Official Gazette and by fulfilling the following conditions, namely:—

(A) the deposit of the material shall be made not later than
the date of the patent application in India or if a priority is claimed
not later than the date of such priority;

(B) all the available characteristics of the material required
for it to be correctly identified or indicated is included in the
specification including the name, address of the depository
institution and the date and number of the deposit of the material
at the institution;

(C) access to the material is available in the depository
institution only after the date of the application for patent in India
or if a priority is claimed after the date of the priority;

(D) disclose the source and geographical origin of the

biological material in the specification, when used in an
invention.”.

(b)after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4A) In case of an international application designating India,—

(i) the title, description, drawings, abstracts and claims filed with
the application shall be taken as the complete specification for the
purposes of this Act; and

(ii) the filing date of the application and its complete specification
processed by the patent office as designated office or elected office shall
be the international filing date accorded under the Patent Cooperation
Treaty.”;


5

(c) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“(5) The claim or claims of a complete specification shall relate to a
single invention, or to a group of invention linked so as to form a single
inventive concept, shall be clear and succinct and shall be fairly based on the
matter disclosed in the specification.”.

9. In Chapter IV of the principal Act,— Amendment of
Chi Ww

(a) for the Chapter heading “Examination of Applications”, the following sper
chapter heading shall be substituted, namely:—

“PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS”;
(8) before section 12, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—

“118. (1) Applications for patents shall be kept secret for a period of Publication of
eighteen months as from the date of filing or date of priority, whichever is _ #PPlications
earlier. |

(2) Except when a secrecy direction is given under section 35, every
application for a patent shall, on the expiry of the period as specified in sub-
section (J), shall be published.

(3) The publication of every application for a patent shall be notified in
the Official Gazette.

(4) In case a secrecy direction has been given in respect of an application
under section 35, then it shall be published after the expiry of the period of
eighteen months or when the secrecy direction has ceased to operate, whichever
is later.

(5) The publication of every application under this section shall include
the particulars of the date of application, number of application, name and
address of the application identifying the application and an abstract.

(6) Upon publication of an application for a patent under this section—

(a) the depository institution shall make the biological material
mentioned in the specification available to the public;

(b) the patent office may, on payment of such fee as may be
prescribed, make the specification and drawings, if any, of such
application available to the public.

11B. (7) No application for a patent shall be required to be examined Request for
unless the applicant or other interested person makes a request in the prescribed ©x@mmation.
manner for such examination within forty-eight months from the date of filing
of the application for patent.

(2) In case of applications filed before the commencement of the Patents
(Second Amendment) Act, 1999, a request for examination shall‘be made by
the applicant or any other interested person within a period of twelve months
from the date of such commencement or within forty-eight months from the
date of application, whichever is later.

(3) In case the applicant or any other interested person does not make a
request for examination of the application for a patent within the period as
specified under’sub-section (1), the application shall be treated as withdrawn
by the applicant:

Provided that—

(i) the applicant may, at any time after the filing of the application
but before the grant of the patent, withdraw the application made by
him; and


6

(ii) in a case where a secrecy direction has been issued under
section 35, the request for examination may be made within forty-eight
months from the date of revocation of the secrecy direction.”.

Amendment 4 10. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
of न्‍
(a) (i) for the portion beginning with the words “When the complete
specification” and ending with the words “specification relating thereto”, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
“When a request for examination has been made in respect of an application
for a patent in the prescribed manner under sub-section (1) of section 118, the
application and other documents related thereto.”.
(ii) in clause (a), for the words “specification relating thereto”, the words
“oher documents related thereto” shall be substituted.
(6) in sub-section (2), for the words “specification relating thereto”, the words
“other documents related thereto” shall be substituted.
Amendment 11. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words “as the Controller
of section 13. may direct” shall be omitted.
Subsstituton of 12, For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
new section namely:—
for section 15.
Power of Con- "15. Where the Controller is satisfied that the application or any specification
troller to refuse or any other document filed in pursuance thereof does not comply with the
applications in requirements of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, the Controller may require
certain cases. the application, specification or the other document as the case may be, to be amended
to his satisfaction before he proceeds with the application or refuse the application
on failure to do so.".
Amendment 13. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words, brackets, letter
of section 17. and figure “clause (b) of sub-section (7) of” shall be emitted.
Amendment ३4. In section 21 of the principal Act,—
of section 21. (७) in sub-section (7), for the portion beginning with the words “fifteen months”
and ending with the words “of this section”, the words “twelve months from the
date on which the first statement of objections to the application or complete
specification is forwarded to the applicant by the Controller,” shall be substituted.

(9) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;

(c) in sub-section (3),—

(i for the words, brackets and figures “fifteen months specified in sub-
section (J) or the extended period, as the case may be,", the words “twelve
months” shall be substituted;

(ii) for the words “fifteen months or one extended period, as the case
may be”, the words “twelve months” shall be substituted;

(a) in sub-section (4), for the words “fifteen months, or as the case may be,
the extended period, until the expiration of", the words “twelve months to" shall be
substituted.

Amendment 15. In section 22 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the words “eighteen months",
of section 22. the words “twelve months" shall be substituted.
Amendment 16. In section 23 of the principal Act, for the words “filed in pursuance thereof”,

of section 23. the words “as accepted by the Controller along with the other documents filed by the
applicant in pursuance thereof” shall be substituted.
Amendment 17. In section 25 of the principal Act,—
of section 25. (a) in sub-section (7), after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—


7

“() that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mention
the source or geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;

(0 that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete
specification is anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise,
available within any local or indigenous community in any country,”;

(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “shall give”, the words “may, if so desired,
give” shall be substituted;

(©) in sub-section (3), after the words “shall be taken of any”, the words
“personal document or secret trial or” shall be added.

18. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the words “to any person
or class of persons specified in the directions” shall be omitted.

19. In section 36 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) The question whether an invention in respect of which directions have
been given under section 35 continues to be relevant for defence purposes shall be
reconsidered by the Central Government at intervals of twelve months or on a request
made by the applicant which is found to be reasonable by the Controller and if, on
such re-consideration it appears to the Central Government that the publication of
the invention would no longer be prejudicial to the defence of India or in case of an
application filed by a foreign applicant it is found that the invention is published
outside India it shall forthwith give notice to the Controller to revoke the direction
and the Controller shall thereupon revoke the directions previously given by him.”.

20. In section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause (c), the word “or” shall be inserted at the end;
(b) after clause (c), the following clause be inserted, namely:—

“@) the application has not been found to be in contravention of any of
the provisions of the Act,”.

21. In section 45 of the principal Act, for the sub-section (/), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, every patent shall
be dated as of the date on which the application for patent was filed.”

22. For section 48 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“48. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and the conditions
specified in section 47, a patent granted after the commencement of the Patents
(Second Amendment) Act, 1999 shall confer upon the patentee—

(व) where the subject matter of the patent is a product, the exclusive
Tight to prohibit third parties who do not have his consent from the act of
making using, offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes that
product in India;

(b) where the subject matter of the patent is a process, the exclusive
right to prohibit third parties who do not have his consent from the act of
using that process and from the act of using, offering for sale, selling or
importing for those purposes the product obtained directly by that process in
India:

Provided that the product obtained is not a product in respect of which no
patent shall be granted under this Act.”.

Amendment
of section 35.

Amendment
of section 36.

Amendment
of section 43.

Amendment
of section 45.

Substitution of
new section
for section 48.
Rights of
Patentees.


Amendment of

section 50.

Amendment

of section 53.

Amendment

of section 57.

Amendment

of section 59,

Amendment
of section 60.

Amendment

of section 64,

8

23. In-section 50 of the principal act, in sub-section (2), for the words “make, use,
exercise and sell the patented invention”, the words and figures “the rights conferred by
section 48” shall be substituted.

2A. in section 53 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“(1 Subject to the provisions of this Act, the term of every patent granted
under this Act shall be twenty years from the date of filling of the application
for patent.” ;

(9) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be added, namely:—

"(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, on cessation of the patent right due to non-payment of renewal
fee or on-expiry of the term of patent, the subject matter covered by the said
patent shall not be entitled to any protection.".

25. In section 57 of the principal Act—

(a) in sub-section (1), after the word “specification” occurring at both the
places, the words “or any document related thereto” shall be inserted;

(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “or a specification”, the words “or a
complete specification or any document related thereto” shall be substituted;

(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall substituted, namely:—.

“(3) Any application for leave to amend an application for a patent or a
complete specification or a document related thereto under this section made
after the acceptance of the complete specification and the nature of the proposed
amendment may be advertised in the Official Gazette if the Controller deems
it fit to do so.”.

26. In section 59 of the principal Act, for sub-section (7), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) No amendment of an application for a patent or a complete specification
or any document related thereto shall be made except by way of disclaimer, correction
or explanation, and no amendment thereof shall be allowed, except for the purpose *
of incorporation of actual fact, and no amendment of a complete specification shall
be allowed the effect of which would be that the specification as amended would
claim or describe matter not in substance disclosed or shown in the specification
before the amendment, or that any claim of the specification as amended would not
fall wholly within the scope of a claim of the specification before the amendment.”.

27. In section 60 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “one year”, the words “eighteen months”
~ shall be substituted;

(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
28. In section 64 of the principal Act,—
(a) sub-section (1):—
(i) the proviso to clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) the proviso to clause (e) shall be omitted;
(iii) the proviso to clause (f) shall be omitted;
(iv) after clause (0), the following clauses shall be added, namely:—


1 of 1872

9

“(p) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly
mention the source or geographical origin of biological material used
for the invention;

(q) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete
specification was anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or
otherwise, available within any local or indigenous community in any
country.” ;

(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the words “secret use”, the words
“secret use, personal document or secret trial” shall be substituted.

29. In section 67 of the principal Act, for sub-section (4), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:— है

“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), it shall be lawful
for the Controller to keep the register of patents or any part thereof in computer
floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form subject to such safeguards as may be
prescribed.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, a
copy of, or extracts from, the register of patents, certified to be a true copy under the
hand of the Controller or any officer duly authorised by the Controller in this behalf
shall, in all legal proceedings be admissible in evidence;

(6) In the event the the Register is kept wholly or partly in computer floppies,
diskettes or any other electronic form,—

(a) reference in this Act to an entry in the Register shall be deemed to
include reference to a record of particulars kept in computer floppies, diskettes
or any other electronic form and comprising the Register or part of the
Register;

(b) references in this Act to particulars being registered or entered in the
Register shall be deemed to include references to the keeping of record of
those particulars comprising the Register or part of the Register in computer
floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form; and

(c) references in this Act to the rectification of the Register are to be
read as including references to the rectification of the record of particulars
kept in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form and
comprising the Register or part of the Register.”

30. In section 68 of the principal Act, for the words “the Controller within six months
from the commencement of this Act, or the execution of the document, whs:uever is later
or within such further period not exceeding six months in the aggregate”, the words “the
Controller within six months from the execution of the document or within such further
period” shall be substituted.

31. In section 72 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-
section shall be added, namely:—

“(3) If the record of particulars is kept in computer floppies, diskettes or any
other 21 ctronic form, sub-sections(/) and (3) shall be deemed to have been complied
with if the public is given access to such computer floppies, diskettes or any other
electronic form or printouts of such record of particulars for inspection.” .

32, In section 76 of the principal Act,—

(a) for the words “Central Government”, the words “Central Government,
Appellate Board” shall be substituted;

Amendment
of section 67.

Amendment
of section 68.

Amendment
of section 72.

Amendment
of section 76.


10

(b) in clauses (a) and (0), the words and figures “ or under the Indian Patents
and Designs Act, 1911” shall be omitted.

Amendment of 33. In section 78 of the principal Act, after the words “complete specifications”,
section 78 the words “or other documents related thereto” shall be inserted.

Amendment of 34. To section 80 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the following proviso
section 80 shall be added at the end, namely:—

“Provided that the party desiring a hearing makes the request for such hearing
to the Controller at least ten days in advance of the expiry of the time limit specified
in respect of the proceeding.”.

Amendment of 35. In secton 84 of the principal Act,—
section 84

(a) in sub-sections (7) and (3), after the-words “alleging that the’’, the words
“patented invention has not been worked in India or that the” shall be inserted;

(b)in sub-section (5), after the words “satisfied that the’”’, the words “patented
invention has not been worked in India or that the” shall be inserted.

Amendment of 36. In section 85 of the principal Act, after clause (iii), the following clause shall be
section 85 inserted, namely.—--

“(iv) except in case of a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme
urgency or in case of public non-commercial use or on establishment of a ground of
anti-competitive practices adopted by the patentee, as to whether the applicant has
made efforts to obtain a licence from the patentee on reasonable commercial terms
and conditions and whether such efforts have not been successful within a reasonable
period as the Controller may deem fit,”.

Omnssion of 37. Sections 86, 87 and 88 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
sections 86,

87 and 88

Amendment of 38. In section 89 of the principal Act,—

section 89

(a) for sub-section (J), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“(1) Where, in respect of a patent, a compulsory licence has been granted,
the Central Government or any person interested may, after the expiration of
two years from the date of the order granting the first compulsory licence,
apply to the Controller for an order revoking the patent on the ground that the
patented invention has not been worked in India or that reasonable requirements
of the public with respect to the patented invention have not been satisfied or
that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonable price.”
(b)in sub-section(3) after the words “if satisified that the”, the words “patented

invention has not been worked in India or that the” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 39. In section 90,—
section 90 (a) in the opening portion, for the words and figures “sections 84, 86 and 89",
the words and figures “sections 84 and 89” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (a),—

(i) the opening words “if, by reason of the default of the patentee to
manufacture in India to an adequate extent and supply on reasonable terms
the patented article or a part or the patented article which is necessary for its
efficient working or” shall be omitted;

(ii) in sub-clause (ti), the words “from manufacture in India” shall be
omitted;
(०) in clause (b), the brackets and words “(whether before or after the
commencement of this Act)” shall be omitted;
(d) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(bb) if the patentee imposes a condition upon the grant of licences

under the patent to provide exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to ;

the validity of patent or coercive package licensing.”

2 of 1911


(e) clause (d) shall be omitted;

हे (f) in clause (९), for the words “by the patentee or other persons referred
to in the preceding clause” the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“by—
(i) the patentee or persons claiming under him; or
(ii) persons directly or indirectly purchasing from him; or

(iii) other persons against whom the patentee is not taking or has
not taken proceedings for infringement ”.

40. In section 91 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words and figures
“section 84, section 86 or section 89, as the case may be, is made on the ground”, the
words and figures “section 84 or section 89, as the case may be, is made on the grounds
that the patented invention has not been worked in India or on the ground” shall be
substituted.

41. In section 92 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), the words and figures”,
section 86” shall be omitted.
42. In section 93 of the principal Act,—
(a) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;
() for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: —
“(4) Where two or more patents are held by the same patentee and an
applicant for a compulsory licence establishes that the reasonable requirements
of the public have not been satisfied with respect to some only of the said
patents, then, if the Controller is satisfied that the applicat cannot efficiently
or satisfactorily work the licence granted to him under those patents without
infinging the other patents held by the patentee and if those patents involve
important technical advancement of considerable economic significance in
relation to the other patents, he may, by order, direct the grant of a licence in
respect of the other patents also to enable the licensee to work the patent or
patents in regard to which a licence is granted under section 84,”.
43. In section 95 of the principal Act, in sub-section (J), after clause (iii), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

“(iv) that the licence granted is a non-exclusive licence;
(v) that the right of the licensee is non-assignable;

(vi) that the licence is for the balance term of the patent unless a shorter term
is consistent with public interest;

(vii) that the licence is granted with a predominent purpose of supplying in
the Indian market and in the case of semi-conductor technology, the licence granted
is to work the invention for public non-commercial use and in the case, the license
granted to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process to
be anti-competitive licensee shall be permitted to export the patented product.”

44, After section 95 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—

“95A. (1) On an application made by the patentee or any other person deriving
title or interest in the patent, a compulsory licence granted under section 84 may be
terminated by the Controller, if and when the circumstances that gave rise to the
grant thereof no longer exist and such circumstances are unlikely to recur:

Provided that the holder of the compulsory licence shal] have the right to
object to such termination.

(2) While considering an application under sub-section (/), the Controller
shall take into account that the interest of the person who had previously been granted
the licence is not unduly prejudiced.

Amendment of
section 91.

Amendment of
section 92.

Amendment of
section 93,

Amendment of
section 95,

Insertion of
new section
95A.
Termination of
compulsory
licence.


Amendment
of section 96.

Amendment
of section 97.

Amendment
of section 99.
Amendment
of section 100.

Insertion of
new section
101.

Insertion of
new section
104A.
Burden of
Proof in case
of suits
concerning
infringement.

12
45. In section 96 of the principal Act, to sub-section (3), the following proviso'shall

be added at the end, namely:—

“Provided that the licence granted by the Controller shall be non-assignable
except with the assignment of the respective patents.”.

46. In section 97 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—

(a) for the words “or class of patents in force that it is necessary or expedient
in the public interest”, the words “in force in circumstances of national emergency
or circumstances of extreme urgency, it is necessary or in case of public non-
commercial use” shall be substituted;

(b) for the word “terms” occurring in clauses (i) and (ii), the words “terms
and conditions” shall be substituted.

47. In section 99 of the principal Act, sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
48. In section 100 of the principal Act,—
(a) the proviso to sub-section (3) shall be omitted;

(b) in sub-section (5), for the words “unless it appears to the Government that
it would be contrary to the public interest so to do”, the words “except in
circumstances of extreme urgency or of national emergency or for non-commercial
use” shall be substituted;

(c) in sub-section (6), for the words “right to sell the goods”, the words “right
to sell, on non-commercial basis, the goods” shall be substituted.

49. In section 101 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—

{i) the words “, whether before or after the commencement of this Act,”
shall be omitted;

(ii) the brackets and words “(including payments by way of minimum
royalty)” shall be omitted;

(b) in sub-section (2), the brackets and words “(including payments by way
of minimum royalty)”, shall be omitted;

(c) in sub-section (3), in clause (b), the words “including payments by way of
minimum royalty” shall be omitted.

50. After section 104 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

namely:—

“104A. (1) In any suit for infringement of a patent, where the subject matter
of the patent is a process for obtaining a new product, the burden of proving that a
new and identical product is not made by that process shall be on the alleged infringer
if a substantial likelihood exists that the identical product is made by the process,
and the proprietor, of the patent or a person deriving title or interest in the patent
from him has been unable through reasonable efforts to determine the process actually
used:

Provided that the proprietor of the patent or a person deriving title or interest
in the patent from him first proves that the product is identical to the product directly
obtained by the patented process.

(2) In considering whether a party has discharged the burden imposed upon
him by sub-section (7), the court shall not require him to disclose any manufacturing
or commercial secrets, if it appears to the court that it would be unreasonable to do
so.”.


13

51. After section 107 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, insertion of
namely:— new section
107A,
“107A. For the purposes of this Act— Certain acts
not to be
(a) any act of making or using a patented invention within three years considered as
before the expiry of the term of the patent by any person for the purpose of __ infringement.
development and submission of information to any regulatory authority
responsible for grant of marketing approval for the product of invention;

(b) importation of patented products by any person from a person who is
duly authorised by the patentee to sell or distribute the product,
shall not considered as an infringement of patent rights.".
52, Section 108 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (7) thereof, Amendment of

and after sub-section (J), as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, section 108.
namely:—

“(2) The court may also order that the goods which are found to be infringing
and materials and implements, the predominant use of which is in the creation of
infringing goods shall be destroyed without payment of any compensation.".

53. Section 112 of the principal Act, shall be omitted. Omigson of
section 112,
54, For Chapter XIX of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be substituted, Substitution of
namely:— new Chapter
for Chapter
“CHAPTER XIX XIX,

APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE BOARD

116. (1) Subject to the provisions of thisAct, theAppellate Board established Appellate
under section 83 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 shall be the Appellate Board for Board.
the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Board shall exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act:

Provided that the Technical Member for the purposes of this Act shall
have the qualifications specified in sub-section (2).

(2) Aperson shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member for
the purposes of this Act unless he—

(a) has at least five years held the post of Controller under this Act or
has exercised the functions of the Controller under this Act for at least five
years; or

(b) has been for at least ten years functioned as a Registered Patent
Agent and possesses a degree in engineering or technology or a masters degree
in science from a recognised university or equivalent; or

(c) has, for at least ten years, been an advocate of a proven specialised
experience in practising law relating to patents and designs.

117.(1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories —_Staffof
of the officers and other employees required to assist the Appellate Board in the Appellate
discharge of its functions under this Act and provide the Appellate Board with हु
such officers and other employees as it may think fit.

(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers
and other employees of the Appellate Board shall be such as may be prescribed.

(3) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge
their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairman in the manner as
may be piescribed.


Appeals to
Appellate
Board.

Procedure and
powers of
Appellate
Board.

Bar of
jurisdiction of
courts, etc.

Procedure for
application for
rectification
etc. before
Appellate
Board.

Appearance of
Controller in
legal
proceedings.

14

117A. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in sub-section (3), no appeal
shall lie from any decision, order or direction made or issued under this Act by the
Central Government, or from any act or order of the Controller for the purpose of
giving effect to any such decision, order or direction.

(2) An appeal shall lie to the Appellate Board from any decision, order or
direction of the Controller or Central Government under section 15, section 16,
section 17, section 18, section 19, section 20, section 25, section 27, section 28,
section 51, section 54, section 57, section 60, section 61, section 63, section 66,
sub-section (3) of section 69, section 78, section 84, section 89, section 93, section
96 and section 97.

(3) Every appeal under this section shall be in the prescribed form and shall be
verified in the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the decision,
order or direction appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.

(4) Every appeal shall be made within three months from the date of the
decision, order or direction, as the case may be, of the Controller, or within such
further time as the Appellate Board may in accordance with the rules made by it
allow.

117B. The provisions of sub-sections (3) to (6) of section 84, section 87, section
92, section 95 and section 96 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 shall apply to the Appellate
Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the
discharge of its functions under the Trade Marks Act, 1999.

117C. No court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, exercise any
jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub-section
(2) of section 116 or section 117D.

117D. (1) An application for rectification of the register made to the Appellate
Board under section 71 shall be in such form as may be prescribed.

(2) Acertified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating
to a patent under this Act shall be communicated to the Controller by the Board and
the Controller shall give effect to the order of the Board and shall, when so directed,
amend the entries in, or rectify, the register in accordance with such order.

117E. (1) The Controller shall have the right to appear and be heard—

(a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the
relief sought includes alteration or rectification of the register or in which any
question relating to the practice of the patent office is raised;

(b) in any appeal to the Appellate Board from an order of the Controller
on an application for grant of a patent—

(i) which is opposed, and the application is either refused by the
Controller or is accepted by him subject to any amendments,
modifications, conditions or limitations, or

(ii) which has been opposed and the Controller considers that his
appearance is necessary in the public interest,

and the Controller shall appear in any case if so directed by the Appellate Board.

(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Controller may, in lieu
of appearing, submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars
as he thinks proper of the proceedings before him relating to the matter in issue or of
the grounds of any decision given by him or of the practice of the patent office in
like cases, or of other matters relavant to the issues and within his knowledge as the
Controller, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.


15

117F. In all proceedings under this Act before the Appellate Board, the costs Costs of Con-
of the Controller shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the Controller shall not troller in pro-

त ceedings be-
be ordered to pay the costs of any of the parties. fore Appellate
Board,

1176. All cases of appeals against any order or decision of the Controller and Transfer of
all cases pertaining to rectification of register, pending before any High Court, shall pending
be transferred to the Appellate Board from such date as may be notified by the Proceedings
Central Government in the Official Gazette and the Appellate Board may proceed Appellate
with the matter either de novo or from the stage it was so transferred.”. हु

55. In section 120 of the principal Act, for the words “five hundred rupees”, the Amendment of

words “ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted. section 120.
56. In section 122 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “one thousand — Amendment of
rupees”, the words “twenty thousand rupees” shall be substituted. section 122.
57. In section 123 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 123

(a) for the words “five hundred rupees”, the words “ten thousand rupees”
shall be substituted;

(b) for the words “two thousand rupees”, the words “forty thousand rupees”
shall be substituted.

58, For section 125 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, Substitution of
namely:— new section
for section
125.

“125. (1) The Controller shall maintain a register to be called the register of Register of
patent agents in which shall be entered the names, addresses and other relevant Patent agents.
particulars as may be prescribed of all persons qualified to have their names so
entered under section 126.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), it shall be lawful
for the Controller to keep the register of patent agents in computer floppies, diskettes
or any other electronic form subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed.”.

59, In section 126 of the principal Act,— Amendment of

(a) in sub-section (1),— section 126.

(@ in clause (c),—
(A) for the words “degree from any University”, the words “degree

in science, engineering or technology from any University” shall be
substituted;

(B) in sub-clause (ii), the word “or” shall be added at the end;

(ii) after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(iii) has, for a total period of not less than ten years, functioned either
as an examiner or discharged the functions of the Controller under section 73
or both but ceased to hold any such capacity at the time of making the
application for registration;”;

(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a person
who has been registered as a patent agent before the commencement of the
Patents (Second Amendment) Act, 1999, shall be entitled to continue to be or
when required to be re-registered as a patent agent on payment of the fee as
may be prescribed.”.


16

Amendment of 60. In section 128 of the principal Act,—
section 128. + . . aw +
(a) in sub-section (1), the words “Subject to the provisions contained in sub-

section (3) and to any rules made under this Act” shall be omitted;
(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.

Amendment of 61. In section 130 of the principal Act,—
tion 130.
section (a) for the words “Central Government” wherever they occur, the word
“Controller” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (7), for the word “it”, the word “he” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 62. In section 132 of the principal Act,—
section 132. हि “ . .

(a) in clause (a), the words “or any person, not being a patent agent, who is
duly authorised by the applicant” shall be omitted;

(b) in clause (b), for the words “proceedings under this Act otherwise than by
way of drafting any specification”, the words “hearing before the Controller on
behalf of a party who is taking part in any proceeding under this Act” shall be
substituted.

Amendment 63. In section 133 of the principal Act, the following Explanation shall be inserted
of section at the end, namely: —
133.

‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter “country” includes a group

or union of countries or inter-governmental organisations.’.
Amendment 64. In section 138 of the principal Act,—
on gootion (a) in sub-section (1), after the words “shall furnish”, the words “when required

by the Controller,” shall be inserted;

(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “annexed to the specification or document”,
the words “furnished when required by the Controller” shall be substituted;

(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: —

“(4) An international application filed under Pateht Co-operation Treaty
designating India shall have effect of filing an application for patent under
section 7, section 54 and section 135, as the case may be, and the title,
description, claim and abstract and drawings, if any, filed in the international
application shall be taken as complete specification for the purposes of this
Act.

(5) The filing date of an application for patent and its complete
specification processed by the patent office as designated office shall be the
international filing date accorded under the Patent Co-operation Treaty.

(6) Amendment, if any, proposed by the applicant for an international
application designating India or designating and electing India before
international searching or preliminary examination authority shall, if the
applicant so desires, be taken as an amendment made before the patent office.".

Amendment 65. In section 140 of the principal Act.—

oo (a) in sub-section (1), in clause (iii), after sub-clause (c), the following sub-
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(d) to provide exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to validity
of patent and coercive package licensing,”;
(b) sub-section (5) shall be omitted.
Amendment of 66. In section 141 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), the words “whether made
section 141 before or after the commencement of this Act," shall be omitted.
Amendment of 67. In section 142 of the principal Act,—

section 142.


17

(a) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: —
“(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the
patent office, the fee shall be paid along with the document or within the
prescribed time and the document shall be deemed not to have ben filed at the
office if the fee has not been paid within such time.”;
(b) in sub-section (4), the words “or within the extended period not later than
nine months from the date of recording" shall be added at the end.

68. In section 143 of the principal Act, for the words “or be open to public inspection
at any time before the date of advertisement of acceptance of the application”, the words
“before eighteen months from the date of application or the priority date of the application
or before the same is opened to public inspection" shall be substituted.

69, For section 157A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“157A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central
Government shall—

(a) not disclose any information relating to any patentable invention or
any application relating to the grant of patent under this Act, which it considers
prejudicial to the interest of the security of India;

(b) take any action including the revocation of any patent which it
considers necessary in the interest of the security of India by issue of a
notification in the Official Gazette to that effect.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression “security of
India” means any action necessary for the security of India which—

(i) relates to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are

derived; or

(ii) relates to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war

and to such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or,

indirectly for the purpose of supplying a military establishment; or
(iii) is taken in time or war or other emergency in international relations.".
70. In section 159 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ia) the manner of making the request for examination of an application
for patent under sub-section (/) of section 11B;";
(b) in clause (iii), after the word "manner", the word "time" shall be inserted;
(c) in clause (xi), after the word “maintained”, the words “and the safeguards
to be observed in the maintenance of such register in computer floppies, diskettes or
any other electronic form” shall be inserted;
(b) after clause (xii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(xiia) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the
officers and other employees of the Appellate Board under sub-section (2)
and the manner in which the officers and other employees of the Appellate
Board shall discharge their functions under sub-section (3) of section 117;
(xiib) the form of making an appeal, the manner of verification and the
fee payable under sub-section (3) of section 117A;
(xiic) the form in which, and the particulars to be included in, the
application to the Appellate Board under sub-section (1) of section 117D;";
(c) in clause (xiv), after the word “maintained”, the words, brackets and figures
“under sub-section (1) of the section 125 and the safeguards to be observed in the
maintenance of such register of patent agents on computer floppies, diskettes or any
other electronic form under sub-section (2) of that section;".
71. Section 161 of the principal Act, shall be omitted.

72. In section 162 of the principal Act, sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be omitted.

Amendment of
section 143,

Substitution of
new secton for
secton 157A.
Protection of
Security of
India.

Amendment
of section
159.

Omission of
section 161.
Amendment of

. section 162.,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The law relating to patents is contained in the Patents Act, 1970 which came into
force on the 20th April, 1972. The Act was last amended in March, 1999 to meet India’s
‘obligations under the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) which forms part of the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation
ts )). Apart from the aforesaid amendment, the Act has not undergone any change so
far.fSince 1972, there has been considerable technological innovations and development
of knowledge and the concept of intellectual property as a resource for knowledge-based
industries has become well recognised the world over. Development of technological
capability in India, coupled with the need for integrating the intellectual property system
with international practices and intellectual property regimes, requires that the Act be
modified into a modern, harmonised and user-friendly legislation to adequately protect
national and public interests while simultaneously meeting India’s international oblications
under the TRIPS Agreement which are to be fulfilled by 31st December, 1999

2. Given the importance of the issues, the Government engaged itself in broad-
based and extensive consultations involving different interest groups on aspects critical to
the changes which may be necessary in the Patents Act, 1970.

3. While considering amendment to the Act, efforts have been made to make the law
not only TRIPS complaint but also to provide therein necessary and adequate safeguards for
protection of public intcrest, national security, bio-diversity, traditional knowledge, etc.
Opportunity is also proposed to be availed of for harmonising the procedure for grant of
patents in accordance with international practices and to make the system more user friendly.

4. Some of the salient features of the Bill are as under:—

(a) to define the term “invention” in consonance with international practices
and consistent with TRIPS Agreement,

(b) to modify section 3 of the present Act to include exclusions permitted by
TRIPS Agreement and also subject matters like discovery of any living or non-
living substances occurring in nature in the list of exclusions which in general do
not constitute patentable invention;

(c) to align rights of patentee as per Article 28 of the TRIPS Agreement;

(d) to add provision for reversal of burden of proof in case of infringement suit
on process patent in accordance with Article 34 of the TRIPS Agreement,

(e) to provide a uniform term of patent protection of twenty years for all
categories of invention as per Article 33 of the TRIPS Agreement;

(f) to align the provisions relating to compulsory licensing and to omit
provisions relating to licensing of rights;

(g) to provide provisions relating to parallel import of patented products;

(h) to make a provision for enabling persons other than patent holder to obtain
marketing approval from the appropriate regulatory authorities within three years
before the expiration of the term of the patent;

(i) to incorporate measures for protection of bio-diversities and traditional
knowledge;

(j) to provide an Appelate Board for speedy disposal of appeals and rectification
of register of patent which at present lie before High Court;

(k) to amend the provisions relating to national security.

(1) to amend several provisions of the Act with a view to simplifying and
rationalising the procedures aimed at benefitting users.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes on clauses explain the
various provisions of Bill.

New DELHI, MURASOLI MARAN.
The 16th December, 1999.


Notes on clauses

Clause 1.—Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides for the short title of the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (2) provides for appointment of different dates for commencement
of different provisions of the Bill when enacted, because provisions like those for Appellate
Board are new and require providing of necessary mechanism, which may take some
time.

Clause 2.—This clause provides substitution of the words "High Court" and "Court"
by the words "Appellate Board" and "Board" in sections 21, 43 and 71 and in sections 21
and 71 respectively of the Patents Act, 1970 (hereafter referred to as the Act). In the Bill
it is proposed ia clause 54 to set up an Appellate Board to which appeals on the orders,
decisions or directions of the "Controller" and application for rectification of the register
are to be made.

Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Patents Act, 1970 relating to
definitions and interpretation. While some new definitions which have been added, some
of the existing definitions have been made comprehensive and amplified. The new
definitions which have been added are "Appellate Board", "capable of industrial

Application", "International application", "Inventive Step" and "Patent Cooperation Treaty"
and definitions which are amended are those relating to "assignee", "convention country",
food, "High Court" and "Patent". While it is necessary to define new terminologies used
in this Bill, it has also become necessary to modify some other definitions in accordance
with changing requirements, present practices, etc. Definition of "assignee" has been
amended to include an assignee of the assignee. The group of countries or Union of
Countries or Inter-Governmental Organization have been included in the definition of
convention countries to meet the requirements of international treaties to which India is a
party. The definition of food has been amended to encode interpretation of the existing
provision as applicable to human beings only. "Invention" has been defined to mean a
new product or process involving an inventive step and capable of industrial application
to make it in conformity with Article 27 of the Agreement on Trade Related Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS). The expressions "inventive step" and "capable of industrial
application" have also been defined.

Clause 4.—This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Act which relates to inventions
not patentable. It is proposed to modify some of the provisions in respect of non-patentable
subject matter and also proposes to include some additional matters as non-patentable
under the category of non-patentable subject matter. Sub-clause (a) seeks to substitute
clause (b) of the said section so that invention causing serious prejudice to human beings,
animals or plant or to the environment would not be inventions within the meaning of the
Act. Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend clause (०) of section 3 so as to include discoveries of
any living thing or non-living substance occurring in nature as not inventions patentable.
Method of testing has been removed from the category of non-patentable subject matter
by omission of clause (g) of section 3 as required by Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement.
The scope of the subject matter under clause (1) of seciton 3 has been widened to include
diagnostic and therapeutic methods. But the similar treatment of plants in this category
has been removed from the category of non-patentable inventions as such exclusion is not
permissible under Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement. A new provision has been added to
exclude plants and animals, other than micro-organism in whole or any part thereof
including seeds varieties and species and essentially biological process for production or
propogation of plants and animals from being patentable as these exclusions are permissible
under paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement. Similarly a mathematical or
business method or a computer programme or algorithms, a literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work or any other aesthetic creation including cinematographic works and television
productions, a mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or method or
playing game; a presentation of information and topography of integrated circuits have
been included in this section so as to be ineligible for being patented.

19


20

Clause 5.—This clause seeks to amend section 5 of the Act relating to inventions
where only methods or processes of manufacture are patentable. It is proposed to add an
Explanation to the section clarifying that the expression "chemical process" shall include
biochemical, biotechnological and microbiological processes. Products of such processes
are not presently protected under the Act.

Clause 6.—This clause seeks to insert a new provision in section 7 of the Act which
relates to form of application. It proposes that an international application when it is filed
designating India shall be treated as an application under the Act. The provision is in
conformity with the Patent Cooperation Treaty to which India is a signatory.

Clause 7.—Sub-clause (a) of this clause proposes to amend sub-section (1) of section
8 of the Act which relates to information and undertaking regarding foreign applications
to enable filing of particulars of corresponding applications being prosecuted in other
countries either alongwith the application. Subsequently within such period as the Controller
may, for goods and sufficient reasons allow. It is also proposed to expand the requirement
of submission of such particulars to detailed particulars of the foreign application. By
sub-clause (b), sub-section (2) of section 8 is proposed to be substituted by a provision for
receiving information relating to processing of corresponding application outside India
from the applicant within one month under the direction of the Controller or within such
period as the Controller may permit.

Clause 8.—By this clause some new provisions are proposed to be included under
section 10 which relates to contents of application to make furnishing of abstract of
invention as mandatory for making deposit of biological material mentioned in the
specifications with the authorized depository institution and also for disclosing the source
and geographical origin of the biological material used in the invention.

The proposed new sub-section (4A) seeks to lay down that the title, description
drawings and claims filed in an international application designating India shall be the
complete specification under the Act and the filing date of an application for patent and
its complete specification processed by the Patent Office as designated office or elected
office shall be the international filing date accorded under the Patent Cooperation Treaty.
This provision is in accordance with Patent Cooperation Treaty to which India is a signatory.

Sub-clause (c) seeks to substitute sub-section (5) of section 10 to accommodate a
group of inventions as one invention when having single inventive concept. The provision
is in accordance with Patent Cooperation Treaty to which India is a signatory.

Clause 9.—This clause seeks to insert new section 11 A and 11 B in the Act to
include a system of publication of applications after 18 months of the priority date and a
system of examination on request only. The request can be made by the applicant for
patent or any other interested party. Provisions for withdrawal of application has also
been introduced. Consequent upon the insertion of these new provisions, the heading of
Chapter IV is proposed to be amended to read as Publication and Examination of
Applications.

Clause 10.—This clause proposes to amend section 12 which relates to examination
of application to the effect that the application is to be referred by the Controller to an
examiner for examination only after a request for such examination is received.

Clause 11.—This clause proposes to amend section 13 of the Act which relates to
search for anticipation by previous publication and by prior claim. So as to make
international search mandatory for the examiner which under the existing provisions, is
required only on the direction of the Controller.

Clause 12.—This clause seeks to substitute section 15 which relates to power of
Controller to refuse or require amendment of application. The provision has been simplified
to enable the Controller to require the application, specification or drawings to be amended
to his satisfaction or on failure to do so entails refusal of application.


21

Clause 13.—This clause proposes to amend section 17 as a consequential to the
introduction of the new provision of section 15 by clause 12.

Clause 14.—This clause proposes to amend section 21 of the Act which relates to
the time for putting application in order for acceptance. By this clause the time limit for
putting up an application for patent in order for acceptance has been reduced to twelve
months (with no further extension) from the existing time limit of 15 months, extendable
by 3 months, for expediting grant of patents.

Clause 15.—This clause proposes to amend section 22 of the Act so as to make
changes consequential to the changes proposed in section 21 by clause 14.

Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 23 of the Act which relates to
advertisement of acceptance of complete specification. By this clause it is proposed to
provide that the other documents alongwith the application and the specification as accepted
should made available to public inspection on advertisement of acceptance of complete
specification in the Official Gazette.

Clause 17.—This clause seeks to amend section 25 of the Act relating to opposition
to grant of patent to incorporate two additional grounds for opposition to grant of a patent.
Tt is proposed to mclude non-disclosure or wrongful disclosure of the source of biological
materials and also availability of local or indigenous knowledge oral or otherwise in any

-country as grounds for opposition.

Further it is also proposed that when opposition is not substantially lodged, the
Controller should not be compelled to give hearing to the parties. This is with a view to
avoid dilatory tacties of parties. This scope of sub-section (3) with respect to secret use is
proposed to be extended to incorporate personal documents and secret trial.

Clause 18.—This clause proposes to amend section 35 of the Act which relates to
secrecy directions relating to inventions relevant for defence purposes. It is proposed to
extend the scope of secrecy from partial secrecy with respect to a person or class of
persons to complete secrecy in respect of inventions relevant for defence purpose.

Clause 19.—This clause proposes amendment of section 36 of the Act which relates
to periodical review of secrecy directions. It is proposed to substitute sub-section (1) with
a new sub-section so as to provide for review of secrecy direction after a uniform interval
of one year in place of nine months at the first instance and thereafter twelve months.
Further it is also proposed that on publication of application abroad in case of foreign
applications, the secrecy direction shall be removed by the Central Government.

Clause 20.—This clause proposes to amend section 43 of the Act which relates to
grant and sealing of patent. It is proposed to incorporate a provision for refusal of grant of
Patent by Controller in case the accepted application violates any of the provisions under
the Act.

Clause 21.—This clause proposes to amend section 45 which relates to date of
patent to make the date of patent as date of filing of the application in place of date of
filing of complete specification and to delete the proviso relating to the provisions of
Patents and Designs Act, 1911 which have no relevance now.

Clause 22.—This clause seeks to substitute section 48 of the Act which is for right
of the patentee with a new provision. Under the proposed section, the right of a patentee
on product patent will be extended to prevent importation and that on process patent is
extended to sell and importation of the product directly obtained by the process, provided
that the product itself is patentable under the Act.

Clause 23.—This clause seeks to carry out a consequential amendment in section
50 of the Act which relates to right of co-owners of patents proposed by clause 22.


22

Clause 24.—This clause proposes amendment of section 53 of the Act which relates
to the term of patent. Sub-clause (a) proposes to substitute sub-section (1) so as to lay
down a uniform term of 20 years for every patent granted under the Act from the date of
filing of application for such patent. This provision is proposed in accordance with Article
33 of the TRIPS Agreeement.

Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) to section 53 so as to provide
that once the invention enters into public domain due to non-payment of renewal fee or
expiry of full term, the subject matter is not entitled to protection.

Clause 25.—This clause proposes amendment of section 57 of the Act which relates
to amendment of application and specification to incorporate provision for amendment of
other documents related therewith. Further it is also proposed to make it discretionary to
the Controller to advertise in the Official Gazette of the advertisement of amendment
proposed and the nature of such amendment after acceptance of the complete specification
by him.

Clause 26—This clause seeks to amend section 59 of the Act which provides
supplementary provisions for amendment of application and sepcification so as to allow
amendment for incorporation of actual facts also to be included in the said supplementary
provision.

Clause 27.—This clause proposes to amend section 60 of the Act which relates to
restoration of lapsed patent. Period for restoration is now proposed to be eighteen months
in place of one year. This clause further proposes deletion of sub-section (2) which relates
to patents granted under the Patents and Designs Act, 1911 as the said provision has
become obsolete.

Clause 28.—This clause proposes to amend section 64 of the Act which relates to
revocation of patents. By this clause, proviso to clauses (b), (०) and (f) of sub-section (1)
are proposed to be omitted as those provisos pertain to patents granted under the Patents
and Designs Act, 1911 (since repealed) and have since become obsolete. This clause
further proposes to incorporate two additional grounds for revocation of patents. Non-
disclosure or wrongful mentioning of the source or geographcial origin of biological
material used for the invention is now proposed to be a grounds for revocation of patent.
This measure is taken to protect the bio-diversity of the country. it is further proposed to
include knowledge available to indigenous community in any country as anticipation of
the invention for the purpose of revocation of patent. This measure is taken to protect
folklore or knowledge belonging to local or indigenous community.

Clause 29.—This clause seeks to amend section 67 of the Act which relates to
register of patent. By this clause it is proposed to enable the Controller to maintain the
register of patent or any part thereof in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other
electronic form subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed by rules. It is a meausre to
keep pace with recent developments in the technology and to provide better and quicker
services.

Clause 30.—This clause seeks to amend section 68 of the Act which relates to
registration of the documents like assignments, etc. By this clause, the rigidity in the
provision to make registration within a maximum period of one year from the date of
execution of the documents is proposed to be inade flexible.

Clause 31.—This clause proposes to amend section 72 of the Act which relates to
register of patent to be open for public inspection. This clause provides amendments
which are consequential to the amendment proposed in section 67 by clause 29.

Clause 32.—This clause proposes to amend section 76 of the Act which relates to
restriction on the officers or employees in the Patent Office to furnish information, etc.,
except by the order of the Central Government or Controller or Court. By this clause it is
proposed to add "Appellate Board" to it as consequential to the establishment of Appellate


23

Board by clause 54. This clause further provides deletion of reference to the Patents ‘and
Designs Act, 1911 as which has become obsolete.

Clause 33.—This clause proposes to amend section 78 of the Act which relates to
power of the Controller to correct clerical errors, etc. By this clause the words "or other
documents related thereto" has been sought to be inserted after the words "complete
specifications" in sub-section (1}n order to enable the Controller to correct the said
documents. This is consequential to the amendments proposed in sections 57 and 59.

Clause 33.—This clause proposes to amend section 80 of the Act which relates to
exercise of discretionary powers by Controller. This clause seeks to add a proviso to the
said section so as to lay down that at least 10 days time limit shall be given for requesting
hearing by the party desiring a hearing before the Controller. This provision will enable
the Controller to have timely and effective hearing to the parties.

Clause 35.—This clause proposes to amend section 84 which relates to grant of
compulsory licence on patents. By this clause, additional ground of non-working of patented
invention in India has been included in the grounds for grant of compulsory licence.

Clause 36.—This clause proposes to amend section 85 of the principle Act which
relates to matters to be taken into account in granting compulsory licences. This clause
provides prior approaching to patentee for grant of licence on reasonable terms and
conditions. This clause further provides that such prior approaching is not necessary in
the case of national emergency, extreme urgency, public non-commercial use or on
establishment of a ground of anti competitive practices adopted by the patentee.

Clause 37.—This clause proposes to delete sections 86, 87 and 88 of the Act which
relate to licence of right as these provisions are not in conformity with provisions under
Article 31(a) of the TRIPS Agreement which lays down that use of patent without
authorisation of the patentee to be considered only on individual merit.

Clause 38.—This clause proposes to amendment section 89 of the Act which relates
to revocation of patent by the Controller for non-working. Amendments proposed are
consequential to the amendments proposed in section 84 vide clause 35.

Clause 39.—This clause proposes amendment of section 90 of the Act which provides
circumstances as to when reasonable requirement of the public deemed to be not satisfied.
It is proposed to omit certain words relating to manufacture in India from clause (a) and
clause (d) of section 90 so as to meet the obligations under the TRIPS. Amendments
consequential to the omition of clause (d) are also proposed to be made in clause (e). It
also proposes removal of reference to section 86 which is proposed to be deleted by clause
37. Further. the words whether before or after the commencement of this Act are also
proposed to be deleted from clause (a) of section 90 as the provision under the Patents and
Designs Act, 1911 have become redundant. Further it is also proposed that if the patentee
imposes restrictive conditions while granting a licence the same will also be taken as of
the reasonable requirement of public is not met. .

Clause 40.—This clause proposes amendment of section 91 of the Act which relates
to the power of Controller to adjourn application for compulsory licences in some cases.
Amendments proposed are consequential to the amendments contained in clauses 35 and
37.

Clause 41.—This clause seeks to amend section 92 of the Act which relates to
proceedings for dealing with applications for compulsory licences so as to omit the reference
to section 86 therein. The amendment proposed is consequential to the amendment
contained in clause 37.

Clause 42.— This clause proposes amendment of section 93 of the Act which relates
to the power of Controller in granting compulsory licence. Sub-section (3) which empowers
the Controller to grant compulsory licence of exclusive nature is proposed to be deleted 88
it contravenes clause (d) of Article 31 of TRIPS Agreement.


24

Clause 43.— This clause amendment of section 95 of the Act which relates to terms
and conditions of the compulsory licences. It is proposed to introduce three more clauses
in sub-section (1) so as to enable the Controller to endeavour to secure, the in setting the
terms and conditions of a licence under section 84. The new conditions are that the
compulsory license to be an non-exclusive license, riffht under license is non-assignable,
the licence is to be granted for the balance term of the patent and that the license is
granted for predominant purpose for supply in the India-market. Further licence granted
for semi-conductor technologies is for public non-commercial use and in the case of
establishment of anti-competitive practices adopted by the patentee, licence granted can
be for exporting the goods manufactured. These provisions are proposed in accordance
with Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement.

Clause 44.—This clause incorporate a new provision for termination of compulsory
licence in the Act when the circumstances on which compulsory licence is granted does
not exist and also unlikely to recur after consideration of objection, by the licence holder
and taking into account to his interest. These provisions are porposed to make the law in
conformity with clause (g) of Article 31 of TRIPS Agreement.

Clause 45.— This clause proposes amendment of section 96 of the Act which relates
to licensing of related patents. It imposes a restriction on the licence granted by the
Controller as to be non-assignable This provision is proposed in accordance with clause
(/) of Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement.

Clause 46.— This clause proposes amendment of section 97 of the Act which relates
to special provision of compulsory licence on notification by Central Government. It is
proposed to remove the applicability of the provision to "class of patents" and to substitute
the expression "public interest" with "circumstances of national emergency or circumstances
of extreme urgency". These amendments are proposed in accordance with Article 31 of
the TRIPS Agreement.

Clause 47.— This clause propose omission of sub-section (2) of section 99 as it
relates to the patents granted under the Patents and Designs Act, 1911 and has thus become
redundant.

Clause 48.— This clause proposes amendment of section 100 of the Act which
relates to power of Central Government to use invention for the purpose of Government.
It is proposed to delete the proviso under sub-section (3) which restricts the royalty to four .
per cent. as it is against the provisions of clause (h) of Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement
according to which patent holder must be paid adequate remuneration based on the
circumstances of the case. Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (5) so as to substitute
the words "contrary to public interest’ by the words "circumstances of extreme urgency or
of national emergency or for public non-commercial use" as in those circumstances only
the TRIPS Agreement permits that the patent holder need not be approached when use
without authorisation of the patent holder is granted. Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend sub-
section (6) so as to restrict the right to sell the goods to non-commercial basis. This is
proposed in accordance with Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement.

Clause 49.— This clause proposes amendment of section 101 of the Act which
relates to rights of third parties in respect of use of invention for purposes of Government.
It is proposed to omit the words, "whether before or after the commencement of this Act"
occurring in sub-section (1) as these words have become redundant.

It is also proposed to omit the brackets and words "(including payments by way of
minimum royalty)" occurring in sub-sections (1) and (2) as clause (h) of Article 31 of
TRIPS Agreement provides for payment of adequate remuneration based on the
circumstances of the case.

Clause 50.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 104A in the Act relating to
burden of proof in the cases of infringement suits. It is proposed that in the case of


25

infringement of process patent, the burden of proof in proving that the patent is not infringed
shall be on the alleged infringer in the circumstances specified in the provision. However,
the alleged infringer shall not be required by the court to disclose any manufacturing or
commercial secrets when such disclosure is found to be unreasonable.

Clause 51.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 107A in the Act, relating to
certain acts which are not to be considered infringements. It is proposed that the act of
making or using a patented product for the purpose of development and submission of
information to a regulatory authority regulating marketing approval of the product, shall
not constitute an infringement. This provision is proposed to ensure that generic durg
should be available in Indian market immediately after the expiry of the term of the
concerned patents. It is also proposed that the importation of patented product from the
person who is duly authorised by the patent holder shall not constitute an infringement.
This provision is proposed to ensure availability of the patented product in the Indian
market at minimum international market price.

Clause 52.—This clause proposes to amend section 108 of the Act which relates to
reliefs in suits for infringement. It is proposed to provide additional reliefs to the patentee
in case of infringement of the patent by giving power to the court for destruction of
infringing goods and implements used for the production of said goods. This provision is
proposed in accordance with Articles 41 and 61 of the TRIPS Agreement.

Clause 53.—This clause seeks to omit section 112 of the Act which relates to
restriction on powers of the court to grant injunction in cases of infringement of patent
endorsed or deemed to be endorsed with the words “Licences of rights”. This is
consequential to the proposal made in clause 37 for deletion of section 86, 87 and 88
which are related to “Licences of rights”.

Clause 54.—This clause seeks to substitute Chapter XIX of the Act with a new
chapter with the heading “Appeals to the Appellate Board”. Intellectual property is a
specialized subject needing special expertise to deal with. Appellate Tribunal for
Intellectual property is a recognised system in many countries of the world. Having regard
to the expected increase in the volume of appeals in the future and in order to have speedy,
timely and less expensive disposal of appeals, etc. it is proposed to utilize the services of
the Intellectual Property Rights Appellate Board sought to be established under section 83
of the proposed Trade Marks Act, 1999 with experienced hands in the field of patent law
as Technical Member. It is proposed that appeals from the decisions of the Controller shall
be to the Appellate Board instead of to the High Court. Further, rectification of the register
which is now before the High Court under section 71 of the Act is proposed to be brought
before Appellate Board. The new Chapter deals with constitution, functions and powers
of the Appellate Board, qualifications of Technical Member, arrangement of staff for the
Appellate Board, appeals, procedure of Appellate Board, bar of jurisdiction of other forum
in matters within the jurisdiction of the Appellate Board, procedure for rectification before
Appellate Board, appearance of Controller before the Appellate Board, cost of Controller
and transfer of proceedings pending before High Court.

Clause 55.—This clause proposes amendment of section 120 of the Act which
relates to unauthorized claim of patent right. It is proposed to raise the amount of fine
from five hundred rupees to ten thousand rupees based on the prevalent socio-econonic
conditions and the nature of the offence.

Clause 56.—This clause proposes amendment of section 122 of the Act which
relates to refusal or failure to supply information about patents to the Controller or Central
Government when asked to do so, It is proposed to raise the fine for such refusal or failure
from one thousand rupees to twenty thousand rupees based on the prevalent socio-economic
conditions and the nature of the offence.

Clause 57.—This clause proposes to amend section 123 of the Act which relates to
practice by non-registered patent agents. It is proposed to raise the amount of fine in that


26

respect from five hundred rupees to ten thousand rupees for first offence and from one
thousand rupees to twenty thousand rupees for any subsequent offence based on the changed
socio-economic conditions and the nature of the offence.

Clause 58.—This clause seeks to substitute a new section for section 125 of the Act
which relates to register of Patent agent by a new provision. The provision will enable
maintenance of the register of Patent agent to be kept in computer floppies or diskettes or
in any other electronic form. This provision is made to keep pace with the modern
technology computer floppies or diskettes or any other electronic form. It is proposed to
lay down necessary safeguards by way of rules.

Clause 59.—This clause proposes amendment of section 126 which relates to the
qualifications for registration as a patent agent. By this clause it is proposed that in place
of qualification of degree from any University, the qualification of degree in science,
engineering or technology from any University to be substituted to ensure that the patent
agents are sufficiently qualified to deal with scientific and technological matters contained
in the specification. Further it is proposed that Controller and examiners of the Patent
Offices having functioned on such for 10 years will be qualified for registration of Patent
agents. This provision is made to enrich the profession of the patent agent with the
experienced personnel of the patent office. At present the said profession is deficient of
experienced personals for which applicants for patents are suffering and their intersts are
prejudiced. Sub-clause (0) seeks to substitute sub-section (2) so as to provide for re-
registration of existing patent agents.

Clause 60.—This clause proposes to amend section 128 of the Act which relates to
subscription and verification of certain documents by patent agent. The amendment
proposed will remove the restriction an patent agents in respect of signing and verification
of documents produced before the patent office.

Clause 61.—This clause proposes amendment of section 130 of the Act which relates
to removal of name from the register of Patent agent and restoration thereof. By this
amendment, the power to remove and restore any name from or in the register of patent
agent is proposed to be vested in Controller in place of the Central Government.

Clause 62.—This clause seeks to amend section 132 of the Act which relates to
savings in respect of the persons authorised to act as patent agents so as to preclude any
person other than the applicant and patent agents from drafting of specification or acting
or appearing before the Controller other than the applicants for patents. It also restricts the
activities of advocates, who are not patent agents to practice before the Controller. They
will be permitted only to take part in the hearing before the Controller.

Clause 63.—This clause proposes amendment of section 133 of the Act which relates
to notification as to convention countries. It is proposed to include an explanation to this
section to the effect that for the purpose of the whole chapter which relates to international
arrangement, the expression country will include a group or union of country or inter-
governmental organization. This proposal is made to make reciprocal arrangement with
bodies like European Union, ARIPO, etc. which are members of international treaties like
Paris Convention or W.T.O. to which India is also a party.

Clause 64.—This clause proposes amendment of section 128 of the Act which
provides supplementary provisions as to convention application. By this proposal the
furnishing of certified copy of basic application to the Controller is made optional and
with the discretion of the Controller. It is also proposed that the translation of the documents
in foreign language can only be furnished to the Controller on his requisition. It is also
proposed that international application filed under Patent Cooperation Treaty designating
India shall have the effect of filing an application for patent in India and the title,
description, claims, abstract and drawings filed in the International application are to be
taken as complete specification under the Act.


27

It is further proposed that the amendments before international searching or
preliminary examination authority shall be taken as amendment before the Patent Office
when desired by the applicant. These proposals are in accordance with provisions under
Patent Cooperation Treaty to which India is a signatory.

Clause 65.—This clause proposes amendment of section 140 of the Act which relates
to avoidance of certain restrictive conditions in contractual licenses. Sub-clause (a) of this
clause seeks to specify that exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to validity of
patent or corecive package licensing shall be a restrictive condition.

Sub-clause (b) seeks to omit sub-section (5) of this section as it refers to the Indian
Patent and Designs Act, 1911 which has since become obsolete.

Clause 66.—This clause seeks to amend section 141 of the Act which relates to
determination of certain contracts so as to omit the words “whether made before or after
the commencement of this Act” occurring in sub-section (1) thereof as these words have
become redundant.

Clause 67.—This clause proposes amendment of section 147 of the Act which relates
to payment of fees. By this clause it is proposed that fee can be paid alongwith documents
requiring payment of such fee or within a period prescribed under the rules. It if further
proposed to increase the time limit to nine months for payment of arrear of renewal fees in
the event the patent is granted after two years from the date of filing.

Clause 68.—This clause proposes amendment of section 143 of the Act which relates
to restriction upon publication of the specification. The amendment proposed are
consequential to the provisions contained in the proposed new sections 11A and section
23 vide clauses 9 and 16 respectively.

Clause 69.—This clause proposes amendment of section 157A of the Act relating to
the protection of security of India. By this clause it is proposed that the Central Government
can take any action including revocation of a patent in the interest of the security of India
under clause (b) of this section by issuing a notification in Official Gazette.

Clause 70.—This clause seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 159 of the Act
relating to rule making powers of the Central Government. By this clause some additional
matters in respect of rule making powers are sought to be enumerated as consequential to
the other amendments proposed in the Act. These inter alia include the safeguards to be
observed in maintenance of register of patent and register of patent agents in computer
floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic media the manner of making a request for
examination of an application for patent, the salaries and allowances and other conditions
of service of the officers and other employees of the Appellate Board under sub-section
(2) of section 177 and the manner in which such officers and employees shall discharge
their functions under sub-section (3) of that section, the form of making an appeal, the
manner of verification and fee payable under sub-section (3) of section 117A, the form in
which, and the particulars to be included in, the application to the Appellate Board under
sub-section (1) of section 117D and the time of payment of fees.

Clause 71.—This clause proposes to omit section 161 of the Act which relates to
special provision with respect to certain applications deem to have been refused under the
Patents and Designs Act 1911, as the said section has become obsolete.

Clause 72.—This clause seeks to omit sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 162 of the
Act which relates to repeal of Act 2 of 1911 as those provisions have become obsolete.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to substitute Chapter XIX of the Patents Act, 1970 with
anew Chapter XIX relating to appeals to the Appellate Board. The new section 116 sought
to be inserted by the aforesaid Chapter XIX, inter alia, provides that the Appellate Board
for the purposes of the Patents Act, 1970. The Board will have Technical Member(s)
fulfilling the qualifications laid down in sub-section (2) of the proposed section 116.
Proposed new section 117 sought to be inserted in new Chapter XIX empowers the Central
Government to determine the nature and categories of officers and other employees required
to assist the Appellate Board in the discharge of its functions under the Act and provide
the Board with such officers and other employees as the Central Government may think
fit. Sub-section (2) of the said section 117 provides that the salaries and allowances and
conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall be such
as may be prescribed by the Central Government by rules.

2. It is estimated that, for meeting the salaries, allowances, etc., of the officers and
other employees of the Appellate Board, a recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees
46.27 lakhs per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India will be incurred. It is also
estimated that an expenditure to the tune of rupees 3.50 lakhs shall be incurred, by way of
a non-recurring expenditure, towards meeting the establishment of the office of the
Technical Members, Staff, additional furniture required by the Trade Marks Registry,
vehicles, telephones, etc., during the financial year 1999-2000.

28


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill, inter alia, seeks to insert new sections 11A and 11B in the
Patents Act, 1970. Clause (b) of sub-section (6) of the proposed new section 11A relating
to publication of applications for patents empowers the Central Government to prescribe
the fee payable by any person to the patent office for obtaining specifications and drawings,
if any, in respect of such applications. Sub-section (1) of proposed new section 11B relating
to request for examination empowers the Central Government to lay down the rules relating
to the manner of making applications for getting the applications for patents examined.

2. Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to amend section 67, relating to register of patents and
particulars to be entered therein, of the Patents Act, 1970. Sub-section (5) of the aforesaid
section 67 as sought to be inserted provides that it shall be lawful for the Controller to
keep the register of patents or any part thereof in computer floppies or diskettes or any
other electronic forms. This sub-section empowers the Central Government to lay down
the safeguards in relation to maintenance of such register of patents in computer floppies,
ete.

3. Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new Chapter XIX relating to appeals
with the Appellate Board for Chapter XIX of the Patents Act, 1970. Sub-section (2) of
section 117 sought to be inserted in the aforesaid Chapter XIX empowers the Central
Government to make rules governing the salaries and allowances and conditions of service
of the officers and employees of the Appellate Board referred to in section 116 of the Act.
Sub-section (3) of section 117 empowers the Central Government to make rules governing
the manner in which the officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge
their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairman. Sub-clause (3) of the
new section 117A relating to appeals to Appellate Board proposed to be inserted in the
aforesaid new Chapter XIX empowers the Central Government to specify the form in
which an appeal may be made and also the manner of verification of such memorandum
of appeal. Sub-section (1) of new section 117D relating to procedure for application for
rectification, etc., before the Appellate Board proposed to be inserted in the said Chapter
XIX empowers the Central Government to specify the form in which an application for
rectification shall be made.

4. Clause 58 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section 125 relating to register of
patent agents for the existing section 125. Sub-section (1) of the new section 125 empowers
the Central Government to make rules specifying the other relevent particulars in addition
to the name and address of the patent agents to be ended in the register of such agents.
Sub-section (2) of section 125 empowers the Central Government to make rules governing
the safeguards subject to which the register of patent agents shall be maintained in computer
floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form.

5. Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to amend section 126 relating to qualifications for
registration as patent agents. Proposed sub-section (2) of section 126 empowers the Central
Government to make a rules specifying the fee payable for re-registration as patent agents,

6. Clause 67 of the Bill, inter alia, seeks to substitute to sub-section (3) of section
142 relating to fees of the Act. The said sub-section (3) empowers the Central Government
to make rules specifying the time within which any document may be filed in the patent
office.

7. The power of Central Government to make rules under the Act is subject to the
condition of the rules being made after previous publication. The rules are also required to
be laid before Parliament.

8. The power to make rules in respect of the aforesaid matters relate to matters of
procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.

29


Definitions
and inter-
pretation

‘What are not
inventions.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE Parents Act, 1970
(39 oF 1970)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “assignee” includes the legal representative of a deceased assignee, and
references to the assignee of any person include references to the assignee of the
legal representative or assignee of that person;

* * * * *
(9) “convention country” means a country notified as such under sub-section
(1) of section 133;

* * * * *

(g) “food” means any article of nourishment and includes any substance in-
tended for the use of babies, invalids or convalescents as an article of food or drink;
* * * * *

(i) “High Court” means,—

(i) in relation to the Union territory of Delhi and the Union territory of
Himachal Pradesh, the High Court of Delhi;

(ii) in relation to the Union territory of Manipur and the Union territory
of Tripura, the High Court of Assam;
* * * * *

60) in relation to the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu and the
Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, the High Court at Bombay;

* * * * *
(0 “invention” means any new and useful—
(i) art, process, method or manner of manufacture;
(ii) machine, apparatus or other article;
(ili) substance produced by manufacture,

and includes any new and useful improvement of any of them and an alleged

invention;

* * * * *

(m) “patent” means a patent granted under this Act and includes for the pur-
poses of sections 44, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 63, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 78,
134, 140, 153, 154 and 156 and Chapters XVI, XVII and XVIII, a patent granted
under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911;

* * * * *

(u) “prescribed” means, in relation to proceedings before a High Court,
prescribed by rules made by the High Court, and in other cases, prescribed by rules
made under this Act;

* * * * *

CHAPTER IT

Inventions Not PaTENTABLE
३. The following are not inventions within the meaning of this Act,—

* * * * *

30

2 of 1911.


31

(8) an invention the primary or intended use of which would be contrary to
law or morality or injurious to public health;

(c) the mere discovery of a scientific principle or the formulation of an ab-
stract theory;

* * * * *

(g) a method or process of testing applicable during the process of manufac-
ture for rendering the machine, apparatus or other equipment more efficient or for
the improvement or restoration of the existing machine, apparatus or other equip-
ment or for the improvement or control of manufacture;

* * * * *

(i) any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative, prophylactic or other
treatment of human beings or any process for a similar treatment of animals or
plants to render them free of disease or to increase their economic value or that of
their products.

* * * * *

8. (1) Where an applicant for a patent under this Act is prosecuting either alone or
jointly with any other person an application for a patent in any country outside India in
respect of the same or substantially the same invention, on where to his knowledge such
an application is being prosecuted by some person through whom he claims or by some
person deriving title from him, he shall file along with his application—

(a) a statement setting out the name of the country where the application is
being prosecuted, the serial number and date of filing of the application and such
other particulars as may be prescribed; and

(b) an undertaking that, up to the date of the acceptance of his complete speci-
fication filed in India, he would keep the Controller informed in writing, from time
to time, of details of the nature referred to in clause (a) in respect of every other
application relating to the same or substantially the same invention, if any, filed in
any country outside India subsequently to the filing of the statement referred to in
the aforesaid clause, within the prescribed time.

(2) The Controller may also require the applicant to furnish, as far as may be avail-
able to the applicant, details relating to the objections, if any, taken to any such applica-
tion as is referred to in sub-section (1) on the ground that the invention is lacking in
novelty or patentability, the amendments effected in the specifications, the claims al-
lowed in respect thereof and such other particulars as he may require.

* * * * *

10.(1) * * * * *

(5) The claim or claims of a complete specification shall relate to a single invention,
shall be clear and succinct and shall be fairly based on the matter disclosed in the specifi-
cation and shall, in the case of an invention such as is referred to in section 5, relate to a
single method or process of manufacture.

* * * * *

CHAPTER IV

EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS

* * * * *

12. (1) When the complete specification has been filed in respect of an application
for a patent, the application and the specification relating thereto shall be referred by the
Controller to an examiner for making a report to him in respect of the following matters,
namely:—

Information
and undertak-
ing regarding
foreign
applications

Contents of
specifications

Examination
of apphcation.


Search for
anticipation
by previous
publication
and by prior
claim.

Power of
Controller to
Tefuse or
require
amended
applications in
certain cases.

Power of
Controller to
make orders
respecting
dating of
application.

Time for
putting
application in
order for
acceptance.

32

(a) whether the application and the specification relating thereto are in ac-
cordance with the requirements of this Act and of any rules made thereunder;

(b) whether there is any lawful ground of objection to the grant of the patent
under this Act in pursuance of the application,

(c) the result of investigations made under section 13; and
(d and other matter which may be prescribed.

. * * . *
13. (7) * * * ” *

(2) The examiner shall, in addition, make such investigation as the Controller may
direct for the purpose of ascertaining whether the invention, so far as claimed in any claim
of the complete specification, has been anticipated by publication in India or elsewhere in
any document other than those mentioned in sub-section (1) before the date of filing of
the applicant’s complete specification.

* * * * *

15. (1) Where the Controller is satisfied that the application or any specification file
in pursuance thereof does not comply with the requirements of this Act or of any rules
made thereunder, the Controller may either—

(a) refuse to proceed with the application or

(8) require the application specification or drawings to be amended to his
satisfaction before he proceeds with the application.

(2) If it appears to the Controller that the invention claimed in the specification is
not an invention within the meaning of, or is not patentable under, this Act, he shall refuse
the application.

(3) If it appears to the Controller that any invention, in respect of which an applica-
tion for a patent is made, might be used in any manner contrary to law, he may refuse the
application, unless the specification is amended by the insertion of such disclaimer in
respect of that use of the invention, or such other reference to the illegality thereof, as the
Controller thinks fit.

* * * * *

17. (7) * * * * *

(2) Where an application or specification (including drawings) is required to be
amended under clause (8) of sub-section (1) of section 15, the application or specifica-
tion shall, if the Controller so directs, be deemed to have been made on the date on which
the requirement is complied with or where the application or specification is returned to
the applicant, on the date on which it is re-filed after complying with the requirement.

* * * * *

21. (1) An application for a patent shall be deemed to have been abandoned unless
within fifteen months from the date on which the first statement of objections to the
application or complete specification is forwarded by the Controller to the applicant or
within such longer period as may be allowed under the following provisions of this
section the applicant has complied with all the requirements imposed on him by or under
this Act, whether in connection with the complete specification or otherwise in relation to

_ the application:

Explanation.—Where the application or any specification or, in the case of a con-
vention application, any document filed as part of the application has been returned to the


35

ment to the contrary is in force, each of those persons shall be entitled, by himself or his
agents, to make, use, exercise and sell the patented invention for his own benefit without
accounting to the other person or persons.

* * * * *

53. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the term of every patent granted under
this Act shall—

(a) in respect of an invention claiming the method or process of manufacture
of a substance, where the substance is intended for use, or is capable of being used,
as food or as a medicine or drug, be five years from the date of sealing of the patent,
or seven years from the date of the patent whichever period is shorter; and

(5) is respect of any other invention, be fourteen years from the date of the
patent.

* * * * *
CHAPTER X
AMENDMENT OF APPLICATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS

57. (1) Subject of the provisions of section 59, the Controller may, upon application
made under this section in the prescribed manner by an applicant for a patent or by a
patentee, allow the application for the patent or the complete specification to be amended
subject to such conditions, if any, as the Controller thinks fit:

Provided that the Controller shall not pass any order allowing or refusing an appli-
cation to amend an application for a patent or a specification under this section while any
suit before a court for the infringement of the patent or any proceeding before the High
Court for the revocation of the patent is pending, whether the suit or proceeding com-
menced before or after the filing of the application to amend.

(2) Every application for leave to amend an application for a patent or a specifica-
tion under this section shall state the nature of the proposed amendment, and shall give
full particulars of the reasons for which the application is made.

(3) Every application for leave to amend an application for a patent or a specifica-
tion under this section made after the acceptance of the complete specification and the
nature of the proposed amendment shall be advertised in the prescribed manner.

* * * * *

59. (1) No amendment of an application for a patent or a complete specification
shall be made except by way of disclaimer, correction or explanation, and no amendment
thereof shall be allowed, except for the purpose of correcting an obvious mistake, and no
amendment of a complete specification shall be allowed the effect of which would be that
the specification as amended would claim or describe matter not in substance disclosed in
the specification before the amendment, or that any claim of the specification as amended
would not fall wholly within the scope of a claim of the specification before the amend:
ment.

* * * * *

CHAPTER XI
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS

60. (1) Where a patent has ceased to have effect by reason of failure to pay any
renewal fee within the prescribed period or within that period as extended under sub-
section (3) of section 53, the patentee“or his legal representative, and where the patent
was held by two or more persons jointly, then, with the leave of the Controller, one or
more of them without joining the others, may, within one year from the date on which
the patent ceased to have effect, make an application for the restoration of the patent.

Term of patent.

Amendment of
application and
specification
before
Controller.

Supplementary
Provisions 88
to amendment
of application
or specifica-
tion.

Applications
for restoration
of lapsed
patents


Revocation of
patents.

Register of
patents and
particulars to
be entered
therein.

Assignments,
etc., not to be
valid unless in
wniting and
registered.

36

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall also apply to patents granted before.the
commencement of this Act, subject to the modification that for the reference to the pre-
scribed period or to sub-section (3) of section 53, there shall be substituted a reference to
the period prescribed therefor under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911 or to sub-
section (2) of section 14 of that Act.

* * * * *

6A. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, a patent, whether granted
before or after the commencment of this Act, may, on the petition of any person interested
or of the Central Government or on a counter-claim in a suit for infringement of the patent
be revoked by the High Court on any of the following grounds, that is to say—

* * * * *

(0) that the patent was granted on the application of a person not entitled
under the provisions of this Act to apply therefor:

Provided that a patent granted under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911
shall not be revoked on the ground that the applicant was the communicate or the
importer of the invention in India and therefore not entitled to make an application
for the grant of a patent under this Act;

* * * * .

(¢) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specifica-
tion is not new, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India
before the priority date of the claim or to what was published in India or elsewhere
in any of the documents referred to section 13:

Provided that in relation to patents granted under the Indian Patents and De-
signs Act, 1911, this clause shall have effect as if the words “or elsewhere” had
been omitted;

(0 that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specifica-
tion is obvious or does not involve any inventive step, having regard to what was
publicly known or publicly used in India or what was published in India or else-
where before the priority date of the claim:

Provided that in relation to patents granted under the Indian Patents and De-
signs Act, 1911, this clause shall have effect as if the words “"or elsewhere” had
been omitted;

* * * * *

(2 For the purposes of clauses (6) and (0) of sub-section (1),—
(a) no account shall be taken of secret use; and

* * * * *
CHAPTER XIII
REGISTER OF PATENTS
67. (1) * * * * *

(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the register of patents exist-
ing at the commencement of this Act shall be incorporated in, and form part of, the regis-
ter under this Act.

68. An assignment of a patent or. ण 8 share in a patent, a mortgage, licence or the
creation of any other interest in a patent shall not be valid unless the same were in writing
and the agreement between the parties concerned is reduced to the form of a document
embodying all the terms and conditions governing their rights and obligations and the
application for registration of such document is filed in the prescribed manner with the
Controller within six months from the commencement of this Act or the execution of the
document, whichever is later or within such further period not exceeding six months in
the aggregate as the Controller on application made in the prescribed manner allows:

2 of 1911.

2 of 1911.

2 of 1911.


33

applicant by the Controller in the course of the proceedings, the applicant shall not be
deemed to have complied with such requirements unless and until he has re-filed it.

(2) The period of fifteen months specified in sub-section (J) shall, on request made
by the applicant in the prescribed manner and before the expiration of the period so speci-
fied, be extended for a further period so requested (hereafter in this section referred to as
the extended period), so, however, that the total period for complying with the require-
ments of the Controller does not exceed eighteen months from the date on which the
objections referred to in sub-section (1) are forwarded to the applicant.

(3) If at the expiration of the period of fifteen months specified in sub-section (1) or
extended period—

(a) an appeal to the High Court is pending in respect of the application for the
patent for the main invention, or

() in the case of an application for a patent of addition, an appeal to the High
Court is pending in respect of either that application or the application for the main
invention,

the time within which the requirements of the Controller shall be complied with shall, on
an application made by the applicant before the expiration of the said period of fifteen
months or the extended period, as the case may be, be extended until such date as the
High Court may determine.

(4) If the time within which the appeal mentioned in sub-section (3) may be insti-
tuted has not expired, the Controller may extend the period of fifteen months, or as the
case may be, the extended period, until the expiration of such further period as he may
determine: ह

Provided that if an appeal has been filed during the said further period, and the
High Court has granted any extension of time for complying with, the requirements of
the Controller, then, the requirements may be complied with within the time granted by
the Court.

22. Subject to the provisions of section 21, the complete specification filed in pur-
suance of an application for a patent may be accepted by the Controller at any time after
the applicant has complied with the requirements mentioned in sub-section (1) of that
section, and, if not so accepted within the period allowed under that section for compli-
ance with those requirements, shall be accepted as soon as may be thereafter:

Provided that the applicant may make an application to the Controller in the
prescribed manner requesting him to postpone acceptance until such date [not being later
than eighteen months from the date on which the objections referred to in sub-section (1)
of section 21 are forwarded to the applicant] as may be specified in the application, and,
if such application is made, the Controller may postpone acceptance accordingly.

23. On the acceptance of a accomplete specification, the Contoller shall give notice
thereof to the applicant and shall advertise in the Official Gazette the fact that the speci-
fication has been accepted, and thereupon the application and the specification with the
drawings (if any) filed in pursuance thereof shall be open to public inspections.

* * * * *
CHAPTER V
OPPOSITION TO GRANT OF PATENT
25. (1) * * * * *

(2) Where any such notice of opposition is duly given, the Controller shall notify

Acceptance of
complete
specification.

Advertisement
of acceptance
of complete
specification.

‘Opposition to
grant of patent.


Secrecy
directions
relating to
inventions
relevant for
defence
purposes,

Secrecy
directions to be
periodically

reviewed,

Date of patent.

Rights of
patentees.

Rights of co-
owners of
patents,

34

the-applicant and shall give to the applicant and the opponent an opportunity to the heared
before deciding the case.

(3) The grant of a patent shall not be refused on the ground stated in clause (c) of
sub-section (1) if no patent has been granted in pursuance of the application mentioned in
that clause; and for the purpose of any inquiry under clause (d) or clause (¢) of that sub-
section, no account shall be taken of any secret use.

* * * * *

CHAPTER VII

PROVISIONS FOR SECRECY OF CERTAIN INVENTIONS

35. (1) Where, in respect of an application made before or after the commencement
of this Act for a patent, it appears to the Controller that the invention is one of a class’
notified to him by the Central Government as relevant for defence purposes, or, where
otherwise the invention appears to him to be so relevant, he may give directions for pro-
hibiting or restricting the publication of information with respect to the invention or the
communication of such information to any person or class of persons specified in the
directions.

* * * * *

36. (1) The question whether an invention in respect of which directions have been
given under section 35 continues to be relevant for defence purposes shall be re-consid-
ered by the Central Government within nine months from the date of issue of such direc-
tions and thereafter at intervals not exceeding twelve months, and if, on such re-consid-
eration it appears to the Central Government that the publication of the invention would
no longer be prejudicial to the defence of India it shall forthwith give notice to the Con-
troller accordingly and the Controller shall thereupon revoke the directions previously
given by him.

* * * * *

45. (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, every patent shall be
dated as of the date on which the complete specification was filed:

Provided that a patent which is granted in pursuance of an application to which any
directions issued under section 78C of the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911 applied
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be dated as of the date of the
filing of the complete specification or the date of such commencement whichever is later.

* * * * *

48. (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a patent granted before
the commencement of this Act, shall confer on the patentee the exclusive right by him-
self, his agents or licensees to make, use, exercise, sell or distribute the invention in India.

(2) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and the conditions specified
in section 47, a patent granted after the commencement of this Act shall confer upon the
patentee— ¥

(8) where the patent is for an article or substance, the exclusive right by hjm-
self, his agents or licensees to make, use, exercise, sell or distribute such article or
substance in Indja;

(b) where a patent is for a method or process of manufacturing an article or
substance, the exclusive right by himself, his agents or licensees to use or exercise
the method or process in India.

* * * * *

50. (1) * * * *
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in section 51, where two
or more persons are registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, then, unless an agree-

*

2 of 1911.


39

(6) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (5), the provisions of sub-sections (1),
(2), (4) and (5), of section 93 (regarding the powers of the Controller) and of sections 94
and 95 shall apply to licences granted under this section as they apply to licences granted
under section 84.

89. (1) Where, in respect of a patent, a compulsory licence has been granted or the
endorsement “Licences of right” has been made or is deemed to have been made, the
Central Government or any person interested may, after the expiration of two years from
the date of the order granting the first compulsory licence or, as the case may be, the date
of the grant of the first licence under section 88, apply to the Controller for an order
revoking the patent on the ground that the reasonable requirements of the public with
Tespect to the patented invention have not been satisfied or that the patented invention is
not available to the public at a reasonable price.

* * * * *

(3) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requirements of the public with
respect to the patented invention have not been satisfied or that the patented invention is
not available to the public at a reasonable price, may make an order revoking the patent.

* * * * *

90. For the purposes of sections 84, 86 and 89, the reasonable requirements of the
public shall be deemed not to have been satisfied—

(a) if, by reason of the default of the patentee to manufacture in India to an
adequate extent and supply on reasonable terms that patented article or a part of the
patented article which is necessary for its efficient working or if, by reason of the
refusal of the patentee to grant a licence or licences on reasonable terms,—

* * * * *

(ii) the demand for the patented article is not being met to an adequate
extent or on reasonable terms from manufacture in India; or

* * * * *

(d) if the demand for the patented article in India is being met to a substantial
extent by importation from abroad by—

(i) the patentee or persons claiming under him; or
(ii) persons directly or indirectly purchasing from him; or

(iii) other persons against whom the patentee is not taking or has not
taken proceedings for infringement; or

* * * * *

91. (1) Where an application under section 84, section 86 or section 89, as the case
may be, is made on the ground mentioned in clause (c) of section 90 and the Controller is
satisfied that the time which has elapsed since the sealing of the patent has for any reason
been insufficient to enable the invention to be worked on a commercial scale to an ad-
equate extent or to enable the invention to be so worked to the fullest extent is reasonably
practicable, he may, by order, adjourn the further hearing of the application for such
period not exceeding twelve months in the aggregate as appears to him to be sufficient for
the invention to be so worked:

Provided that in any case where the patentee establishes that the reason why a
patented invention could not be worked as aforesaid before the date of the application
was due to any State or Central Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder or any order
of the Government imposed otherwise than by way of a condition for the working of the
invention in India or for the disposal of the patented articles or of the articles made by the
process or by the use of the patented plant, machinery, or apparatus, then, the period of
adjournment ordered under this sub-section shall be reckoned from the date on which the

Revocation of
patents by the
Controller for
non-working.

When
reasonable
requirements
of the public
deemed not
satisfied,


Procedure for
dealing with
applications
under sections
84, 86 and 89.

Powers of
Controller in
granting
compulsory
licences.

Terms and
conditions of
compulsory
licences.

Licensing of

related patents.

Special
provision for
compulsory
licences on
notification by
Central
Government.

40

period during which the working of the invention was prevented by such Act, rule or
regulation or order of Government as computed from the date of the application,
* * * * *

92. (1) Where the Controller is satisfied, upon consideration of an application un-
der section 84, section 86 or section 89, that a prima facie case has been made out for the
making of an order, he shall direct the applicant to serve copies of the application upon
the patentee and any other person appearing from the register to be interested in the patent
in respect of which the application is made, and shall advertise the application in the
Official Gazette.

* * * * *
93.(1) * * * * *
(3) Where on an application made under section 84, the Controller orders the grant
of a licence, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct that the licence shall
operate—
(a) to deprive the patentee of any right which he may have as patentee to
make, use, exercise or vend the invention or to grant licences under the patent;
(b) to revoke all existing licences in respect of the invention.
* * * * *

95. (1) In settling the terms and conditions of a licence under section 84, the Con-
troller shall endeavour to secure—

(i) that the royalty and other remuneration, if any, reserved to the patentee or
other person beneficially entitled to the patent, is reasonable, having regard to the
nature of the invention, the expenditure incurred by the patentee in making the
invention or in developing it and obtaining a patent and keeping it in force and other
relevant factors;

(ii) that the patented invention is worked to the fullest extent by the person to
whom the licence is granted and with reasonable profit to him;

(iii) that the patented articles are made available to the public at reasonable

prices.
* * * * *
96 (1) * * * * *

(3) When the Controller is satisfied that the conditions mentioned in sub-section (1)
have been established by the applicant, he may make an order on such terms as he thinks
fit granting a licence under the first mentioned patent and a similar order under the other
patent if so requested by the proprietor of the first mentioned patent or his licensee.

* * * * *

97. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied in respect of any patent or class of
patents in force that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest that compulsory
licences should be granted at any time after the sealing thereof to work the invention or
inventions, it may make a declaration to that effect in the Official Gazette, and thereupon
the following provisions shall have effect, that is to say—

(i) the Controller shall on application made at any time after the notification
by any person interested grant to the applicant a licence under the patent on such
terms as he thinks fit;

(ii) in settling the terms of a licence granted under this section, the Controller
shall endeavour to secure that the articles manufactured under the patent shall be
available to the public at the lowest prices consistent with the patentees deriving a
reasonable advantage from their patent rights.

* * * * *


2 of 1911.

2 of 1911.

37

Provided that the document shall, when registered, have effect from the date of its
execution.

* * * * *

76. An officer or employee in the patent office shall not, except when required or
authorised by this Act or under a direction in writing of the Central Government or the
Controller or by order of a court,—

(2) furnish information on a matter which is being, or has been dealt with
under this Act or under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911; or

(0) prepare or assist in the preparation of a document required or permitted by
or under this Act or under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911, to be lodged in
the patent office; or

* * * * *

78. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sections 57 and 59 as re-
gards amendment of applications for patrents or complete specifications and subject to
the provisions of section 44, the Controller may, in accordance with the provisions of
this section, correct any clerical error in any patent or in any specification or other
document filed in pursuance of such application or in any application for a patent or any
clerical error in any matter which is entered in the register.

* * * * *

84. (1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the date of the sealing
of a patent, any person interested may make an application to the Controller alleging
that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention
have not been satisfied or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a
reasonable price and praying for the grant of a compulsory licence to work the patented
invention.

(2) An application under this section may be made by any person notwithstanding
that he is already the holder of a licence under the patent and no person shall be estopped
from alleging that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented
invention are not satisfied or that the patented invention is not available to the public at
a reasonable price by reason of any admission made by him, whether in such a licence or
otherwise or by reason of his having accepted such a licence.

* * * * *

(5) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requirements of the public with
respect to the patented invention have not been satisfied or that the patented invention is
not available to the public at a reasonable price, may order the patentee to grant a licence
upon such terms as he may deem fit.

* * * * *

86. (1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the date of the sealing
of a patent, the Central Government may make an application to the Controller for an
order that the patent may be endorsed with the words “Licences of right” on the ground
that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention have
not been satisfied or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reason-
able price.

(2) The Controller, if satisfied that’ the reasonable requirements of the public with
respect to the patented invention have not been satisfied or that the patented invention is
not available to the public at a reasonable price, may make an order that the patent be
endorsed with the words “Licences of right”.

Officers and
‘employees not
to furnish
information,
ete,

Power of
Controller to
correct clerical
errors, etc.

Compulsory
licences

Endorsement
of patent with
the words
“Licences of
right”.


Certain patents
deemed to be
endorsed with
the words
“Licences of

right”.

Effect of
endorsement of
patent with the
words
“Licences of

night”

38

(3) Where a patent of addition is in force, any application made under this section
for an endorsement either of the original patent or of the patent of addition shall be
treated as an application for the endorsement of both patents, and where a patent of
addition is granted in respect of a patent which is already endorsed under this section,
the patent of addition shall also be so endorsed.

(4 All endorsements of patents made under this section shall be entered in the
register and published in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the Controller
thinks desirable for bringing the endorsement to the notice of manufacturers.

87. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—

(a) every patent in force at the commencement of this Act in respect of
inventions relating to—

(i) substances used or capable of being used as food or as medicine or
drug;

(ii) the methods or processes for the manufacture or production of any
such substance as is referred to in sub-clause (i);

(iii) the methods or processes for the manufacture or production of
chemical substances (including alloys, optical glass, semi-conductors and
inter-metallic compounds),

shall be deemed to be endorsed with the words “Licences of right” from the commence-
ment of this Act or from the expiration of three years from the date of sealing of the patent
under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911, whichever is later; and

(b) every patent granted after the commencement of this Act in respect of any
such invention as is referred to in section 5 shall be deemed to be endorsed with the
words “Licences of right” from the date of expiration of three years from the date of
sealing of the patent.

(2) In respect of every patent which is deemed to be endorsed with the words “Li-
cences of right” under this section, the provisions of section 88 shall apply.

88. (1) Where a patent has been endorsed with the words “Licences of right”, any
person who is interested in working the patented invention in India may require the paten-
tee to grant him a licence for the purpose on such terms as may be mutually agreed upon,
notwithstanding that he is already the holder of a licence under the patent.

(2) If the parties are unable to agree on the terms of the licence, either of them may
apply in the prescribed manner to the Controller to settle the terms thereof.

(3) The Controller shall, after giving notice to the parties and hearing them and after
making such enquiry as he may deem fit, decide the terms on which the licence shall be
granted by the patentee.

(4) The Controller may at any time before the terms of the licence are mutually
agreed upon or decided by the Controller, on application made to him in this behalf by
any person who has made any such requisition as is referred to in sub-section (1), permit
him to work the patented invention on such terms as the Controller may, pending agree-
ment between the parties or decision by the Controller, think fit to impose.

(5) In the case of every patent in respect of an invention referred to in sub-clause (i),
or sub-clause (ii); of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 87 and deemed to be endorsed
with the words “Licences of right” under clause (a) or clause (0) of that sub-section, the
royalty and other remuneration reserved to the patentee under a licence granted to any
person after such commencement shall in no case exceed four per cent. of the net ex-
factory sale price in bulk of the patented article (exclusive of taxes levied under any law
for the time being in force and any commissions payable) determined in such manner as
may be prescribed.

2 of 1911


41

CHAPTER XVII

USE OF INVENTIONS FOR PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT AND ACQUISITION OF INVENTIONS BY CEN-
‘TRAL GOVERNMENT

99. (1) * * * . *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (),—

(a) the importation, by or on behalf of the Government, of any invention be-
ing a machine, apparatus or other article covered by a patent granted before the
commencement of this Act, for the purpose merely of its own use; and

(b) the importation, by or on behalf of the Government, of any invention
being a medicine or drug covered by a patent granted before the commencement of
this Act—

(i) for the purpose merely of its own use; or

(ii) for the purpose of distribution in any dispensary, hospital or other
medical institution maintained by or on behalf of the Government or in any
other dispensary, hospital or other medical institution which the Central Gov-
ernment may, having regard to the public service which such other dispen-
sary, hospital or medical institution renders, specify in this behalf by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette,

shall also be deemed, for the purposes of this Chapter, to be use of such invention for the

purposes of Government.
* * . * *
100. (1) * * * * *

(3) If and so far as the invention has not been so recorded or tried or tested as
aforesaid, any use of the invention made by the Central Government or any person author-
ised by it under sub-section (1), at any time after the acceptance of the complete specifi-
cation in respect of the patent or in consequence of any such communication as aforesaid,
shall be made upon terms as may be agreed upon either before or after the use, between
the Central Government or any person authorised under sub-section (/) and the patentee,
or, as may in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a reference under
section 103:

Provided that in the case of any such use of any patent in respect of any medicine or
drug or article of food the royalty and other remuneration shall in no case exceed four per
cent. of the net ex-factory sale price in bulk of the patented article (exclusive of taxes
levied under any law for the time being in force and any commissions payable) deter-
mined in such manner as may be prescribed.

* * . * *

(5) Where an invention has been used by or with the authority of the Central Gov-
emment for the purposes of Government under this section, then, unless it appears to the
Government that it would be contrary to the public interest so to do, the Government shall
notify the patentee as soon as practicable of the fact and furnish him with such informa-
tion as to the extent of the use of the invention as he may, from time to time, reasonably
require; and where the invention has been used for the purposes of a Government under-
taking, the Central Government may call for such information as may be necessary for
this purpose from such undertaking.

(6) The right to make, use, exercise and vend an invention for the purposes of Govern-
ment under sub-section (1) shall include the right to sell the goods which have been made in
exercise of that right, and a purchaser of goods so sold, and a person claiming through him,
shall have the power to deal with the goods as if the Central Government or the person
authorised under sub-section (1) were the patentee of the invention.

* * * * *

Meaning of use
of invention
for purposes of
Government.

Power of
Central
Government to
use inventions
for purposes of
Government.


Rights of third
parties in
respect of use
of invention
for purposes of
Government.

Reliefs in suits
for infringe-
ment.

Restriction in
power of court
to grant
injunction in
certain cases

42

101. (/) In relation to any use of a patented invention, or an invention in respect of
which an application for a patent is pending, made for the purposes of Government—

(a) by the Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Gov-
ernment under section 100; or

(0) by the patentee or applicant for the patent to the order made by the Central
Government.

the provisions of any licence, assignment or agreement granted or made, whether before
or after the commencement of this Act, between the patentee or applicant for the patent
(or any person who derives title from him or from whom he derives title) and any person
other than the Central Government shall be of no effect so far as those provisions—

@ restrict or regulate the use for the purposes of Government of the inven-
tion, or of any model, document or information relating thereto, or

(ii) provide for the making of payments in respect of any use of the invention
or of the model, document or information relating thereto for the purposes of Gov-
ernment (including payments by way of minimum royalty),

and the reproduction or publication of any model or document in connection with the said
use for the purposes of Government shall not be deemed to be an infringement of any
copyright subsisting in the model or document.

(2) Where the patent, or the right to apply for or obtain the patent, has been assigned
to the patentee in consideration of royalties or other benefits determined by reference to
the use of the invention (including payments by way of minimum royalty), then, in rela-
tion to any use of the invention made for the purposes of Government by the patentee to
the order of the Central Government, sub- section (3) of section 100 shall have effect as if
that use were made by virtue of an authority given under that section; and any use of the
invention for the purposes of Government by virtue of sub-section (3) of that section shall
have effect as if the reference to the patentee included a reference to the assignor of the
patent, and any sum payable by virtue of that sub-section shall be divided between the
patentee and the assignor in such proportion as may be agreed upon between them or as
may in default of-agreement be determined by the High Court on a reference under sec-
tion 103.

(3) Where by virtue of sub-section (3) of section 100, payments are required to be
made by the Central Government or persons authorised under sub-section (1) of that sec-
tion in respect of the use of an invention for the purposes of Government and where in
respect of such patent there is an exclusive licensee authorised under his licence to use the
invention for the purposes of Government, such sum shall be shared by the patentee and
such licensee in such proportions, if any, as may be agreed upon between them or as may
in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a reference under section 103
to be just, having regard to any expenditure incurred by the licensee—

(a) in developing the said invention; or

(b) in making payments to the patentees other than royalties or other benefits
determined by reference to the use of the invention including payments by way of
minimum royalty in consideration of the licence.

* * * * *

108. The- reliefs which a court may grant in any suit for infringement include an
injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and, at the option of the
plaintiff, either damages or an account of profits.

* * * * *

112. If in proceedings for the infringement of a patent, endorsed or deemed to be
endorsed with the words “Licences of right” (otherwise than by the importation of the
patented article from other countries) the infringing defendant is ready and willing to


43

take a licence upon terms to be settled by the Controller as provided in section 88, no
injunction shall be granted against him, and the amount if any recoverable against him by
way of damages shall not exceed double the amount which would have been recoverable
against him as licensee if such a licence had been granted before the earliest infringement.

* * * * *

CHAPTER XIX
APPEALS

116. (1) No appeal shall lie from any decision, order or direction made or issued
under this Act by the Central Goverment, or from any act or order of the Controller for
the purpose of giving effect to any such decision, order or direction.

(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in sub-section (1), an appeal shall lie to a
High Court from any decision, order or direction of the Controller under any of the fol-
lowing provisions, that is to say,

section 15, section 16, section 17, section 18, section 19, section 20, section 25,
section 27, section 28, section 51, section 54, section 57, section 60, section 61, section
63, sub-section (3) of section 69, section 78, section 84, section 86, section 88(3) section
89, section 93, section 96 and section 97.

(3) Every appeal under this section shall be in writing and shall be made within
three months from the date of the decision, order or direction, as the case may be, of the
Controller, or within such further time as the High Court may in accordance with the rules
made by it under section 158 allow.

117. (1) Every appeal before a High Court under section 116 shall be by petition and
shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed by rules
made by the High Court under section 158.

(2) Every such appeal shall be heard by a single Judge of the High Court:

Provided that any such Judge may, if he so thinks fit, refer the appeal at any stage of
the proceeding to a Bench of the High Court.

(3) Every such appeal shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and endeavour
shall be made to decide the appeal within a period of twelve months from the date on
which it is filed.

* * * * *

120. If any person falsely represents that any article sold by him is patented in India
or is the subject of an application for a patent in India, he shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees.

Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to repre-
sent-—-

(a) that an article 1s patented in India if there is stamped, engraved or im-
pressed on, or otherwise applied to, the article the word “patent” or “patent
some other word expressing or implying that a patent for the article has been ob-
tained in India;

(b) that an article is the subject of an application for a patent in India, if there
are stamped, engiaved or impressed on, or otherwise applied to, the article the
words “patent applied for”, “patent pending”, or some other words implying that
an application for a patent for the article has been made in India.

Explanation 2—The use of words “patent”, “patented”, “patent applied for”, “pat-
ent pending” or other words expressing or implying that an article is patented or that a

Appeals,

Procedure for
hearing of
appeals,

Unauthorised
claim of patent
rights.


Refusal or
failure to
supply
information.

Practice by
non-registered
patent agents.

Register of
patent agents.

Qualifications
for registration
as patent
agents.

Subscription
and verifica-

tion of certain
documents by
patent agents.

44

patent has been applied for shall be deemed to refer to a patent in force in India, or to a
pending application for a patent in India, as the case may be, unless there is an accompa-
nying indication that the patent has been obtained or applied for in any country outside
India.

* * * * *

122. (1) If any person refuses or fails to furnish—

(a) to the Central Government any information which he is required to furnish
under sub-section (5) of section 100,

(b) to the Controller any information or statement which he is required to
furnish by or under section 146,

he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
* * * * *
123. 1f any person contravenes the provisions of section 129, he shall be punish-

able with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees in the case of a first offence and
two thousand rupees in the case of a second or subsequent offence.

* * * * *

CHAPTER XXI
PATENT AGENTS
125. The Controller shall maintain a register to be called the register of patent agents

in which shall be entered the names and addresses of all persons qualified to have their
names so entered under section 126.

126. (1) A person shall be qualified to have his name entered in the register of patent
agents if he fulfils the following conditions, namely:—

* * * * *

(c) he has obtained a degree from any University in the territory of India or

possesses such other equivalent qualifications as the Central Government may specify
in this behalf, and, in addition,—

(i) is an advocate within the meaning of the Advocates Act, 1961; or

(ii) has passed the qualifying examination prescribed for the purpose;

* * * * *

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a person who has been
practising as a patent agent before the Ist day of November, 1966 and has filed not less

than five complete specifications before the said day, shall, on payment of prescribed
fee, be qualified to have his name entered in the register of patent agents.

* * * * *

128, (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2) and to any rules made
under this Act, all applications and communications to the Controller under this Act may
be signed by a patent agent authorised in writing in this behalf by the person concerned.

(2) The following documents, namely:—
(i) applications for patents;
(ii) applications for the restoration of lapsed patents;

(iii) applications for the sealing of patents after the time allowed for that pur-
pose by or under sub- section (2), or sub-section (3) of section 43 has expired;

25 of 1961.


45

(iv) applications for leave to amend;
(V) applications for compulsory licences or for revocation; and
(vi) notices of surrender of patents,

shall be signed and verified in the manner prescribed by the person making such
applications or giving such notices:

Provided that if such person is absent from India, they may be signed and verified
on his behalf by a patent agent authorised by him in writing in that behalf.

* * * * *

130. (1) The Central Government may remove the name of any person from the
register when it is satisfied, after giving that person a reasonable opportunity of being
heard and after such further inquiry, if any, as it thinks fit to make—

(i) that his name has been entered in the register by error or on account of
misrepresentation or suppression of material fact;

(ii) that he has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to a term of
imprisonment or has been guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity which
in the opinion of the Central Government renders him unfit to be kept in the
register.

(2) The Central Government may, on application and on sufficient cause being
shown, restore to the register the name of any person removed therefrom.

* * * * *
132, Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit—

(a) the applicant for a patent or any person not being a patent agent, who is
duly authorised by the applicant from drafting any specification or appearing or
acting before the Controller; or

(b) an advocate, not being a patent agent, from taking part in any proceedings
under this Act otherwise than by way of drafting any specification.

CHAPTER XXII
INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS,

133. (1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or arrangement with
any country outside India which affords to applicants for patents in India or to citizens of
India similar privileges as are granted to its own citizens in respect of the grant of
patents and the protection of patents rights, the Central Government'may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, declare such country to be a convention country for the
purposes of this Act.

(2)A declaration under sub-section (1) may be made for the purposes either of all or
of some only of the provisions of this Act, and a country in the case of which a declaration
made for the purposes of some only of the provisions of this Act is in force shall be
deemed to be a convention country for the purposes of those provisions only.

* * * * *

138, (1) Where a convention application is made in accordance with the provisions of
this Chape*, the applicant shall furnish, in addition to the complete specification, copies of
the specifications or corresponding documents filed or deposited by the applicant in the
patent office of the convention country in which the basic application was made, certified by
the official chief or head of the patent office of the convention country, or otherwise verified
to the satisfaction of the Controller, along with the application or within three months there-
after, or within such further period as the Controller may on good cause allow.

Removal from
register of

and restoration.

Savings in
respect of other

persons
authorised to
act as agents.

Notification as
to convention
countries.

‘Supplementary
provisions as
to convention
applications.


Avoidance of
certain
restrictive
conditions.

Determination
of certain
contracts.

Fees.

Restrictions
upon
publication of
specifications.

Protection of
security of
India,

46

(2) If any such specification or other document is in a foreign language, a transla-
tion into English of the specification or document, verified by affidavit or otherwise to the
satisfaction of the Controller, shall be annexed to the specification or document.

(3) For the purposes of this Act, the date on which an application was made in a
convention country is such date as the Controller is satisfied, by certificate of the official
chief or head of the patent office of the convention country or otherwise, is the date on
which the application was made in that convention country.

* * * * *

CHAPTER XXIII
MISCELLANEOUS
140. (1) It shall not be lawful to insert—

(i) in any contract for or in relation to the sale or lease of a patented article or
an article made by a patented process; or

(ii) in a licence to manufacture or use a patented article; or

(iii) in a licence to work any process protected by a patent, a condition the
effect of which may be—

* * * * *

(5) The provisions of this section shall also apply to contracts made before the
commencement of this Act if, and in so far as, any restrictive conditions declared unlaw-
ful by this section continue in force after the expiration of one year from such commence-
ment.

141. (1) Any contract for the sale or lease of patented article or for licence to
manufacture, use or work a patented article or process, or relating to any such sale,
lease or licence, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act, may at
any time after the patent or all the patents by which the article or process was protected
at the time of the making of the contract has or have ceased to be in force, and notwith-
standing anything to the contrary in the contract or in any other contract, be determined
by the purchaser, lessee, or licensee, as the case may be, of the patent on giving three
months notice in writing to the other party.

* * * * *

142. (1) * * * * *

(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filling of a document at the patent office,
the document shall be deemed not to have been filed at the office until the fee has been
paid.

(4) Where a principal patent is granted later than two years from the date of filing of
the complete specification, the fees which have become due in the meantime may be paid
within a term of three months from the date of the recording of the patent in the regs tr

143. Subject to the provisions of Chapter VII, an application for a patent, and १०९
specification filed in pursuance thereof, shall not, except with the consent of the apph~
cant, be published by the Controller or be open to public inspection at any time before the
date of advertisement of acceptance of the application in pursuance of section 23.

* * * * * *

157A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government
shall—


29 of 1948.

33 of 1962.

47

(a) not disclose any information relating to any patentable invention or any
application relating to the grant of a patent under this Act, which it considers preju-
dicial to the interest of security of India;

(b) take action including the recocation of any patent which it considers nec-
essary in the interest of security of India:

Provided that the Central Government shall, before taking any action under
this clause, issue a notification in the Official Gazette declaring its intention to take
such action.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression security of India
means any action necessary for the security of India which—

(i) relates to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are de-
rived; or

(ii) relates to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to
such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the
purpose of supplying a military establishment; or

(iii) is taken in time of war or other emergency in matter of international
relations.
* * * * *

(ix) the maintenance of the register of patents and the matters to be entered
therein;

* * * * *

(xiv) the manner in which the register of patent agents may be maintained;
the conduct of qualifying examinations for patent agents; and matters connected
with their practice and conduct, including the taking of disciplinary proceedings
against patent agents for misconduct;

* * * * *

161. (1) Where, as a result of action taken by the Controller under section 12 of the
Atomic Energy Act, 1948, or under section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, an appli-
cation for a patent made before the commencement of this Act could not be accepted
within the time specified for the purpose in the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911
(hereafter in this section referred to as the repealed Act), and, consequently, was deemed.
to have been refused by reason of sub-section (4) of section 5 of the repealed Act, the
application may, if the applicant or, if he is dead his legal representative makes a request
in that behalf to the Controller in the prescribed manner within three months from the
commencement of this Act, be revived and shall be disposed of as if it were an application
pending at the commencement of this Act to which the provisions of this Act apply by
reason of sub-section (3) of section 162.

(2) The Controller may, before proceeding to act upon any such request as is re-
ferred to in sub- section (1), refer the matter to the Central Government for directions as to
whether the invention is one relating to atomic energy and shall act in conformity with the
directions issued by it.

(3) Where in pursuance of any such application as is referred to in sub-section (1) a
patent is granted, the rights of the patentee shall be subject to such conditions as the
Controller things fit to impose for the protection or compensation of persons who may
have begun to avail themselves of, or have taken definite steps by contract or otherwise to
avail themselves of, the patented invention before the date of advertisement of the accept-
ance of the complete specification.

(4) A patent granted in pursuance of any such application as is referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be dated as of the date on which the request for reviving such application

was made under sub-section (1).
*

* * *

Special
provisions with
respect to
certain
applications
deemed to
have been
refused under
Act 2 of 1911.


Repeal of Act 2
of 1911 in so
far as it relates
to patents and
savings.

48

162. (1) * * * * *

(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911, in so far
as it relates to patents—

(a) the provisions of section 21A of that Act and of any rules made thereunder
shall continue to apply in relation to any patent granted before the commencement
of this Act in pursuance of that section, and

(b) the renewal fee in respect of a patent granted under that Act shall be as
fixed thereunder.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the provisions of this Act shall
apply to any application for a patent pending at the commencement of this Act and to any
proceedings consequent thereon and to any patent granted in pursuance thereof.

* * * * *


RATYA SABHA

A

BILL
further to amend the Patents Aci, 1970.

(Shri Murasoli Maran, Minister of Commerce and industry)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2897RS—17-12-99.