1
Bill No. XLIX of 2012
THE  CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 72 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall be applicable in all cases
in which Supreme Court of India has held any accused guilty of waging war
against India under Sections 121, 121(A) and 122 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860”.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 72.
45 of 1860.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS   AND  REASONS
Article 72 of the Constitution of India provides power to President of India to
grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit
or commute sentence in certain cases including those where the sentence is of death.
In certain cases including the attack on Parliament House in 2001 and later attack on
Mumbai known as "26/11 Attack" in 2008 have been adjudged as an act of waging war
against India by the Supreme Court. The accused in the case of Parliament attack
made a clemency petition to the President and the accused of Mumbai attack had also
done the same. The acts of violence perpetuated by those accused, amount to waging
war against India and therefore should not be considered with a normal parameter.
The feeling of a law-abiding citizen of India is such that the sentence to be executed
immediately and accused should not be benefited of exceptional provision in the
Constitution of India. Therefore, the provision of President's discretion of pardoning
or suspending the sentence pronounced by the Supreme Court of India should not be
made available to the accused who have wagged war against India as mentioned
under sections 121, 121(A) and 122 of the Indian Penal Code. This Constitution
amendment is, therefore, brought to prevent the accused from filing clemency petition
to the President of India.
Hence  this Bill.
DR.  BHARATKUMAR  RAUT
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
* * * * * *
72.  (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites
or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any
person convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against
any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) In all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power conferred by
law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a
sentence passed by a Court Martial.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause ( c) of clause ( 1) shall affect the power to suspend,
remit or commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor of a State under
any law for the time being in force.
* * * * * *
Power of
President to
grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit
or commute
sentences in
certain cases.
3

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Bharatkumar Raut, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3951RS(S3)—07-12-2012.