1
Bill No. XLIX of 2022
THE  INDIAN  PENAL  CODE  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2)  It shalll come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860 after section 295A, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
"295B. Whoever willfully defiles, damages or desecrates copy of Srimad Bhagwad
Gita, Sri Gurugranth Sahib, Holy Quran, Holy Bible or any holy scripture by whatever name
called or of an extract therefrom or uses it in any derogatory manner or for any unlawful
purpose or with the intentions to hurt the religious feelings of the people, shall be punishable
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine or with both.
Short title and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022
Insertion of
new sections
295B & 295C.
545 of 1860.
Willfully
defiling of
Srimad
Bhagwad Gita,
Sri Gurugranth
Sahib, Holy
Quran and
Holy Bible etc.
10

2
295C. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written or by visible representation or by
any imputation, innuendo or insinuation directly or indirectly, defiles the sacred names
concerning God or sacred things, shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and with
fine."
Use of impious
utterance or
action
concerning
God or sacred
things.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In India, secularism has been highlighted in Preamble and the Fundamental Rights in
the Constitution of India. Articles 25, 26, 27 and 28 of the Constitution provide religious
freedom to all citizens of India and articles 29 and 30 provide cultural and educational rights.
However, these provisions do not  imply separation of religion and State. Currently, around
25 per cent. of the countries in the world have defined punishments of criminal nature for the
offence of blasphemy. In India, blasphemy is punishable under provisions of Indian Penal
Code, 1860. Since, India is a secular State, all the religions and even different denominations
thereof is protected under the blasphemy law.
Recently, a wave of religious fanaticism has engulfed the entire globe, its magnitude is
no less in India, which has been witnessing the same trend. Religious sensitivities, once
provoked can immediately lead to conflagration and get uncontrolled. Freedom of expression
should not outrage the freedom and sensitivities of others. The proposed Bill implies that
sacrilege and blasphemy are socially and culturally unacceptable. It is in time with recent
events of intolerance and outrage against diverse religious sentiments.
The Bill aims to maintain peace and tranquillity among the citizens. It, proposes to
further criminalise acts of blasphemy committed by way of defiling the holy books and
scriputures and sacred names and things concerning God. The Bill is a symbol of cultural
and religious affirmation and prohibits incitement of hatred in the name of religion or the
actions or offence of speaking sacrilegiously.
Hence, this Bill.
DR.  ASHOK  BAJPAI
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Dr. Ashok Bajpai, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—863RS—08-08-2022.