1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  XLIX of  2008
THE ERADICATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the eradication of unemployment particularly amongst the youth by extending
the right to work so as to force the State to generate employment opportunities and
failing to do so for payment of unemployment allowance till such time employment is
provided to any unemployed citizen and for promoting self employment and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Eradication of Unemployment Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
(b) “Fund” means the Unemployment Assistance Fund established under
section 5;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
and subject to the provisions of this Act, every citizen who has attained the age of majority
and who is unemployed and registered at any employment exchange established by the
appropriate Government shall have the right to suitable work to be provided by the appropriate
Government.
(2) The work to be provided under sub-section ( 1) shall be according to the age,
qualifications, and physical ability of the citizen concerned.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, the appropriate Government shall generate requisite
employment opportunities within the Government, within the private sector in consultation
with the corporates and through small and cottage and village industries, self employment
and in the agricultural sector.
4. (1) Till such time work is provided to a citizen under section 3 or is made self
employed under any of the Government scheme, he shall be entitled to an unemployment
allowance, not being less than rupees one thousand five hundred per month which shall be
paid by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
Provided that the unemployment allowance shall not be paid to any citizen:—
(a) who has an income through any source not being less than the amount of
unemployment allowance fixed under this section; or
(b) who is covered under any scheme of unemployment allowance prevalent in a
State or Union Territory, as the case may be.
(2) Where a citizen being unemployed and registered with an Employment Exchange,
but has an income of his own through any source, the amount of unemployment allowance
to which he may be entitled under this Act shall be reduced by the amount of his such
income.
(3) In case a citizen secures any work or becomes self employed subsequent to his
registration with any Employment Exchange he shall inform the concerned Employment
Exchange immediately and his name shall be removed by the Employment Exchange with
effect from the date of his having secured the work or becoming self-employed, as the case
may be.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Fund to be
called the Unemployment Assistance Fund for the purposes of this Act with initial corpus of
rupees ten thousand crore and thereafter shall contribute to the fund from time to time
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf along with the Governments
of the States in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(2) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by
way of donation, contribution, assistance or otherwise from individuals, body corporate,
financial institutions, firms, partnership, etc.
(3)All amounts due and payable as unemployment allowance and all expenditures
relating to the management and administration of the fund shall be paid out of the fund and
the fund shall be managed in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to all the State Governments and Union Territory
Administrations for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
Right to work.
Grant of
unemployment
allowance.
Establishment
of the
Unemployment
Assistance
Fund.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Power to
make rules.
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to any matter dealt with by this
Act.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions for this Act.
5

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Unemployment is one of the biggest  challenges before our nation after the population
explosion, which has assumed menacing proportions. According to an estimate, more than
five crore unemployed, mostly youth, are registered in various employment exchanges
throughout the country. Similar or even more numbers are also  there mostly in rural and semi
urban areas who are unemployed but not registered with employment exchanges. Even the
highly educated youth are also enemployed. Unemployment is causing unrest and frustration
amongst the youth, who in turn, are being, lured by anti social and anti national elements.
Many of them are joining hands with naxalities and terrorist and indulging in other crimes.
Lack of employment opportunities is also leading to brain  drain and exodus of large number
of skilled and unskilled persons from  the country. The recently announced hundred days
national rural employment guarantee scheme has not made the desired impact on the
unemployment scenario. Thus the problem is going from bad to worse each passing day.
Ours is a welfare State and our Constitution guarantees every citizen the Fundamental
right to life, but this right is meaningless if the citizen is unemployed and he has no source of
having a decent and meaningful life. Our apex Court has also stressed the need for having
necessary means, for that is suitable employment for a decent livelihood. As such now the
time has come to make all our efforts to create more and more employment opportunities so
as to assure guaranteed employment  to all the unemployed citizens of the nation and if  the
State fails to do so the unemployed should be paid unemployment allowance till he gets
employment. This will go a long way  in solving the problem of unemployment in the country.
Hence, this Bill.
V .  HANUMANTHA  RAO

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the grant of  unemployment allowance. Clause 5
provides for the establishment of the Unemployment Assistance Fund with initial corpus of
rupees ten thousand crore. Clause 6 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds to the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the eradication of unemployment particularly amongst the youth by extending
the right to work so as to force the State to generate employment opportunities and
failing to do so for payment of unemployment allowance till such time employment is
provided to any unemployed citizen and for promoting self employment and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri V. Hanumantha Rao, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4765RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.