RAJYA SABHA

further to amend the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.

(Dr. C.P: Thakur, Minister of babour)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2109RS—28.07.2000,


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.

(Dr. ९.7 Thakur, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)


As INTRODUCED IN THE RAsYA SABHA

Bill No. XLIX of 2000

THE MULTIMODAL TRANSPORTATION OF GOODS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

A
BILL
to amend the Multimodal Transportation of Goods Act, 1993.
Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Multimodal Transportation of Goods (Amendment)
Act, 2000.
28 of 1993, 2. In section 2 of the Multimodal Transportation of Goods Act, 1993 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act),—
(0) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

‘(a) “carrier” means a person who performs or undertakes to perform
for hire, the carriage or part thereof, of goods by road, rail, inland waterways,
sea or air;’;

Short title.

Amendmert of
section 2.


Amendment of
section 4.

2
(ii) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

‘@ "goods" means any property including live animals, containers, pallets
or such other articles of transport or packaging supplied by the consignor,
irrespective of whether such property is to be or is carried on or under the
deck;';

(iii) in clause (/), for the words "road, rail", the words “road, air, rail" shall be

substituted;

(iv) for clauses (k) and (0), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—

‘(k) “multimodal transportation" means carriage of goods, by at least
two different modes of transport under a multimodal transport contract, from
the place of acceptance of the goods in India to a place of delivery of the
goods outside India;';

(0 “multimodal transport contract" means a contract under which a
multimodal transport operator undertakes to perform or procure the
performance of multimodal transportation against payment of freight;

(la) “multimodal transport document" means a negotiable or no1-
negotiable document evidencing a multimodal transport contract and which
can be replaced by electronic data interchange messages permitted by
applicable law;

(v) in clause (m), in sub-clause (ii), for the words "not as an agent either of the

consignor or of the carrier", the words "not as an agent either of the consignor, or
consignee or of the carrier" shall be substituted;

(vi) after clause (4), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

7) "special drawing rights" means such units of accounts as are
determined by the International Monetary Fund;

(s) "taking charge" means that the goods have been handed over to and
accepted for carriage by the multimodal transport operator;’.

3. In section 4 of the principal Act,—

(i) in sub-section (3), for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,

namely:—

"(a) (i) that the applicant is a company, firm or proprietary concern,
engaged either in the business of shipping, or freight forwarding in India or
abroad with a minimum annual turnover of fifty lakh rupees during the
immediately preceding financial year or an average annual turnover of fifty
lakh rupees during the preceding three financial years as certified by a Chartered ,
Accountant within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants
Act, 1949;

(ii) that if the applicant is a company, firm or proprietary concern other
than a company, firm or proprietary concern, specified in sub-clause (i), the
subscribed share capital of such company or the aggregate balance in the capital
account of partners of the firm, or the capital of the proprietor is not less than
fifty lakh rupees.";

(ii) in sub-section (3), after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted,

namely:—

“Provided further that any applicant who is not a resident of India and
who is not engaged in the business of shipping shall not be granted registration
unless he has established a place of business in India:

38 of 1949,


3

Provided also that in respect of any applicant who is not a resident of
India, the turnover may be certified by any authority competent to certify the
accounts of a company in that country.";

(iii) for sub-sections (4) and (5), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—

"(4) A certificate granted under sub-section (3) shall be valid for a period
of three years and may be renewed from time to time for a further period of
three years at a time.

(5) An application for renewal shall be made in such form as may be
prescribed and shall be accompanied by such amount of fees as may be notified
by the Central Government:

Provided that such fees shall not be less than rupees ten thousand and
shall not exceed rupees twenty thousand.

(6) The competent authority shall renew the registration certificate
granted under sub-section (3) if the applicant continues to fulfil the conditions
as laid down at the time of registration.".

4. In section 6 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
all be substituted, namely:—

"(1) Any person aggrieved by, refusal of the competent authority to grant or
renew registration under section 4 or by cancellation of registration under section 5,
may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such period as may be
prescribed.".

5. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be
nseried, namely:—

“Provided that the multimodal transport operator shall issue the multimodal
transport document only after obtaining, and during the subsistence of a valid
insurance cover.”.

6. In section 9 of the principal Act,—

(A for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(a) the general nature of the goods, the leading marks necessary for
identification of the goods, the character of the goods (including dangerous
goods), the number of packages or units and the gross weight and quantity of
the goods as declared by the consignor;";

(ii) for clause (A), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(h) the date or the period of delivery of the goods by the multimodal
transport operator as expressly agreed upon between the consignor and the
multimodal transport operator;";

(iii) for clause (४), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(0 freight payable by the consignor or the consignee, as the case may
be, to be mentioned only if expressly agreed by both the consignor and the
consignee;";

(iv) after clause (0), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that the absence of any of the particulars listed above shall
not affect the legal character of the multimodal transport document.".

Amendment of
section 6.

Amendment of
section 7.

Amendment of
section 9.


4

Amendment of 7. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the second proviso, the
section 13. following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—

"Provided further that the multimodal transport operator shall not be liable for
loss or damage arising out of delay in delivery including any consequential loss or
damage arising from such delay unless the consignor had made a declaration of
interest in timely delivery which has been accepted by the multimodal transport
operator.".

Amendment of 8. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), for the Explanation, the
section 14, following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:—

"“Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, where a container, pallet
or similar article is stuffed with more than one package or units, the packages or
units enumerated in the multimodal transport document, as packed in such container,
pallet or similar article of transport shall be deemed as packages or units.".

Amendment of 9. In section 15 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

section 15.
“Provided that the multimodal transport operator shall not be liable for any
loss, damage or delay in delivery due to a cause for which the carrier is exempted
from liability in accordance with the applicable law.".

Insertion of 10. After section 20, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

new section

20A.

Period of "20A. The responsibility of the multimodal transport operator for the goods

responsibility. under this Act shall cover the period from the time he has taken the goods in his
charge to the time of their delivery.".

Amendment of 11. In the Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925, in Schedule, in Article I, for

Act 26 of 1925. clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

‘(c) "Goods" includes any property including live animals as well as containers,
pallets or similar articles of transport or packaging supplied by the consignor, .
irrespective of whether such property is to be or is carried on or under deck;’.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Multimodal Transportation of Goods Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as an Act)
was enacted to regulate the multimodal transportation of goods by law with a view to
reducing and eliminating interruption in the continuous movement of goods from their
origin to the ultimate destination as well as to reduce the costs and delays and thereby to
improve the quality of transport services. This Act provides a legal regime to govern on a
uniform basis, the liabilities and responsibilities of a multimodal transport operator who
can provide services under a single document to shippers engaged in international trade.

2. There are two basic international arrangements which are of significance in the
area of multimodal transportation. The United Nations Convention on International
Multimodal Transport of Goods, 1980 lays down the responsibilities and liabilities of
multimodal transport operators at the international level, whereas the UNCTAD/Interna-
tional Chamber of Commerce (ICC) Rules have gained universal acceptance in the inter-
national multimodal transportation of goods. In order to bring the Act in line with both
the United Nations Convention and the UNCTAD/ICC Rules and also to ensure its better
acceptance on the basis of the experience gained so far during the implementation of the
Act, it is proposed to amend the Act as follows:—

(a) in section 2, it is proposed to substitute definitions of the expressions
“carrier”, “goods”, “multimodal transportation”, “multimodal contract” and to
amend the definition of the expression “multimodal transport operations”. It is
further proposed to insert new definitions of multimodal transport document”, “spe-
cial drawing rights” and “taking charge” in this section;

(b) to amend section 4 to make certain additional provision relating to
registration of multimodal transportation. It is thus proposed to provide that a firm
or a proprietary concern can also be registered as a multimodal transport operator.
At present, only a company can be registered as a multimodal transport operator.
Further, it is proposed that all foreign applicants other than the one engaged in the
business of shipping must have a place of business in India and in case of foreign
applicants, the turnover is to be certified by a competent authority of the foreign
country to which the applicant belongs. The period of the-validity and renewal of
certificate of registration is being increased from one year to three years. The fee
for renewal is also proposed to be increased from rupees two thousand to a sum of
money which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but shall not exceed
rupees twenty thousand. A provision for renewal of registration has also been
proposed in this section;

(c) itis proposed to provide the right of appeal in section 6 to an aggrieved
person against the refusal of the competent authority to register any person or to
renew the certificate of registration.;

(d) it is proposed to amend section 7 to provide that a multimodal transport
operator should possess a proper insurance cover before issuing a multimodal trans-
port document. This is necessary to protect the interest of shippers;

(e) it is proposed to provide in section 9, which deals with contents of
multimodal transport document, that particulars relating to the general nature of the
goods mentioned in the document shall be the same as are furnished by consignor.
Further, it is proposed that the date or period of delivery of the goods by the
multimodal transport operator shall be as expressly agreed upon between the ship-
pers and the multimodal transport operator. It is further proposed that the freight
payable shall be mentioned only if expressly agreed by both consignor and


6

consignee. Lastly, it is proposed that the absence of any of the particulars men-
tioned in this section shall not affect the legal character of the document;

(f) it is proposed to amend section 13 to provide that the multimodal transport
operator shall be relieved from liability for any consequential loss or damage aris-
ing from delay in delivery of the consignment unless consignor has made a declara-
tion of interest in timely delivery which is accepted by the multimodal transport
operator;

(g) it is proposed to provide in section 15 that a multimodal transport operator
shall not be liable for any loss, damage or delay in delivery due to a cause for which
the carrier is exempted from liability in accordance with the applicable law;

(h) it is proposed to insert a new section 20A so as to define the period of
responsibility of multimodal transport operator; and

(i) it is proposed to amend the definition of the expression “goods” in the
Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925 on the lines of the definition contained in
international instruments.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI; RAJNATH SINGH
The 28th July, 2000.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe by rules the
amount of fee which shall be paid along with an application for renewal of certificate of
registration.

2. Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe by rules the
period within which an appeal against order of refusal of the competent authority to grant
or renew registration or cancellation thereof may be filed before the Central Government.

3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure and
detail and it is not possible to incorporate the same in the Bill. The delegation of legisla-
tive power is, therefore, of a normal character.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE MULTIMODAL TRANSPORTATION OF Goons Act, 1993

(28 oF 1993)
* * * * *
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(@) "carrier" means a person who is engaged in the business of transporting for
hire goods by road, rail, inland waterways or sea;

* * * * *
(i) "goods" includes—

(2) containers, pallets or similar articles of transport used to consolidate
goods; and

(7) animals;

(j) "mode of transport" means carriage of goods by road, rail, inland waterways
or sea;

(k) "multimodal transportation" means carriage of goods by two or more modes
of transport from the place of acceptance of the goods in India to a place of delivery
of the goods outside India;

(D "multimodal transport contract" means a contract entered into by the
consignor and the multimodal transport operator for multimodal transportation;

(m) "multimodal transport operator" means any person who—

(i concludes a multimodal transport contract on his own behalf or througt
another person acting on his behalf;

(i) acts as principal, and not as an agent either of the consignor or of the
carrier participating in the multimodal transportation, and who assumes
responsibility for the performance of the said contract; and

(iii) is registered under sub-section (3) of section 4;

* * * * *
Registration 4. (7) * * * * *
for multimodal

transportation. (3) On recepit of the application, the competent authority shall satisfy that the

applicant fulfills the following conditions, namely:—

(a) (6) that the applicant is a shipping company or a company engaged in the
business of freight forwarding in India or abroad with a minimum annual turnover
of fifty lakh rupees during the immediate preceding financial year or an average
annual turnover of fifty lakh rupees during the preceding three financial years as
certified by a chartered accountant within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants
Act, 1949;

(ii) that if the applicant is a company other than a company specified in sub-
clause (i), the subscribed share capital of such company is not less than fifty lakh
rupees;

38 of 1949,


9

(b) that the applicant has offices or agents or representatives in not less than
two other countries,

and on being so satisfied, register the applicant as a multimodal transport operator and
grant a certificate to it to carry on or commence the business of multimodal transportation:

Provided that the competent authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
refuse to grant registration if it is satisfied that the applicant does not fulfil the said
conditions,

(4) A certificate granted under sub-section (3) shall be valid for a period of one year
and may be renewed from time to time for a further period of one year at a time.

(5) An application for renewal shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and
shall be accompanied by a fee of two thousand rupees.

* * * * *

6. (J) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the competent authority under
section 5 may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such period as may be
prescribed,

* * * * *

9. The multimodal transport document shall contain the following particulars,
namely:—

(a) the general nature of the goods, the leading marks necessary for
identification of the goods, the character of the goods (including dangerous goods),
number of packages or units and the gross weight and quantity of the goods;

* * * * *

(A) the date or the period of delivery of the goods at the place of delivery;

* * * * *

(& freight payable by the consignor or the consignee, as the case may be;
* * * * *

CHAPTER IV |
RESPONSIBLITIES AND LIABILITIES OF THE MULTIMODAL TRANSPORT OPERATOR
13. (7) The multimodal transport operator shall be liable for loss resulting from—
(a) any loss of, or damage to, the consignment;

(b) delay in delivery of the consignment and any consequential loss or damage
arising from such delay,

where such loss, damage or delay in delivery took place while the consignment was in his
charge:

Provided that the multimodal transport operator shall not be, liable if he proves that
no fault or neglect on his part or that of his servants or agents had caused or contributed to
such loss, damage or delay in delivery:

Provided further that the multimodal transport operator shall not be liable for loss or
damage arising out of delay in delivery unless the consignor had made a declaration of
interest in timely delivery which has been accepted by the multimodal transport operator.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "delay in delivery" shall be
deemed to occur when the consignment has not been delivered within the time expressly
agreed upon or, in the absence of such agreement, within a reasonable time required by a
diligent multimodal transport operator, having regard to the circumstances of the case, to
effect the delivery of the consignment.

* * * * *

Appeal.

Contents of
multimodal

transport
document.

Basis of
liability of
multimodal
transport
operator.


Limits of
liability when
the nature and
value of the
consignment
have not been
declared and
stage of
transport
where loss or
damage
‘occurred is not
known.

Limits of
liability when
the nature and
value of the
consignment
have not been
declared and
stage of
transport where
loss or damage
occurred is
known.

10

14. (1) Where a multimodal transport operator becomes liable for any loss of, or
damage to, any consignment, the nature and value whereof have not been declared by the
consignor before such consignment has been taken in charge by the multimodal transport
operator and the stage of transport at which such loss or damage occurred is not known,
then the liability of the multimodal transport operator to pay compensation shall not exceed
two Special Drawing Rights per kilogram of the gross weight of the consignment lost or
damaged or 666.67 Special Drawing Rights per package or unit lost or damaged, whichever
is higher.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, where a container, pallet or similar
article of transport is loaded with more than one package or unit, the packages or units
enumerated in the multimodal transport document, as packed in such container, pallet or
similar article of transport shall be deemed as packages or units.

* * * * *

15. Where a multimodal transport operator becomes liable for any loss of, or damage
to, any consignment, the nature and value whereof have not been declared by the consignor
before such consignment has been taken in charge by the multimodal transport operator
and the stage of transport at which such loss or damage occurred is known, then the limit
of the liability of the multimodal transport operator for such loss or damage shall be
determined in accordance with the provisions of the relevant law applicable in relation to
the mode of transport during the course of which the loss or damage occurred and any
stipulation in the multimodal transport contract to the contrary shall be void and
unenforceable.

* * * * *

EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN CARRIAGE OF Goons BY SEA Act, 1925
(26 oF 1925)
* * * * *
SCHEDULE
RULES RELATING TO BILLS OF, LADING
ArtICLE I.—Definitions.
In these Rules the following expressions ‘have the meanings hereby assigned to them

respectively, that is to say—
* * * * *

(c) "Goods" includes goods, wares, merchandises, containers, pallets or similar
article of transport used to consolidate goods is supplied by the shipper, and articles
of every kind whatsoever, except live animals and cargo which by the contract of
carriage is stated as being carried on deck and is so carried:

* * * * *