THE WIDOWS (PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the measures to be undertaken by the State for the protection and maintenance
of  neglected, abandoned and destitute widows by establishing a Welfare Board
for such widows and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Widows (Protection and Maintenance) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "abandoned widow" means a widow who has been deserted or thrown out of
the household by her relatives to fend for  herself and who has no means to support her
and her dependent children, if any;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XLV of 2006
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH JULY, 2006.

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(c) "Board" means the National Widows Welfare Board established under
Section 3;
(d) "destitute widow" means a widow stricken with infirmity due to old age,
physical disability, chronic ailment, mental imbalance or who is too poor having no
source of income with or without dependent minor children;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "widow" means a woman whose husband has expired after her legal marriage.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Board to be called the National Widows Welfare Board for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The Head Office of the Board shall be situated at such place as may be decided
by the Central Government and the Board may establish its branches in the States and
Union Territories in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Board shall consist of, —
(a) a chairperson ex-officio who shall be the Minister in charge of the Union
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment;
(b) a vice-chairperson preferably a widow to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(c) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha
and one from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective presiding officers
of each House;
(d) two members representing the Department of Women and Child
Development of the Union Ministry of Human Resource Development to be
appointed by the Central Government;
(e) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government
in consultation with the Governments of States, by rotation in alphabetical order,
to represent the Governments of the States; and
(f) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
the Non Government Organizations working for the welfare of widows.
(5) The Board shall follow such procedure in discharge of its agenda and hold
meetings in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The Board shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and employees
with such terms and conditions of service, as may be necessary for the efficient
functioning of the Board as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall have a Welfare Fund for the widows known as the Widows
Welfare Fund to which shall be credited all receipts from the Central Government,
State Governments other institutions, organizations, body corporate of public or private
sector, and individual for the welfare and maintenance of the needy and destitute widows.
5. (1) The Board shall promote and provide, by such measures as it thinks fit for the
protection, maintenance and welfare of neglected,  abandoned and destitute widows with or
without dependent children.
Establishment
of the National
Widows
Welfare Board.
Welfare Fund.
Functions of
the Board.

3
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the Board
shall, —
(a) maintain district wise register of widows with such particulars and in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(b) collect and get verified the antecedents of every widow covered under this
Act to assess her need for assistance in such manner as may be prescribed.
(c) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it from time to time.
6. The Board shall provide to the needy and destitute widows, on an application
prescribed for the purpose the following facilities, namely:—
(a) Subsistence allowance of rupees two thousand per month in case the
widow is infirm and destitute or is having one or more dependent children or
rupees one thousand per month in case she has no dependent child;
(b) residential accommodation free of cost wherever necessary;
(c) free education including technical education to the dependent children
of the widows;
(d) gainful employment;
(e) vocational training wherever required;
(f) such other facilities as may be necessary and as may be prescribed:
Provided that if a widow covered under this Act gets gainful employment
or remarries, the facilities provided to her under this Act shall stand withdrawn
from the date such widow gets employment or remarries, as the case may be:
Provided further that a widow residing with her in-laws or parents according
to custom or due to other circumstances shall not be denied the facilities under
this Act on this ground.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
in any custom, a widow,—
(i) shall not be evicted or thrown out of the House of the in-laws or parents, as
the case may be, where such widow was residing at the time of death of her husband;
(ii) shall be entitled to inherit the property or the share of her late husband in
case of joint ownership of the property from her in-laws; and
(iii) shall be entitled for maintenance from the heir or in-laws who abandon a
widow at religious place like Mathura, Vrindavan, etc. for bhajan chanting for
subsistence.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
in this behalf by law, provide adequate requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but
save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being applicable to the widows.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Facilities to be
provided to the
widows.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ RS \ 1005RS.P65
4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country there are millions of unfortunate women who lose their husbands, many
a time untimely, and become widows and their number is nearly three per cent of our
population. Very large number of widows particularly from the lower and middle income
groups of our society become destitute after the death of their husbands. More than fifty per
cent of these widows are old without any means to support themselves. Their position becomes
more miserable if they have dependent children to support and bring up. They work as
housemaids and take up other jobs for survival. It is very common in our society that when
a widow does not have a source of livelihood or permanent source of income they are driven
out of their in-laws homes or even from their parental homes. Sometimes condition of such
widows becomes so miserable due to poverty and other compelling reasons that they are
exploited to the extent possible and their life is made disgraceful. Many old widows suffering
from infirmity due to old age, disability or ailment can be seen begging in the streets and
public places. Many young widows are not only sexually exploited by their known ones but
also forced into prostitution. Due to superstition at many places, they are treated as bad
omen and are kept away from auspicious functions of the households.
Ours is a welfare state, therefore, the State is duty bound to initiate welfare measures
and protect and provide maintenance to the hapless widows so that they too live honourably
in the society. For this purpose and autonomous Welfare Borad should be established to
exclusively look after the welfare of needy widows.
Hence this Bill.
SUSHMA SWARAJ

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ RS \ 1005RS.P65
5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Widows Welfare
Board. Clause 4 provides for the Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides for facilities to widows.
Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate requisite funds for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore may also involve.

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ RS \ 1005RS.P65
6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the measures to be undertaken by the State for the protection and maintenance
of neglected, abandoned and destitute widows by establishing a Welfare Board
for such widows and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1772RS(S-4)—28-07-2006.
SERVER 4 \ BILL_2004 \ RS \ 4328RS.P65