1
Bill No. XLV of  2017
Short title and
commencement.
5
Amendment
of section 141.
45 of 1860.
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 141 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to peaceful protest on public
roads or streets.”
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 29TH DECEMBER, 2017

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Section 141 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 declares an assembly of five or more
persons as unlawful for various purposes including holding public meetings by the road
side. The Division Bench of Kerala High Court has banned holding public meetings beside
public roads and directed the police, public works department and local self-Government not
to grant permissions to hold such meetings and asked the police to take legal action against
violation.
The Constitution also allows the State to impose reasonable restrictions on the
fundamental rights. But it also explains the concrete conditions in which such restrictions
can be imposed. The Constitution states that such restrictions can be imposed only in the
interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations
with foreign countries, public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of court or
defamation or incitement of an offence.
The Bill proposes to protect the fundamental rights of the citizens from any infringement
due to State intervention.
Hence this Bill.
K.K. RAGESH
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
141. An assembly of five or more persons is designated an “unlawful assembly”, if the
common object of the persons composing that assembly is—
First—To overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, the Central or any
State Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State, or any public servant
in the exercise of the lawful power of such public servant; or
Second—To resist the execution of any law, or of any legal process; or
Third—To commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other offence; or
Fourth—By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to any person, to
take or obtain possession of any property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment
of a right of way, or of the use of water or other incorporeal right of which he is in
possession or enjoyment, or to enforce any right or supposed right; or
Fifth—By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to compel any
person to do what he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what lie is legally
entitled to do.
Explanation.— An assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled, may
subsequently become an unlawful assembly.
* * * * *
Unlawful
Assembly.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri K.K. Ragesh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3420RS(S3)—02-01-2018.