AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XLV of 1999

THE COPYRIGHT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
A
BILL
further to amend the Copyright Act, 1957.
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1999.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

14 of 1957 5 2, In the Copyright Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section
2, in clause (0), for the words “data basis", the word “databases” shall be substituted.

Short title and
commence-
ment.

Amendment of
section 2.


Amendment of
section 14.

Amendment of
section 38,

2

3. In section 14 of the principal Act, in clause (०), for sub-clause (ii), the following

shall be substituted, namely:—

“(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial
rental any copy of the computer programme:

Provided that such commercial rental does not apply in respect of computer
programmes where the programme itself is not the essential object of the rental.”.

4. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “twenty-five

years”, the words “fifty years” shall be substituted.

5. After section 40 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

namely:—

“40A. (7) If the Central Government is satisfied that a foreign country (other
than a country with which India has entered into a treaty or which is a party to a
convention relating to rights of broadcasting organisations and performers to which
India is also a party) has made or has undertaken to make such provisions, if any, as
it appears to the Central Government expedient to require, for the protection in that
foreign country, of the rights of broadcasting organisations and performers as is
available under this Act, it may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct
that the provisions of Chapter VIII shall apply—

(a) to broadcasting organisations whose headquarters is situated in a

=

10

country to which the order relates or, the broadcast was transmitted from 8१.0

transmitter situated in a country to which the order relates as if the headquarters
of such organisation were situated in India or such broadcast were made
from India;

(b) to performances that took place outside India to which the order

relates in like manner as if they took place in India; as

(c) to performances that are incorporated in a sound recording published
in a country to which the order relates as if it was published in India;

(d) to performances not fixed on a sound recording broadcast by a
broadcasting organisation the headquarters of which is located in a country

to which the order relates or where the broadcast is transmitted from १:30

transmitter which is situated in a country to which the order relates as if the
headquarters of such organisation were situated in India or such broadcast
were made from India.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) may provide that—

( the provisions of Chapter VIII shall apply either generally or in 3.5

relation to such class or classes of broadcasts or performances or such other
class or classes of cases as may be specified in the order;

(ii) the term of the rights of broadcasting organisations and performers
in India shall not exceed such term as is conferred by the law of the country

to which the order relates; bo

(iii) the enjoyment of the rights conferred by Chapter VIII shall be
subject to the accomplishment of such conditions and formalities, if any, as
may be specified in that order;

(iv) Chapter VIII or any part thereof shall not apply to broadcast and
performances made before the commencement of the order or that Chapter
VIII or any part thereof shall not apply to broadcasts and performances
broadcast or performed before the commencement of the order;

us


3

(v) in case of ownership of rights of broadcasting organisations and
performers, the provisions of Chapter VIII shall apply with such exceptions
and modifications as the Central Government may, having regard to the law of
the foreign country, consider necessary.”.

6. After section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—

“42A. If it appears to the Central Government that a foreign country does not
give or has not undertaken to give adequate protection to rights of broadcasting
organisations or performers, the Central Government may, by order published in
the Official Gazette, direct that such of the provisions of this Act as confer right to
broadcasting organisations or performers, as the case ‘may be, shall not apply to
broadcasting organisations or performers whereof are based on incorporated in such
foreign country or are subjects or citizens of such foreign country and are not
incorporated or domiciled in India, and thereupon those provisions shall not apply
to such broadcasting organisations or performers.”.

7. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),—
(a) after clause (aa), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

“(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain information essential for
operating inter-operability of an independently created computer programme
with other programmes by a lawful possessor of a computer programme
provided that such information is not otherwise readily available;

(ac) the observation, study or test of functioning of the computer
programme in order to determine the ideas and principles which underline
any elements of the programme while performing such acts necessary for the
functions for which the computer programme was supplied;

(ad) the making of copies or adaptation of the computer programme

from a personally legally obtained copy for non-commercial personal use;”;

(b) in the proviso to clause (p), for the words “fifty years”, the words “sixty
years” shall be substituted.

section 52.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is a signatory to the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS). As per Article 14 of the Agreement, the term of protection available to
performers shall last at least until the end of a period of fifty years computed from the end
of the calendar year in which the performance took place. Section 38 of the Copyright
Act, 1957, inter alia, provides that the performers’ right shall subsist until twenty-five
years from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the
performance is made. It is proposed to extend the term of protection of performers’ rights
from twenty-five years to fifty years and to provide for powers to the Government to
extend the provisions of the Copyright Act to broadcasts and performances made in other
countries, provided those countries extend similar protection to broadcasts and performances
made in India. Extension of the period of protection of performers’ rights to fifty years as
well as extending applicability of provisions of Copyright Act to broadcasts and
performances in other countries shall benefit the Indian broadcasting organisations and
performers to get reciprocal protection for their rights in other countries which are
signatories to TRIPS. h is also proposed to carry out certain minor modifications in the
Act.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHt, MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI.
The 8th December, 1999.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 40A, in the Copyright, Act, 1957
relating to power of Central Government to apply Chapter VIII of the Act to broadcasting
organisations and performers of certain other countries. The proposed new section 40A
seeks to empower the Central Government to issue order, published in the Official Gazette,
applying the provisions of Chapter VIII of the aforesaid Act to the broadcasting organisations
and performers in a country (other than a country, with which India has entered into a
treaty or, which is a party to a convention relating to rights of broadcasting organisations
and performers to which India is also a party) in case such country has made or has
undertaken to make such provisions as it appears to Central Government expedient to
require for the protection in the foreign country of the rights of broadcasting organisations
and performers similar to those as is available in India. Clause 6 proposes to insert a new
section 42A relating to power to restrict rights of foreign broadcasting organisations and
performers in the aforesaid Act. The proposed new section seeks to empower the Central
Government to issue order, published in the Official Gazette, restricting the rights of
foreign broadcasting organisations and performers if the Central Government is satisfied
that the foreign country does not give or has not undertaken to give adequate protection
to rights of broadcasting organisations or performers, as is available in India. These new
provisions are sought to be inserted in Chapter IX relating to International Copyright of
the Act. Section 43 of the Act requires that the Central Government shall lay before both
Houses of Parliament every such order made under Chapter IX.

2. It is not practicable to provide for those matters in respect of which orders may
be made by the Central Government under proposed new section 40A and 42A in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



Interpretation.

Meaning of
copyright.

Performer's

Certain acts
not to be
infringement
of copyright.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CopyriGHT Act, 1957
(14 oF 1957)

* * * * *

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—.
* * * * .

(0) “literary work" includes computer programmes, tables and compilations
including computer data basis;
* * * * *

14. For the purposes of this Act, "copyright" means the exclusive right subject to

the provisions of this Act, to do or authorise the doing of any of the following acts in
respect of a work or any substantial part thereof, namely: —

* * * * *
(9) in the case of a computer programme,—

* * * * *

(ii) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the
computer programme, regardless of whether such copy has been sold or given
on hire on earlier occasions;

* * * * *
38. (1) * * * * *
(2) The performer's right shall subsist until twenty-five yearsfroms the beginning of

the calendar year next following the year in which the performance is made.

52 .(1) The following acts shall not constitute an infringement of copyright, namely:—
* * * * *

(aa) the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the
lawful possessor of a copy of such computer programme, from such copy—

(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which
it was supplied; or
(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against
loss, destruction or damage in order only to utilise the computer programme
for the purpose for which it was supplied;
* * * * *

(p) the reproduction, for the purpose of research or private study or with a
view to publication, of an unpublished literary, dramatic or musical work kept in a
library, museum or other institution to which the public has access:

Provided that where the identity of the author of any such work or, in the case
of a work of joint authorship, of any of the authors is known to the library, museum
or other institution, as the case may be, the provisions of this clause shall apply
only if such reproduction is made at a time more than fifty years from the date of the
death of the author or, in the case of a work of joint authorship, from the death of the
author whose identity is known or, if the identity of more authors than one is
known from the death of such of those authors who dies last;

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Copyright Act, 1957

(Shri Murli Manohar Joshi, Minister of Human Resource Development)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2635RS—10.12.1999,