THE PREVENTION OF HUNGER AND MALNUTRITION AND RIGHT
TO FOOD BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for measures to prevent and eradicate hunger and malnutrition from the country
and provide the citizens the right to food and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
Whereas millions of people in India suffer due to food scarcity and malnutrition despite
surplus food and stocks;
AND Whereas hundreds of people particularly children in the country die each day due to
hunger and malnutrition related causes;
AND Whereas the National Family Health Survey 2006 shows that the child under nutrition
rate in India is forty-six per cent which is double that of sub-Saharan Africa;
AND Whereas in the Global Hunger Index (2008) India ranks sixty-sixth among the eighty-
eight countries surveyed by the International Food Policy Research Institute, women
and children are the worst sufferers;
AND Whereas the recently rise in the prices of food has further made the people's access to
food difficult.
Bill NO. XLV of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 18TH DECEMBER, 2009

2
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Hunger and Malnutrition and Right to
Food Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "adequate food" means minimum food and nutrition required for active and
healthy life and includes potable water;
(c) "chronic food insecurity" means continuous and on going lack of access to
adequate food to meet dietary needs for an active and healthy life style;
(d) "below poverty line" means criteria notified by the Central Government for
targeting the people eligible for welfare schemes of the Government;
(e) "extreme poverty" means people living with half of the income notified by
Central Government for below poverty line;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) "State" means the Central Government, the State Governments and the local
self Governments.
3. (1) Every citizen in the country shall have the right to adequate food.
(2) The State shall, within a period of five years from the date of commencement of the
Act ensure that every citizen in the country has access to adequate food in such quality and
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The State shall ensure that no citizen in its territorial jurisdiction goes without
food even for a day and no one lives in chronic food insecurity.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (1) of section 3, the Central Government shall, in
consultation with the Government of States, prepare a comprehensive food security strategy
inter-alia involving experts, Non-governments Organisations, cooperatives and community
based organizations to address the nutrition and food security at the individual and community
level.
(5) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette announce
one or more schemes to give effect to the provisions of section 3.
(6) Without prejudice to the generality of the aforesaid provisions, the people living
in extreme poverty shall  first  be covered under the right to food followed by the people
living below poverty line.
(7) The appropriate Government shall, by a special survey, prepare separate data of
the families living in extreme poverty and those living below poverty line and assess the
need of each household on individual basis.
(8) The appropriate Government shall provide adequate food to the people living in
extreme poverty free of cost and to the people living below poverty line at such rate and
quantity, as may be prescribed:
Provided that while providing adequate food to the  below poverty line families, it shall
be ensured that the total expenditure on food for a below poverty line family shall not be
more than thirty per cent of the family or individual income.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Right to
adequate food.

3
4. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
committee of experts to determine about the nutritional needs of individual in different
areas and occupation depending upon their daily requirement in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with Government of each State,
appoint a Monitoring Committee in each state and Union Territory to oversee the
implementation of the Act and give its periodic report in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The composition and the terms and conditions of the Committee shall be such, as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (2) of section 5, the Committee
shall have in its composition at least five members of Parliament representing the State,
who shall be chosen by rotation in such manner, as may be prescribed and also shall have
adequate representation of the respected and eminent persons of the State or Union Territory
for which the committee is constituted:
Provided that the States and Union Territories represented by less then five members
of Parliament shall have in the Committee's Composition the same number of members of
Parliament which represent them in Parliament.
6. The appropriate Government shall make all efforts to stimulate rural economy
particularly, agriculture and non-agriculture based activities to increase production and
generate employment for the citizens living in rural areas.
7. The Central Government shall give wide publicity through print and electronic
media to the provisions of the Act, rules and various schemes launched under it.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, in such manner and at such time, as may be
prescribed prepare an Annual report giving full account of the activities carried out under the
Act particularly the implementation of the national strategy and lay it before each House of
Parliament.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1) of section 8, the Government of all States shall
give all the required inputs within such period, as may be required to submit the annual
report in time.
9. The Central Government shall, by due appropriation made by Parliament in this
regard, provide funds for the purposes of this Act.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such orders or give such directions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law, for the
time being in force.
12. (1) The Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every order and every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. While it is in
Committee of
experts to
determine
nutritional
needs.
Monitoring
Committee to
oversee the
implementation.
Appropriate
Government
to stimulate
rural
economy.
Wide publicity
to the
schemes under
the Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Annual report.
Overriding
effect of this
Act and
savings.
Power to
make rules.

4
Session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one Session or in two or
more successive Sessions, and if, before the expiry of the Session, immediately following the
Session or the successive Sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be. So, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is persistent hunger and malnutrition in many parts of the country contrary to
the fact that many a time we have food surplus and stocks. Adverse impact on agriculture
and rising food prices are the main reasons for food insecurity in the country. Often, we come
across disturbing media reports of starvation death, hunger and malnutrition killing thousands
of persons in the country particularly the children. In Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh the incidence of child deaths and low weight babies due to
malnutrition are very high. Article 21 of the Constitution provides to the citizen of this
country right to life. The Right to Food is one of the basic and social rights linked to article
21 without which the political democracy is incomplete. There are shocking results of the
National Family Health Survey 2006 showing that child nutrition rate in India is 46% which is
double the figures of sub-Saharan Africa, which is economically poorer than India. In the
Global Hunger Index 2008, we rank sixty sixth  among the eighty-eight and countries come
below Sudan, Nigeria and Cameroon.
We are the seventh largest nation in terms of geographical area in the world and have
a large fertile land. Therefore, we are strong enough to achieve food security for our citizen.
All that is required to be done to achieve it is to have an equitable and sustainable food
distribution system along with increase in agriculture activities and enhancing the purchasing
power of the citizens to buy food. Certain programmes of the Central Government is inshrined
in the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act are already in place to enhance the purchasing
power of the citizens. Indentifying the right beneficiaries and ensuring that the benefits
reach the target group are the two major challenges in giving right to food.
Though only handful countries have achieved total food security and a few of them
have enacted legislations. South Africa is one of them. The time has come now to put in place
a comprehensive right to food legislation that can check the malnutrition we cannot afford to
allow to hunger continue to haunt the country.
Hence this Bill.
MABEL REBELLO

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that there shall be right to food to each citizen of the
country. Clause 4 provides that there shall be an expert Committee to determine the nutritional
needs. Clause 5 provides for constitution of the Monitoring Committee. Clause 6 talks about
stimulating the rural economy and clause 9 says that the Central Government shall provide
funds for the purposes of this Act. Though it is very difficult to estimate but it is expected
that the legislation may initially require two thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of
India. A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten crore may also be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for measures to prevent and eradicate hunger and malnutrition from the
country and provide the citizens the right to food and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Ms. Mabel Rebello,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5613RS(S5)—18-12-2009.