As INTRODUCED IN THE RAsYA SABHA

Bill No. XLV of 2001

THE GIRL CHILD BORN OF PARENTS LIVING BELOW POVERTY
LINE (SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR UPBRINGING AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2001

A
BILL

to provide for the one time security and development Bond to be issued by the State in
favour of the girl child born of parents living below poverty line to mature at the
time of her marriage and settlement in life of her choice and for.free and
compulsory minimum education including technical and vocational education
and other welfare measures to be ensured by the State for her advancement and
development and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (J) This Act may be called the Girl Child Bom of Parents Living Below Poverty
Line (Special Provisions For Upbringing and Welfare) Act, 2001.

(2 It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;

Short title
extent and

Definitions


Appropriate
Governmentto
give one time
security and
development
bond to the Girl
Child bom of
parents living
below poverty
line,

Educational
and other
facilities,

Central

Government to
make available
requisite funds.

Overriding
effectofthe
Act

Power to make
rales.

2

(b) “Parents below poverty lines” means those couples who have been
enumerated as living below poverty line either by the Central Planning Commission
or by the State Government or those whose monthly income from all sources is not
more than five hundred rupees, as the case may be;

(० “girl child” means any female human being below the age of eighteen
years;

(d) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

3. (1) The appropriate Government shall give an one time Security and
Development Bond of the value of not less than five thousand rupees to every girl
child born of parents living below poverty line within its territorial jurisdiction at the
time when the girl child enters into second year of her age through a Governmental
agency as may be determined by the concerned Government;

(2) The Security and Development Bond referred to in sub-section (1) shall mature
when the girl child attains the age of majority and her marriage is fixed or she decides
to start her vocational career, as the case may be, and the payment shall be made to
her in such manner as may be prescribed.

4. The appropriate Government shall provide to every girl child born of parents
living below the poverty line—

(a) free and compulsory education including technical education at the
level the girl child desires to pursue;

(5) study materials like books, note books, stationery, uniforms, shoes, socks
etc. free of cost;

(c) hostel and boarding and lodging facilities wherever necessary at
Government expenses;

(d) scholarship in deserving cases;

(०) nutritious meals and medical care free of cost;

(6) vocational training of her choice, free of cost;

(g) proper and gainful employment after completion of education or training
in any vocation.
5. The Central Government sball after due appropriation made by Parliament

by Law in this behalf, make available to the States requisite funds for the purposes of
this Act.

6. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other Law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force giving benefits to the girl child.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

15

20

25

30

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The girl child is most unwanted in our Country and in that sense in most parts of the
World. Mos: families do not want a daughter in the family despite that daughters do born
in the families generally to suffer. The condition of girl child born to parents living below
the poverty line is more awsome and pathetic. She grows in abject poverty and has to live
without basic necessities of the life hand to mouth without even clothes to cover her
body. As a result she is forced to become a ragpicker, beggar a petty thief or even a
criminal and finally end in a brothel. Thus she suffers exploitation at every stage of her
life and education, good vocation and normal good life are day dreams for such a hapless
girl child,

Our constitution has adopted the Country as a Welfare State and it has been pledged
that there will be no discrimination on ground of sex, religion, caste, creed in the country
and there will be equality of opportunities for all. Hence the State has to come forward for
the development of the hapless girl child born of parents living below the poverty line. It
has been proposed in this Bill that Government should give security or Development Bond
of minimum denomination value of rupees Five Thousand to every girl child on her first
birth anniversary which will mature when she attains the age of majority and enter into
wedlock or starts her own venture to settle in life. By then this Bond amount will increase
manifold and help her settic down in life. Apart from this the girl child should be given
compulsory and free education, free books, dress, nutrition, medical care, vocational training,
employment opportunities etc. for her overalt development.

Hence this Bill.

DR. DASARI NARAYANA RAO


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall give an one
time Security and Development Bond to the girl child born of parents living below the
poverty line. Clause 4 provides for educational and other facilities for such girl child.
Clause 5 provides that Central Government will make funds available for the purposes of
this Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India, It is estimated that a sum of Rupees Five hundred Crores may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill gives powers to the Central Government to make rules for the
purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the one time security and development Bond to be issued by the State in

favour of the girl child born of parents living below poverty line to mature at the

time of her marriage and settlement in life of her choice and for free and compulsory

minimum education including technical and vocational education and other welfare

measures to be ensured by the State for her advancement and development and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—953RS—12-7-2001.