1
THE  CHILDREN  WITH  SPECIFIC  LEARNING  DISABILITIES
(IDENTIFICATION AND SUPPORT IN EDUCATION) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to identify and support the children with learning disabilities in education and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Children with Specific Learning Disabilities
(Identification and Support in Education) Bill, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XLV of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 12TH JULY, 2019
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means,—
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment wholly or
substantially financed by that Government or a Cantonment Board constituted
under the Cantonments Act, 2006, the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or
substantially financed by that Government or any local authority other than a
Cantonment Board, the State Government;
(b) "dyscalculia" means a learning disability characterized by difficulty in
mathematics;
(c) "dysgraphia" means a learning disability characterized by difficulty with the
act of writing both in the technical as well as the expressive sense including difficulty
with spelling;
(d) "dyslexia" means a learning disability that affects a person's ability to acquire,
process and use either spoken, written or nonverbal information including organization
and planning, functional literacy skills, memory, reasoning, problem solving and
perceptual skills or in other words, difficulty with language in its various uses including
reading;
(e) "dyspraxia" means a learning disability that affects the person's ability to
plan motor tasks and to make an appropriate body response;
(f) "educational institution" includes a private educational institution;
(g) "in service" means in service of any institution run or managed by the
Central or State Government or run or managed with the aid of Central or State
Government;
(h) "prescribed" means as prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(i) "specific learning disability" means a disorder in one or more of the basic
psychological process involved in understanding or in using language, spoken or
written, which disorder may manifest itself in the imperfect ability to listen, think,
speak, read, write, spell or do mathematical calculations and includes such conditions
as perceptual disabilities, brain injury, minimal brain dysfunction, dyslexia, dyspraxia,
dyscalculia, dysgraphia and development aphasia, but does not include a learning
problem that is primarily the result of visual, hearing or motor disabilities, of mental
retardation,  of emotional disturbance, or of environmental, cultural or economic
disadvantages.
3. (1) The appropriate Governments includng local self Governments shall conduct an
annual survey to identify the number of persons with specific learning disabilities, the
nature of facilities and assistance provided to them and the extent to which they are benefitted.
(2) The manner of conduct of survey, qualification of personnel involved in survey,
maintenance of records and publication of reports shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Governments including local self Governments shall,—
(i) conduct mass awareness campaigns to create awareness in the community
regarding specific learning disabilities, their causes and prevention, treatment and
remedial measures;
(ii) sponsor or cause to sponsor awareness campaigns and disseminate or
cause to disseminat information on learning disabilities;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Definitions.
Annual Survey
on Persons
with Specific
Learning
Disabilities.
Mass
Awareness
Campaign.
41 of 2006.

3
(iii) educate the public through the pre-schools, schools, primary health
centres, village level workers and anganwadi workers about specific learning
disabilities, their causes and remedial measures; and
(iv) create awareness amongst the masses through television, radio and other
mass media; and promote research in specific learning disabilities.
5. The appropriate Governments shall,—
(i) set up adequate number of teacher training institutions and assist the
national institutes and other voluntary organizations to develop teachers' training
programmes specializing in specific learning disabilities;
(ii) improve the teacher education programmes to incorporate specific learning
disabilities, its theory and practices within the curriculum of teacher education;
(iii) ensure that newly inducted teachers attend at least one month mandatory
training in inclusive education, with special focus on specific learning disabilities;
(iv) provide adequate training to the regular teachers in service, in inclusive
education with special focus on specific learning disabilities; and
(v) train the teachers and staff in anganwadis to facilitate early detection of
specific learning disabilities.
6. (1) Every educational institution shall be equipped with a resource room and a
special educator trained in specific learning disabilities and where special educator trained
in such disabilities is not available,  a person trained in special education shall be appointed.
(2) The facilities of the resource room and qualification of the special educator shall
be such as may be prescribed.
(3) Every educational institution shall endeavour to detect specific learning disabilities
in children at the earliest.
(4) Where a child is suspected with specific learning disability, a detailed evaluation
of the child including his socio-economic background and family background shall be
conducted and the child may be referred to a clinical psychologist or a Learning Disability
Detection and Remediation Centre as set up under section 7, to detect if, he is suffering from
a specific learning disability.
(5) Where a child is detected with a specific learning disability, and Individualised
Education Plan shall be formulated for the child depending on the specific needs of the
child by a team consisting of the Principal of the school, the class teacher of the child,
another teacher, special educator, the parents of the child and the child himself.
(6) The child detected with specific learning disability may be referred to a Learning
Disability Detection and Remediation Centre as set up under section 7, for specialized
support, if found necessary.
(7) The individualized Education Plan shal lbe periodically revised, and the progress
of the child shall be closely monitored in terms of attainment levels and completion of
education.
7. (1) The State Government shall set up adequate number of Learning Disability
Detection and Remediation Centres in every district to train and equip children with
specific learning disabilities who require specialized training:
Provided that there shall be at least one Learning Disability Detection and
Remediation Centre in every district.
(2) The Learning Disability Detection and Remediation Centres shall provide
specialized training to children with specific learning disabilities, assist the schools in
the concerned district to set up resource rooms, provide training and support to the regular
teachers in dealing with children with specific learning disability.
Setting up of
Teacher
Training
Institutions.
Special
facilities in
educational
institutions.
Setting up of
Learning
Disability
Detection
and
Remediation
Centre.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) The Learning Disability Detection and Remediation Centres may also offer
practical courses in dealing with children with specific learning disabilities for parents
and teachers subject to regulations as may be prescribed by appropriate government.
(4) The appropriate Government may distribute to every education institution the
learning materials including special text books and teaching aid for the children with specific
larning disability through the Learning Disability Detection and Remediation Centres.
(5) The manner in which Learning Disability Detection  and Remediation Centres
shall be set up or recognized, its constitution, structure and function shall be such as may
be prescribed.
8. (1) The Central Government shall establish a National Centre for Specific Learning
Disabilities to provide leadership public awareness and grants to support research and
innovative practices in specific learning disabilities.
(2) The appropriate Government may establish Regional Centres for Specific Learning
Disabilities at the State and District Level.
(3) The manner in which the National and Regional Centres for specific learning
disability shall be set-up, constituted structured and shall function,  shall be such as may be
prescribed.
9. (1) The Central Government shall frame guidelines for certification of children with
specific learning disabilities.
(2) The Central Governmetn shall lay down qualifications for certifying authorities of
children with specific learning disability.
(3) The appropriate Government shall designate persons, having requisite qualifications
and experience, as certifying authorities, who shall be competent to issue the certificate of
specific learning disability.
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall make suitable modifications in the curriculum
and examination system to meet the needs of the children with specific learning disabilities.
(2) Notwithstanding and without prejudice to any other concessions provided to the
children with specific learning disabilities in examinations, the appropriate Government
shall ensure that the children with specific learning disabilities are provided the following
concessions—
(a) twenty five per cent extra time for completion of the examination paper;
(b) facility of scribe or amanuensis when necessary;
(c) oral test along with written tests up to Class IX and promotion based on  the
average of both;
(d) relaxation in standards of Arithmetic per the level of the child;
(e) use of calculators;
(f) disregard the errors of interchanging of computation signs and number
reversal;
(g) exemption from second and third language;
(h) availability of alternate subjects like home since, electronics etc.;
(i) disregard of spelling or grammar errors and incorrect sentence construction;
(j) disregard of direction errors in geography and other subjects;
(k) exemption from diagrams, charts and graphs; and
(l) such other concessions as may be prescribed.
Establishment
of National
and Regional
Centres for
specific
learning
disabilities.
Guidelines for
certification
of children
with specific
learning
disabilities.
Curriculum
and
examination
system for
children with
specific
learning
disabilities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
11. The appropriate Governments and local authorities shall by notification in the
official gazette formulate schemes for ensuring employment of persons with specific learning
disabilities and such schemes shall include training and welfare of persons with specific
learning disability, relaxation of upper age limit, and schemes for promoting self-employment.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law,
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
13. (1) Whoever fraudulently avails or attempts to avail any benefit meant for persons
with specific learning disabilities, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend up to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
(2) Whoever asists or facilitates the commision of the offence under sub-section (1)
shall be punishable with imprisonment of two years or with a fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees or with both.
(3) The appropriate Government shall report the names of the registered medical
practitioners who have been convicted of the offence under sub-section (2) to the respective
State Medical Council for taking necessary action including removal of his name from the
register of the Council for a period of two years for the first offence and permanently for the
subsequent offence.
(4) Any principal or teacher of a school convicted under sub-section (2) shall be liable
for appropriate disciplinary action including suspension or removal from service.
(5) No person shall be punished under sub-section (1) or (2) for an act done by them
in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act and any rules or orders made
thereunder.
14. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 13, the appropriate Government on
the application of any aggrieved person or otherwise shall look into complaints with respect
to matters relating to,—
(a) deprivation of right of persons with specific learning disabilities; and
(b) non-implementation of laws, rules, bye-laws, regulations, executive orders,
guidelines or instructions made or issued for the welfare and protection of rights of
persons with specific learning disabilities.
15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expendient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions in any other law, for the time being inforce.
17. The appropriate Governments, may, by notification in the Official Gazette make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Employment
of persons
with specific
learning
disabilities.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Punishment
for availing
benefits
meant for
persons with
disabilities.
Complaint
mechanism.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
Act not in
derogation of
any other
law.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Children with learning disabilities are a disadvantaged section of the society. There is
no law or policy in this context at present. There has not been a systematic study to gauge
the prevalence of learning disabilities in India, though, isolated studies by independent
researchers and organizations estimate that fourteen percent of all the school children
suffer from learning disabilities. It is a matter of concern that adequate research and funds
have not been channelized to address this particular issue. Further, there is gross lack of
awareness of learning disability among the parents, teachers and the community which
results in branding of children as lazy or uninterested.
A specific learning disability affects the ability to learn and use certain skills, e.g.,
reading, writing, listening, speaking, reasoning, directing attention, doing mathematical
calculationss and coordinating movements. The common forms of specific learning disabilities
are: dyslexia (difficulty in reading), dysgraphia (difficulty in writing) and dyscalculia (difficulty
in mathematics). It may affect a single skill or combination of skills. Learning disability is
distinct from mental retardation, and many a time, those suffering from such disabilities may
have near normal, normal or superior intellectual ability, but the cognition, memory, motor
activity and brain function of such children might be different from other individuals. Many
great personalities like Thomas Alwa Edison and Albert Einstein were once discarded by
the school system as failures.
The major challenge in identification of children with specific learning disabilities is
the invisibility of their condition. The teachers, parents and peers often regard them as a
slow learners or a failure, or attribute to them laziness or bad attitude. The diverse socio-
cultural and economic conditions of the country make it a further complicated exercise. If
the children with specific learning disabilities are identified at an early age, they can be
accommodated into the mainstream by providing appropriate and specialized training. Further,
new centres should be opened to train and equip such children and the teachers and
parents should also be trained to deal with them. The curriculum and asessment methods
must be restructured to accommodate the children with specific learning disabilities or
appropriate concessions should be given to them.
Hence, this Bill
VANDANA CHAVAN
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for conducting annual survey to detect the number of
persons affected with specific learning disability, clause 4 provides for conducting mass
awareness compaigns, clause 5 provides for setting up of teacher training institutions,
clause 7 provides for setting up of Learning Disability Detection and Remediation Centres,
clause 8 provides for setting up a National Centre for specific Learning Disabilities and
clause 12 provides for the Central Government to provide funds to the State Governments.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India
to the tune of rupees five hundred crore per annum. A non-recurring expenditure of one
hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 17 fo the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers
is of normal character.
8

MGIPMRND—1568RS(S3)—15-07-2019.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to identify and support the children with learning disabilities in education and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Vandana Chavan,  M.P .)