THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
2. In section 62 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, after sub-section (5),
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
''(5A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where any member
of Parliament or any member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of
a State has been arrested or detained during the pendency of investigation, inquiry or
trial for an offence but not convicted for that offence, he shall be given mandatory bail
for:
(a) participating in the proceedings of either House of Parliament, or the
Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State;
Bill No. XLV  of  2022
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022
Short title and
commencement.
5 Amendment of
section 62.
10

2
(b) voting in the business of the either House of Parliament, or the
Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State; or
(c) voting in the elections for the President, Vice-President or any other
position or office for which the member of Parliament or member of the Legislative
Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State is otherwise entitled to vote by
virtue of being such a member:
Provided that the arresting or detaining authority shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the safe transportation of such arrested or detained member
to and from the premises of either House of Parliament, or the Legislative
Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State, as the case may be, for the
purpose of this sub-section.”
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A member of Parliament or a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative
Council of a State performs an important public function in our democratic system. They play
an instrumental role in representing the will and protecting the interests of their respective
constituency/regions. Their active participation in the proceedings of the House of which
they are members is absolutely essential for upholding the principles of representative
democracy. Their right to vote in the business of their respective House and in all elections
in which they are otherwise entitled to vote is also equally significant in the discharge of
their duties.
The current framework under our electoral laws is such that a person is barred from
voting at any election if  he is confined in a prison or is in the lawful custody of the police.
The only exception in this provision is for cases involving preventive detention. The blanket
application of this provision across all categories of persons inevitably prevents public
functionaries such as members of Parliament and members of the Legislative Assembly and
the Legislative Council of States from discharging their duties in case of arrest or detention.
This is applicable even in cases where such members are arrested or detained during the
pendency of investigation, inquiry or trial for an offence but have not been convicted for
that offence.
Our criminal system follows the cardinal principle of “innocent until proven guilty”.
Barring an accused public representative who has not been convicted from voting in any
election weakens our legal and democratic principles. There is a need to carve out an exception
in our electoral laws to ensure that members of Parliament and members of the Legislative
Assembly and the Legislative Council of States are not hindered in discharging their public
duties in case of arrest or detention.
Therefore, this Bill seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to allow
such members to receive mandatory bail in cases where they have been arrested or detained
during the pendency of investigation, inquiry or trial for an offence but not convicted for
that offence. The bail shall be granted only for the purpose of enabling these members to
participate in the proceedings and vote in the business of the House and vote in the elections
for the President, Vice-President or any other position or office for which the member is
otherwise entitled to vote by virtue of being such a member.
For this purpose, the Bill also requires the arresting or detaining authority to take all
necessary measures for ensuring the safe transportation of the arrested or detained member
to and from the premises of the House of Parliament, or the Legislative Assembly or the
Legislative Council of a State, as the case may be.
Hence, this Bill.
V .   VIJAY ASAI   REDDY
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  REPRESENTATION OF THE  PEOPLE  ACT, 1951
(43 of 1951)
*****
62. (1) No person who is not, and except as expressly provided by this Act, every
person who is, for the time being entered in the electoral roll of by any constituency shall be
entitled to vote in that constituency.
(2) No person shall vote at an election in any constituency if he is subject to any of the
disqualifications referred to in section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
(3) No person shall vote at a general election in more than one constituency of the
same class, and if a person votes in more than one such constituency, his votes in all such
constituencies shall be void.
(4) No person shall at any election vote in the same constituency more than once,
notwithstanding that his name may have been registered in the electoral roll for that
constituency more than once, and if he does so vote, all his votes in that constituency shall
be void.
(5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison, whether under a
sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful custody of the
police:
 Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected to preventive
detention under any law for the time being in force.
(6) Nothing contained in sub-sections (3) and (4) shall apply to a person who has been
authorised to vote as proxy for an elector under this Act in so far as he votes as a proxy for
such elector.
*****
Right to Vote.
43 of 1950.

MGIPMRND—867RS(S3)—08.08.2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P.)