1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860, after section 379, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
"379 A.—(1) Whoever, with the intention to commit theft, suddenly or quickly or
forcibly seizes or secures or grabs or takes away from any person or from his possession
any moveable property, and makes or attempts to make escape  with such property, is
said to commit snatching.
Bill No. XLV of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
Short title.
Insertion of
new sections
379A and
379B.
5 Snatching.

2
(2) Whoever, commits snatching, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term, which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine of rupees twenty five thousand.
379 B. Whoever, in order to commit snatching, or in committing the snatching,
causes hurt or wrongful restraint or fear of hurt; or after committing the offence of
snatching, causes hurt or wrongful restraint or fear of hurt in order to effect his escape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years
but which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine of rupees
twenty five thousand".
Snatching with
hurt, wrongful
restraint or
fear of hurt.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Statistics show that there has been a multi-fold increase in the cases of snatching in
the country. Every incident of snatching poses a threat to the law and order situation in the
area and also affects the freedom of movement of people after a certain time in the evening.
Some parts of the country have become notorious for their snatching incidents. This is
emblematic to a larger crisis and has kept the police on edge.
Snatching is one of the worst forms of street crimes and measures must be taken to
control their occurrence. The present law is unclear and does  not apply uniformly throughout
the country. Therefore, there is a need to have a single law with stringent punishment for the
snatchers. The snatchers are mostly repeat offenders who have benefitted from the ill equipped
legal system of the country.
This Bill draws inspiration from Haryana which saw a drop in the cases of snatching
after they introduced a specific section in IPC for snatching with increased punishment. In
the end, we all desire and aim for a safe environment for the men and women of our country
with the freedom to roam on the streets without fear.
Hence, this Bill.
V .  VIJAYASAI  REDDY
3

MGIPMRND—4333RS(S3)—11-12-2019.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy.,  M.P.)