THE  CHILLI GROWERS  (WELFARE)  BILL,  2008
A
BILL
to provide for the remunerative prices for the produce of the chilli growers fixed on the
basis of cost of production of chillies under the Minimum Support Price Scheme of
the Government, compulsory purchase of the produce by Government agencies,
compulsory market intervention by such Government agencies in case of bumper
crop of chillies, compulsory insurance of chilli crop free of cost and other welfare
measures to be undertaken by the State and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called  the Chilli Growers (Welfare) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008
Bill No. XLV of 2008

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all the other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Chilli grower" means any person who cultivates chillies;
(c) "fund" means the Chilli Growers Welfare Fund established under section 4;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
the Central Government shall in consultation with concerned Governments of the States fix
and declare remunerative prices of chillies under the Minimum Support Price regime on the
basis of cost of Production of chillies before every sowing season:
Provided that different prices may be fixed for different zones of the country.
(2) While fixing the remunerative prices of chillies under sub-section (1) the Central
Government shall take into account the following factors namely:—
(a) cost incurred by the chilli grower in sowing, growing and harvesting of
chillies;
(b) cost incurred on seeds, fertilizers or manure, insecticides and pesticides;
(c) cost incurred on labour;
(d) maintenance cost of the fields;
(e) cost incurred on transportation of chillies to the market or yard or mandi as
the case may be;
(f) climatic conditions and occurrence of natural calamity; and
(g) any other contingency expenditure incurred by the chilli growers.
(3) The appropriate Government shall give wide publicity to the remunerative prices
fixed for chillies under this Act through electronic and print media.
(4) The Central and State Government agencies shall purchase the chillies from the
chilli growers at the prices fixed by the Central Government in case the chilli growers fail to
sell their produce in the open market;
(5) The appropriate Government shall invoke market intervention compulsorily
whenever there is bumper crop of chillies and purchase the entire quantities of chillies
offered for sale through the Government agencies in such manner as may be prescribed;
(6) The appropriate Government shall keep a watch on the dubious activities of chilli
traders and middlemen during the immediate post harvest period to ensure that prices of
chillies do not fall as a result of speculation and take such measures, as it may deem necessary
to protect the interests of chilli growers.
(7) The Central Government shall take all necessary and appropriate steps to export
the surplus chillies produced during a year in the country.
(8) The entire chilli crop and the yield thereof shall be compulsorily insured free of cost
by the Central Government against natural calamities, fall in the yield of chillies, fall in the
prices of chillies and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
the Chilli Growers' Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act with Initial corpus of rupees one
thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government by due appropriation made by law
by Parliament in this behalf and thereafter the Central and concerned State Governments
shall contribute to the fund to such extent and in such manner as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Fixation of
Remunerative
Price of chilli
and its
procurement.
Establish-
ment of the
Chilli
Growers
Welfare Fund.

3
(2) The Fund may also receive moneys from Corporate Houses, financial institutions
both domestic and international ones, individuals and   bodies in the form of conributions or
donations.
5. (1) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance to chilli growers for purchasing seeds, manure,
pesticides, fertilizers,  insecticides etc., for low yield of chillies or loss of crop due to
natural calamities such as heavy or consistent rains, untimely rains, storms, floods,
drought, hailstorm, fire etc.;
(b) to pay compensation to the next of kin of chilli growers in the event of their
death;
(c) to pay  insurance premium on behalf of the chilli growers;
(d) to provide free health care facilities for the chilli growers and their families;
(e) to provide education including technical, medical, higher education and
vocation training to the children of chilli growers free of cost;
(f) to provide financial assistance to the chilli growers in the event of their
disability; and
(g) for such other purposes as the appropriate Government may deem fit and
necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the appropriate Government shall,—
(i) maintain district-wise register of all the chilli growers with such particulars
and in such manner as may be  prescribed;
(ii) provide maternity facilities free of cost to the female members of the families
of chilli growers;
(iii) make provisions for payment of old age pension to the chilli growers.
6. The Central  Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying  out the purposes of
this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition and not in derogation of any other law
for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Utilization of
the Fund.
Central Govt.
to provide
funds.
Act to have
Overriding
Effect.
Savings.
Power to
make Rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Chilli is a part and parcel of food habit of almost every household and every eatery be
it hotel, restaurant, dhaba, chatwala or any small or big eating place particularly in our
country. Chilli is used for making food tasty and spicy Chillies are grown and cultivated
throughout the country, but Andhra Pradesh is the biggest producer of chillies in the country
and Guntur is the largest chilly market of not only our country but of Asia. Lakhs of chilli
producers are there in Andhra Pradesh alone. This year the unseasonal rains damaged the
chilli crops in the State in a big way followed by big fire in the yards and godowns which
destroyed chillies worth many crores giving a big blow to the debt ridden chilli growers.
Apart from this, it has been observed that when there is bumper crop of chillies the prices
nosedive and unscrupulous traders exploit the growers in a big way. The State Government
makes a request to the Centre for Market Intervention and this being a time consuming
exercise takes the toll resulting in heavy losses to the growers by the time the Market
Intervention is implemented. This year alone dozens of chilli growers have taken the extreme
step of committing suicide. Hence, it has become necessary to protect them by giving them
remunerative prices, compulsory insurance of their crops and welfare measures to be
introduced for the chilli growers. The chilli also needs to be brought under the Minimum
Support Price regime. A welfare fund also needs to be established for their welfare.
Hence, this Bill.
V . HANUMANTHA RAO
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Chilli Growers Welfare Fund
with the initial corpus of rupees one thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government.
Clause 6 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is expected that it may involve rupees five hundred crore as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one hundred crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

6
SERVER5\BILL_ 2008/RS/852RS
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the remunerative prices for the produce of the chilli growers fixed on the
basis of cost of production of chillies under the Minimum Support Price Scheme of the
Government, compulsory purchase of the produce by Government agencies,
compulsory market intervention by such Government agencies in case of bumper crop
of chillies, compulsory insurance of chilli crop free of cost and other welfare measures
to be undertaken by the State and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri V. Hanumantha Rao, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4764RS—29.12.2008.