AS INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

Bill No, XLV of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty First Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
5 2. In clause (2) of article 29 of the Constitution,

(i) after the words “conserve the same” the following shall be inserted,
namely:—

“and the State shall protect the life, property, places of worship, holy literature
of such section of citizens without any discrimination”.

10 (ii) the existing clause (2) shall be renumbered as clause (3) and before the
clause so‘renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing compulsory
total ban on any fundamentalist organisation which indulges in violence against
any religious minority forthwith and confiscate all its properties, both movable and

15 immovable.

Short title ano

Amendment
of article 29.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In many parts of the country, some fundamentalist organisations are terrorising the
religious minorities particularly the christians by attacking them and in many cases killing
them, torching their houses, places of worship and holy books. Even the educational
institutions belonging to the religious minorities are being attacked and the minorities are
living in constant fear and uncertainty. The protection of minorities has, therefore, to be
included in the fundamental rights and duty has to be imposed on the State for their
protection. The State should also ban the organisations and confiscate their properties
which indulge in violence against the minorities. If this provision is included as
fundamental right, the minorities may also approach the Courts of law for their protection
and also seek ban on fundamentalist organisations.

Hence this Bill.

SURESH PACHOURI


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, MP)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2049RS —27.07.2000.