Bill No. XLVII of 2019
Short title and
commencement.
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter reffered to as the principal
Act) after section 75A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘75B. (1) Every elected candidate for a House of Parliament, within ninety days from
the date on which he makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation, according to the
form set out for the purpose in the Third schedule to the Constitution, for taking his
seat in either House of Parliament, furnish the information, relating to—
(i) the details of the valid travel document held by him;
(ii) the names of the countries visited by  him in the previous year, along
with nature of the visit, duration, expenses incurred, source of expenditure ets.;
(iii) any hospitality or monetary help received by him from foreign
government, foreign agency or organisation, foreign national etc.
Insertion of
new section
75B.
5
10
Declaration
of travel
documents
and foreign
travels.
15
43 of 1951.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019

2
5
10
to the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the
case may be.
(2) The information under sub-section (1) shall be furnished every year during the
tenure of an elected candidate for a House of Parliament in such form and in such a manner
as may be prescribed in the rules made under sub-section (3).
(3) The Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People,
as the case may be, may make rules for the purposes of sub-section (2).
(4) The rules made by the Chairman of the Council of the States or the Speaker of the
House of the People under sub-section (3) shall be laid as soon as may be after they are
made, before the Council of States or the House of the People, the case may be, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions and shall take effect upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days unless they
are sooner approved with or without modifications or disapproved by the Council of States
or the House of the People and where they are so approved, they shall take effect on such
approval in the form in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be,
and where they are so disapproved, they shall of no effect.
(5) The Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People,
as the case may be, may direct that any willful contravention of the rules made under
sub-section (1) by an elected candidate for House of Parliament referred to in sub-section (1)
may be dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the Council of States or the
House of the People, as the case may be.’’
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "travel document" means the Passport or any other document required to
visit a foreign country;
(ii) "nature of the visit" means any business, academic, educational, leisure
purposes etc.;
(iii) "foreign government" means any department or government agency
controlled by a foreign country or a group of countries;
(iv) "foreign agency or organisation" means any organization, entity, corporate
or otherwise with its headquarters outside India, and receiving funds from a foreign
government or governments.
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Members of Parliament are important public functionaries and transparency about
their functioning, sources of their income and expenses is necessary to demonstrate their
financial integrity. From time to time, the Parliament has enacted legislation and framed rules
to ensure that those elected to Parliament uphold this cherished ideal. Under Section 75A of
the Representation of People Act, 1951, all elected Members of Parliament are required to
make a detailed declaration of assets and liabilities of the member concerned, his/her spouse
and dependent children.
It is also important for the Members of Parliament to inform the Chairman of the
Council of States and the Speaker of the House of People, as the case may be, about their
foreign visits of private, non-governmental purposes. As public representatives, the
Members of Parliament must make complete disclosures about foreign travels including
purpose of and expenses incurred on such visits. Foreign hospitality received in any manner
from foreign governments or institutions must also be disclosed to the Chairman of the
Rajya Sabha or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be, besides seeking
prior permission from the Central government as per section 9 of the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976.
The Members are advised by the secretariat of both Houses of Parliament to send
information of their visits abroad, stating the purpose and the itineraries, to the respective
Secretary-General at least 3 weeks in advance so that the Ministry of External Affairs and
the concerned Indian Mission/Post can be informed of the same. Members travelling abroad
in their personal capacity are also advised to furnish some information on such foreign
travels to never in the absence of a statutory requirement, this advisory has not been
adhered to by most Members of Parliament.
Therefore, the Bill seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to make
it mandatory for Members of Parliament to disclose the details of their travel documents in
their possession and the foreign travels undertaken by them along with details like countries
and places visited, duration of travel, expenses incurred, sources of funding, foreign
hospitality received, if any etc.
Hence, this Bill.
G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO
3

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill inter alia empowers the Chairman of the Council of States or
Speaker of the House of People to make rules to carry out the provision of the Bill. The rules
so framed would pertain to matters of administrative detail only, which cannot be laid down
in the Bill itself. The delegation is, therefore, normal in character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri G .V.L. Narasimha Rao, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4332RS(S3)—11-12-2019.