THE FARMERS OF ARID AND DESERT AREAS (WELFARE AND
OTHER SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2014.
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures and special facilities for the farmers of arid, desert
and drought prone areas, who are often affected by natural calamities causing loss of
crops, livestock, etc., making them vulnerable to indebtedness, diseases and
physical infirmities, exploitation by moneylenders and others, by extending
welfare measures by the Central and State Governments for them, for the
establishment of a welfare fund, for the removal of indebtedness,
giving remunerative prices for their produce, providing hassle
free Bank loans, improving  farming practices through
scientific means to grow less water consuming crops, for
compulsory crop and livestock insurance and such
other measures and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers of Arid and Desert Areas (Welfare and Other
Special Provisions) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. XLVIII  of  2014
5
Short title,
extent and
Commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) “arid areas” means areas which remain affected by aridity due to scanty or no
rainfall;
(c) “drought prone areas” means any area which gets below normal rainfall in
any season of a calendar year and which in the opinion of the Central Government is
drought prone and declared to be so by notification in the Official Gazette, for such
period as may be specified in the notification;
(d) “desert area” means an area full of sand, mostly remains waterless with few
plantation and vegetations;
(e) “farmer” means a person who owns agricultural land and cultivates or causes
it to be cultivated for agricultural purposes or for horticulture purposes and includes
all farmers big, middle, small and marginal farmers as identified by the appropriate
Government.
(f) “natural calamity” means with reference to arid and desert areas, drought,
flood, excessive rains, storm, hailstorm, winds, frost, winterkill, lightening, fire,
earthquake, wild life, insect infection, plant disease and such other natural causes as
may be prescribed;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) “welfare fund” means the Arid and Desert Areas Farmers Welfare Fund
established under section 4;
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate and publish in the
Official Gazette, a National Plan for the welfare of the farmers of arid, desert and drought
prone areas in particular of Gujarat, Rajasthan etc. as may be necessary, incidental or conducive
for such plan and shall take appropriate measures for proper implementation of such plan.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
sub-section (1) such national plan may include provision of,—
(a) immediate interim relief or ex-gratia payment to farmers affected by natural
calamity;
(b) diversification of crops which require very less water developed by various
Agri Research Institutes suitable for arid, desert and drought prone areas ;
(c) comprehensive crop and livestock insurance scheme for the arid, desert and
drought prone areas in which insurance premium of small and marginal farmers shall be
borne by the Central Government;
(d) ensuring remunerative prices for the agricultural produce of the farmers
through Minimum Support Price mechanism or other appropriate measures;
(e) making easy availability of fertilizers, manure, pesticides and quality seeds at
affordable prices ;
(f) Irrigation projects to provide requisite irrigation facilities and ensuring timely
completion of such irrigation projects;
(g) Comprehensive measures for removing indebtedness, easy loans with nominal
interest from Banks and other financial institutions, saving farmers from private
moneylenders and unscrupulous traders, middlemen etc.
(h) establishing agricultural farms to ensure timely and adequate supply of quality
seeds and saplings at affordable prices;
National Plan
for welfare of
farmers of
arid and desert
areas.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(i) establishing agricultural Universities, Krishi Vigyan Kendras and Krishi
Information Centres at conspicuous places for promotion of less water consuming
crops and horticulture;
(j) establishing modern veterinary hospitals and clinics in every block to assist
farmers in animal husbandary ;
(k) promoting dairy sector, rearing of animals, poultry, piggery, bee keeping etc.
to enhance farm income;
(l) promoting cultivation of vegetables, floriculture, horticulture, spices,
sericulture, herbals and plants of medicinal values alongwith handloom and handicrafts
and other village arts to supplement the income of farmers;
(m) promoting traditional water bodies like wells, ponds, lakes, etc. and rain
water harvesting and providing sprinklers etc. and regular power supply to farmers;
and
(n) providing such other facilities as may be necessary, incidental and expedient
as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government, shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Welfare fund to be called the Arid and Desert Areas Farmers Welfare
Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus of the welfare fund established under sub-section ( 1) shall be
rupee ten thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
(3) After the establishment of the welfare fund, money shall be provided to the Welfare
Fund by the Central Government and the concerned Governments of the States in such
proportion and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Welfare Fund shall also comprise money received from the general public,
body corporate and domestic and foreign financial institutions as donations, gifts etc.
(5) The welfare fund shall be utilised for providing immediate financial assistance,
ex-gratia payments, compensation to the distressed farmers covered under this Act affected
by any natural calamity or disaster resulting in loss of crops in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
(6) The Welfare Fund shall also be utilized for providing special assistance as may be
formulated by the appropriate Government for the children, women, physically challenged or
infirm farmers, old farmers and such other persons vulnerable to the aftermath of natural
calamity in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide every farmer covered
under this Act,—
(a) medical facilities including medicines and hospitalization, wherever required
free of cost ;
(b) educational facilities including higher education free of cost to the children
of such farmers;
(c) maternity facilities to the spouses of such farmers;
(d) adequate old age allowance which is sufficient to lead a dignified life;
(e) disability pension to the physically challenged farmers; and
(f) such other welfare and protective measures as may be deemed necessary and
appropriate, or as may be prescribed
6. The Central Government shall provide, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, necessary requisite funds to the concerned Governments of the States,
from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Establishment
of welfare
fund.
Welfare
measures to
be undertaken
by
appropriate
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
7. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
8. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of
this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Gujarat in particular the Saurashtra and Kutch regions and major parts of Rajasthan are
having arid and desert areas where sand is everywhere. These areas face extreme heat in
summer and extreme cold in winter. Many a time, they face heavy rains but mostly the rainfall
is scanty and deficient. Similarly, large number of areas in various parts of our vast nation
particularly in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Jharkhand, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Odisha etc. are frequently affected by unprecedented drought conditions and
desert is spreading in many of such areas. Despite the harsh natural conditions and vagaries
of nature, agriculture continues to be the main occupation in these regions and areas of the
country and farmers are the backbone of the economy in these regions and areas too as is the
case of the rest of the Country.
Although the farmers of the entire nation depend on rains for their crops same is true
for the farmers of arid and desert areas and those face frequent drought conditions. But
farmers of arid and desert face extreme weather conditions and bear the brunt of such
weather conditions and generally lose their crops. With the damage of the crops, the hopes
and aspirations of the farmers too are lost. The farmers of such areas remain indebted and
distressed.
Ours is a welfare State and it is the duty of the State to protect the farmers of arid,
desert and drought prone areas by giving sufficient protection. The State should implement
comprehensive crop and livestock insurance, extending soft loans by Banks and financial
institutions, providing timely adequate compensation when their crops are affected by natural
calamity. They must get remunerative prices for their produce and State should implement
welfare measures for them. A welfare fund should be set up for the farmers of arid and desert
areas.
Hence this Bill.
AHMED PATEL
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of welfare fund for the farmers of arid
and desert areas with initial corpus of rupee ten thousand crore to be provided by the Central
Government. Clause 5 provides for certain welfare measures to be undertaken by the
appropriate Governments. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide
requisite funds to concerned States.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupee twenty thousand crore, may be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupee five thousand crore may also be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of  India.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures and special facilities for the farmers of arid, desert
and drought prone areas who are often affected by natural calamities causing loss of
crops, livestock, etc., making them vulnerable to indebtedness, diseases and
physical infirmities, exploitation by moneylenders and others, by extending
welfare measures by the Central and State Governments for them, for the
establishment of a welfare fund, for the removal of indebtedness,
giving remunerative prices for their produce, providing hassle
free Bank loans, improving  farming practices through
scientific means to grow less water consuming crops, for
compulsory crop and livestock insurance and such
other measures and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Ahmed Patel, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—3802RS(S3)—18-12-2014.