1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In Article 15 of  the Constitution, for clause ( 1), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds of religion,
race, caste, sex, disability, place of birth or any of them.”
3. In article 16 of the Constitution, for clause ( 2), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent,
disability, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated
against in respect of, any employment or office under the State.”
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XLVI of 2010
Amendment
of article 15.
Amendment
of article 16.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH AUGUST, 2010

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Consitution mentions specifically different spheres of discrimination and mandates
equality of treatment. It is only fair and just that when a large number of citizens come in the
category of “disabled” and suffer from multiple discrimination, the Constitution should
offer protection against any such discrimination based on disability. The amendment in
articles 15(1) and 16(2) of the Constitution is proposed to remove discrimination against
disabled persons.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
BRINDA  KARAT

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
* * * *
15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of
birth—(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
* * * *
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of
birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any
employment or office under the State.
* * * *

GMGIPMRND—4351RS(S3)—-27-08-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Brindra Karat, M.P.)