1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 279 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for the words “which may extend to six months, or with fine, which may extend to one
thousand rupees or with both”, the words “which may extend to three years, or with fine,
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both” shall be substituted.
3. In section 284 of the principal Act for the words,
“which may extend to six months, or with fine, which may extend to one thousand
rupees or with both”, the words “which may extend to five years, or with fine, which
may extend to twenty thousand rupees or with both” shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section
279.
Bill No. XLVI  of  2011
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH APRIL, 2012
Amendment of
section 284.
45 of 1860.
5
10

2
4. In section 304A of the principal Act for the words “any rash or negligent act”, the
words “any rash or negligent act, except by any act of rash and negligent driving of motor
vehicle,” shall be substituted.
5. After section 304B of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“304C. Whoever drives any motor vehicle, or rides, on any public place in a rash
or negligent manner or drives or rides the motor vehicle under the influence of liquor
so as to endanger human life, and causes death by his rash and negligent act, shall be
committing the offence of murder and shall be punished with death or imprisonment
for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees one lakh.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section, the terms ‘motor vehicle’ and
‘public place’ shall have the same meanings as is assigned to them under the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988.”.
Amendment of
section 304A.
Insertion of
new section
304C.
Dealth due to
rash and
negligent
driving.
59 of 1988.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The urbanization has resulted in rapid rise in the number of vehicles on the roads in our
country. The high growth rate of public vehicles as well as private vehicles has made roads
very unsafe for pedestrians and other road users. The problem is compounded by the people
indulging in rash and negligent driving under the influence of liquor. In our country, lakhs of
people die every year as a result of road accidents. This menace has assumed worrying
proportions particularly in the metropolitan cities. The incidents of violating traffic signals
and instructions, road rage, drunken driving etc., are very common and rising day by day.
There is considerable anger in the public about the rising number of road accidents.
Under the present penal provisions, such offences are tried as general crimes 279, 284 and
304A of Indian Penal Code and punishment provided under sections for such acts is not
proportionate to the gravity of the offence committed. In the absence of any stringent legal
framework, the persons responsible for rash and negligent driving are let off easily. Similar is
the case with those indulging in drunken driving. Person indulging in rash and negligent
driving or drunken driving knowingly endanger the lives of fellow road users and therefore
need to be treated harshly. Therefore, it is high time that a stringent law, which may act as a
deterrent for such offences is brought forward by amending the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Hence, this Bill.
NARENDRA  KUMAR  KASHYAP
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE INDIAN  PENAL  CODE
(ACT NO. 45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * *
279. Whoever drives any vehicle, or rides, on any public way in a manner so rash or
negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * * *
284. Whoever does, with any poisonous substance, any act in a manner so rash or
negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any person, or
knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any poisonous substance in his
possession as is sufficient to guard against probable danger to human life from such
poisonous substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.
* * * * * *
304A. Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not
amounting to culpable homicide shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * * * *
Rash driving
or riding on a
public way.
Negligent
conduct with
respect to
poisonous
substance.
Causing death
by negligence.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—447RS(S3)—27-04-2012.