THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall  come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"21B. (1) Every Citizen shall have the right to adequate housing as Parliament
may, by law, determine from time to time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, nothing in
clause (1) shall prevent the State from making any provision for fixing norms and
criteria for the allotment of dwelling units to the citizens.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from implementing special
Housing Schemes through its Boards or Authorities or agencies for the senior
citizens, retired Government employees, physically challenged citizens, citizens
belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, other Backward Classes, widows
and other weaker sections of the society.
Explanations.— For the purposes of this article ‘‘housing’’ includes an
appropriate dwelling unit with all basic amenities and ambience.
Bill NO. XLVIII of 2009
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010
Short title, and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article 21B.
Right to
housing.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
 Ours is a vast and over populated country. Even after more than six decades of
independence and after implementation of ten five year plans, there is housing crisis in the
country and crores of citizens are still homeless. Though, we may blame the booming
population and other social and economic reasons for the acute shortage of housing in the
country but unfortunately, is increasing day by day both in rural and urban areas of the
country. As a result, millions of poor people are forced to live in sub human conditions on the
unauthorized slums pavements, footpaths, shed of busstands, under flyovers and bridges,
drain pipes, jhuggi clusters without basic facilities like sanitation, drinking water, toilets,
electricity, etc. They have no option but to languish in such inhuman conditions of living.
Housing is one of the basic human needs and world over the right to adequate housing
has been codified as a human right in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The United
Nations and more than fifty Constitutions in the world do recognize the constituent elements
of the housing right as a human right. The Supreme Court of India has also recognized the
right of housing by bringing it within the ambit of right to life. In Olgo Tellis case, hon'ble
Supreme Court laid down that pavement dwellers could only be evicted only after arranging
alternative accommodation for them. Thus effectively the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
recognized the right of shelter. In the case of Shantistar Builders Vs. Narayan K. Totame,
Hon'ble Supreme Court laid down that right to adequate housing is a constitutional obligation
of the State. It is, therefore, necessary that the Government should come forward to ensure
adequate housing for millions of homeless citizens more so for those who are languishing on
pavements, footpaths, Jhuggi Jhopri clusters, and slums not only because it is their right
but it would guarantee a healthy and satisfied citizens. Therefore, it has become necessary to
include right to adequate housing as a fundamental right in our Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
AKHILESH DAS GUPTA
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the insertion of right to housing in the list of Fundamental
Rights for the citizens. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. Though it is not possible to give the exact funds that will be involved at this
juncture, it is estimated that an amount of rupees fifty thousand crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum, a major part of it will get recovered eventually.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten thousand crore may also be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*** *** *** *** *** ***
21A. Right to education—The State shall provide free and compulsory education to
all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law,
determine.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
4

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2320RS(S5)—03-05-2010.