1
THE REGISTRA TION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Registration Act, 1908.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Registration (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In section 2 of the Registration Act, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act),––
(i) in clause (1), the words and brackets “rank and title (if any)” shall be omitted;
(ii)  in clause (2), after the words “or portion of a book” occurring at the end, the
words, brackets, letter and figures “and includes electronic records as defined in
clause (t) of  sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology  Act, 2000”
shall be inserted;
(iii) for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
‘(7) “lease” means a lease of immovable property and also includes––
(a) a patta;
Short title
and
commencement.
16 of 1908. Amendment
of section 2.
21 of 2000.
Bill No.  XLVII  of 2013
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
5
10
15

2
(b) a kabuliyat or undertaking in writing to cultivate or occupy, or
pay rent for immovable  property;
(c) any instrument by which tolls of any description are let;
(d) any writing on an application for a lease, where premium or
average annual rent, money advanced, payment in lieu of rent, intended
to signify  that the application is granted;
(e) an agreement to lease stating an annual rent or premium or both
or such amount in lieu of rent as notified by the State Government;
(f) any instrument by which mining lease is granted in respect of
minor minerals as defined in clause ( e) of section 3 of the Mines and
Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957;’;
(iv) after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(9A) “notification” means  a notification published in the  Official Gazette
and the expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;’;
(v) after clause (10), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(11) the words and expressions related to electronic registration used
herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the Information Technology
Act, 2000 shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.”.
3.  In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:–
“(3) The State Government may appoint one or more Additional Inspector-
General of Registration, Joint Inspector-General of Registration, Deputy Inspector-
General of Registration and Assistant Inspector-General of Registration for the
territories and may specify the duties of such officers and authorise them to exercise
all or any powers and duties of the Inspector-General of Registration.”.
4. In section 6 of the principal Act, the words “whether public officers or not,” shall be
omitted.
5.  In section 8 of the principal Act,––
(a)  in sub-section ( 1), for the words “officers, to be called Inspectors of
Registration-offices”, the words “officers to be  designated as Inspectors of
Registration-offices from time to time” shall be substituted;
(b)  in sub-section (2), for the word “Inspector-General”, the word “Inspector-
General of Registration” shall be substituted.
6. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“10. When any Registrar is absent otherwise than on duty in his district, or
when his office is temporarily vacant, any public officer
 whom the Inspector-General
appoints in this behalf, shall be the Registrar during such absence or until the State
Government fills up the vacancy.”.
7.  In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),––
(i)  for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
“(d) leases of immovable property for any term:
Provided that in case where the lease is for a term less than one year, the
State Government may, by notification, specify the amounts of annual rent,
67 of 1957.
21 of 2000.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 8.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 10.
Absence of
Registrar or
vacancy in
his office.
Amendment
of section 17.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
money advance, payment in lieu of rent or premium which shall not be less than
fifty thousand rupees per month;”;
(ii) after clause (e) and before the proviso thereof, the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:––
“(f) any document which purports or operates to effect any contract for
sale of any immovable property including developer’s or promoter’s agreement
by whatever name called for development of any property  or construction of
structure;
(g) agreement relating to the deposit of title deeds, where such deposit
has been made by way of security for the repayment of a loan or an existing or
future debt, except where it is filed under section 89;
(h) sale certificate issued by any competent officer or authority under
any Central Act or State Act for the time  being in force;
(i)  power of  attorney authorising transfer of immovable property with or
without consideration;
(j) instruments in respect of amalgamation, reconstruction, merger and
demerger of companies and transfer of immovable property at the time of
formation of companies pursuant to any order made by the High Court under
the Companies Act, 1956;
(k) instruments which purport or operate to create, declare, assign,
limit, extinguish any right, title or interest whether vested or contingent in
immovable property  pursuant to any decree or order or any award made by  a
court.”;
(iii)  in sub-section ( 2), clause ( xii) and the Explanation thereunder shall be
omitted;
(iv)  for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) Authorities to adopt a son or a daughter and not conferred by a Will,
shall also be registered.”.
8. For section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“18. The following documents may be registered under this Act, namely:––
(a) Wills, authority to adopt
 by a Will;
(b) any document notified by the State Government.”.
9. After section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“18A. The following classes of documents shall be refused for  registration,
namely:—
(a) the document relating to transaction, which is prohibited by any
existing Central Act or State Act for the time being in force;
(b) the document relating to transfer of property by way of agreement for
sale, sale,  gift, exchange or lease or otherwise  in respect of any immovable
property owned by the Central Government or State Government or any
Authority or undertaking of  the Central Government or State Government or
any Authority or undertaking constituted or established under any Central Act
1 of 1956.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 18.
Documents
of which
registration
is optional.
Insertion of
new section
18A.
Refusal of
registration
of certain
documents.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
or State Act,  for the time being in force, executed by  any person other than
those statutorily empowered to do so;
(c) the document relating to transfer of property by way of agreement for
sale, sale, gift, exchange or permanent alienation or lease or otherwise pertaining
to any immovable property which is attached permanently or provisionally by
any competent authority under any Central Act or  State Act for the time being
in force or any court or Tribunal;
(d)  any document or class of documents which are likely to affect adversely
the accrued interest in immovable properties of  the Central Government, State
Governments, local bodies, educational, cultural, religious or charitable
institutions including Waqf Boards, Bhoodan Yagan and other properties as
may be notified by the  State Government:
Provided that  nothing in  this clause shall apply in respect of any document
or class of documents for which sanction in this regard  has been issued by the
competent authority under any law for the time being in force.”.
10. Section 28 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
11. In section 29 of the principal Act,–
(a) in sub-section (1), the words and figures “not being a document referred to
in section 28 or a copy of a decree or order,” shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), the words “where the decree or order does not affect
immovable property,” shall be omitted.
12. For section 32 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“32. Except in the cases mentioned in sections 31, 88 and 89, or when the
document is presented by electronic means, every document to be registered under
this Act, whether such registration be compulsory or optional, shall be presented at
the proper registration office, in the manner as may be prescribed,––
(a) by the person executing or claiming under the same, or, in the case of
a copy of a decree or order, by a person claiming under the decree or order; or
(b) by the representative or assignee of such person; or
(c) by the agent of such person, representative or assignee, duly authorised
by  the power of  attorney executed and authenticated  in the  manner hereinafter
mentioned.”.
13.  For section 32A of the principal Act,  the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“32A. (1) Every person presenting any document at the  proper registration
office under section 32 shall affix in the document his passport size colour photograph
and  get photographed by digital camera and affix thumb impression by manual or by
biometric device in the document and both executants and  claimant shall sign in the
document, if  such document falls in the following category, namely:––
(a) agreement to sell immovable property including developer’s or
promoter’s agreement by whatever name called, for development of any property
or construction of structure;
(b) conveyance;
Omission of
section 28.
Amendment
of section
29.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 32.
Persons to
present
documents
for
registration.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 32A.
Compulsory
affixing of
photograph,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(c) exchange;
(d) gift;
(e) lease including transfer of lease by way of assignment and surrender
of lease;
(f) mortgage;
(g) partition;
(h) settlement;
(i) trust;
(j) power of attorney.
(2) The passport size photograph and thumb impression of each executant and claimant
shall also be affixed to the document referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The State Government shall notify the order for taking photographs of identifying
witnesses before the registering officer.”.
14. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4),––
(a) for the words “may be proved”, the words “shall be proved” shall be
substituted;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided that a proof to the effect that the person executing the power
of attorney is alive shall be produced.”.
15. In section 35 of the principal Act,––
(i) in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( a), after the words “appear personally”, the
words “or through electronic means, as the case may be” shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section (3),—
(a) in clause (c), the word “or” shall be inserted at the end;
(b) after clause (c),  and before the words “registering officer shall refuse”,
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(d) on such circumstances and  such documents as may be prescribed,”.
16.  In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (c), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided that when a document is registered through the electronic means,
the rules made by the State Government shall be followed in this regard.”.
17.  In section 57 of the principal Act,––
(a) in sub-section ( 1),  for the  words and figures “Books Nos. 1 and 2”, the
words and  figures “Books Nos. 1, 2 and 4” shall be substituted;
(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section ( 4), for the  words and figures “Books Nos. 3 and 4”, the
words and figure “Book No. 3” shall be substituted.
18. In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words “the document
has been copied”, the words “or the true copy of the document has been filed” shall be
inserted.
19.  In section 61 of the principal Act,––
(a) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) The endorsements and certificate referred to and mentioned in
sections 59 and 60 shall thereupon be copied into the true copy of the document
Amendment
of section
33.
Amendment
of section
35.
Amendment
of section
52.
Amendment
of section
57.
Amendment
of section
60.
Amendment
of section
61.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
presented along with the document, and the true copy of the map or plan, if any,
mentioned in section 21 shall be filed along with the true copy of the document
in Book No. 1.
(1A) The endorsement sheet and the signature sheet generated through
the electronic means shall be scanned along with the document and numbered
accordingly:
Provided that in the office of the registering officer notified by the State
Government as a computerised office, the copying of the items shall be done by
using the electronic devices.”.
20. In section 64 of the principal Act, after the words and brackets “endorsement and
certificate (if any) thereon,”, the words “either hard copy or in electronic form, as the case
may be,” shall be inserted.
21. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words and brackets
“endorsement and certificate (if any) thereon,”, the words “either hard copy or in electronic
form, as the case may be,” shall be inserted.
22. In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the words and brackets
“together with a copy of the map or plan (if any)”, the words “either hard copy or in
electronic form, as the case may be,” shall be inserted.
23. In section 69 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),––
(a) clause (i) shall be omitted;
(b) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
“(k) regulating the procedure for presentation of various types of
documents, appearance of executants for admission of execution, endorsements,
and the manner of fixing signature and seal of registering officer, mode of
payment of registration fees and other fees and such other processes when the
document is presented for registration by electronic means;
(l) regulating the procedure of registration;
(m) providing the manner in which and the safeguards subject to which
the books may be kept in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic
form under sub-section (1) of section 16A;
(n) regulating the procedure for taking of photograph of identifying
witnesses to a document presented before a registering officer;
(o) providing for online registration of documents and enquiry before the
registering officer when the document is presented before the registering officer
by electronic means at any office of the registering officer;
(p) providing for scanning the documents for their safety in electronic
form;
(q)  providing for sending of memoranda of documents registered in
electronic form;
(r) regulating the manner in which the instruments referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 88 may be presented for registration;
Amendment
of section
64.
Amendment
of section
65.
Amendment
of section
66.
Amendment
of section
69.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(s) regulating the manner of recopying of books, indexes or portions
thereof.”.
24. After section 80 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:––
“80A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 80, after the registration
of a document, if it is found that the fee payable under this Act, in relation to that
document has not been paid, or has been insufficiently paid, such fee for the deficit,
as the case may be, on a certificate of the registering officer, be recovered from the
person who presented such document:
Provided that no such certificate shall be issued unless an inquiry is made and
such person is given an opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that no such inquiry shall be commenced after the expiry of
such period, after the date of the registration of the document, as may be specified by
the State Government.
(2) The certificate of the registering officer issued under sub-section (1) shall,
subject to appeal under sub-section ( 3), be final.
(3) Any person aggrieved, by certificate of the registering officer under
sub-section ( 1), may prefer an appeal to the Registrar if it is a certificate of the
Sub-Registrar, or to the Inspector-General of Registration if it is a certificate of the
Registrar, and all such appeals shall be preferred within such time and be heard and
disposed of in such manner as may be prescribed.
80B. (1) Where the Registrar finds  that  the amount of fee  charged and paid is
in  excess of that which is legally chargeable and payable under this Act, he may,
upon an application in writing or otherwise, refund the excess amount of fee so
charged and paid.
(2) An application for the refund of registration fee, referred to in sub-
section (1), shall be made within a period of six months from the date of registration:
Provided that after the expiry of the period of six months from the date of
registration, the State Government may entertain the application up to a period of one
year, and direct the Registrar to refund the excess amount of fee so charged and paid
within the period of six months from such direction.”.
25. Section 82 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after sub-section (1), as so numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2) In addition to the punishment specified under sub-section (1), documents
referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be liable for cancellation in
such manner and procedure as may be prescribed by the State Government.”.
26.  After section 82 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:––
“82A. Every officer who fails to send a copy of the order within one month
under section 89 to the registering officer shall be punishable with a fine which may
extend to rupees twenty-five thousand.”.
27.  In  section 89 of the principal Act,––
(a)  in sub-section (1), after the words and figure “Book No.1”, the words “or
get it scanned” shall be inserted;
Insertion of
new sections
80A and 80B.
Recovery of
deficit
registration
fee.
Refund of
excess fee.
Amendment
of section
82.
Insertion of
new section
82A.
Punishment
for failure to
send a copy
of order
under section
89.
Amendment
of section
89.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section (3), after the words and figure “Book No.1”, the words “or get
it scanned” shall be inserted;
(d) sub-section (4) shall be omitted;
(e) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(5) All banks and financial institutions, granting loans on the basis of
equitable mortgage whereby immovable property is mortgaged by deposit of
title deeds for the purpose of securing repayment of the loan, may send the
copy of the same online to the registering officer within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the whole or any part of the  property so mortgaged is situated
either directly or through an agency appointed by the Central Government or
the State Government and such registering officer shall keep the copy or copies
in computer diskettes or in any electronic form, as the case may be, in his Book
No.1.”.
28. After section 89 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:––
“89A. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of presentation of every document to the registration
office under section 32;
(b) such circumstances  and such documents  under clause ( d) of sub-
section (3) of section 35;
(c) the time within which and the manner of hearing and disposing of
appeals under sub-section ( 3) of section 80A;
(d) the manner of cancellation and the procedure to be adopted under
sub-section (2) of section 82; and
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the State Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.”.
Insertion of
new section
89A.
Power of
State
Government
to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Registration Act, 1908 was enacted to consolidate the law relating to the registration
of documents. The provisions relating to the registration of documents were scattered
about in seven enactments. The Registration Act, 1908 collated these provisions and
incorporated them into one single Act.
2. At present the Registration Act, 1908 provides that leases below one year are not
compulsorily registrable. This provision has been exploited and the leases below one year
are prepared, which are renewed after the specified period. This not only causes hardships
to both the parties in cases of disputes but also loss of revenue to the States. The Act does
not empower the Sub-Registrar Officer to refuse registration of documents in case of transfer
of the Government properties, properties belonging to charitable and educational institutions
or the properties attached by the Courts or any Authority. At present the Power of Attorney
is optionally registrable. Many unscrupulous elements have found an ingenious way to
avoid the registration and transfer the immovable properties through this Power of Attorney.
The Act does not contain the provision for recovery of deficit registration fees or refund of
the excess registration fees collected by the Registering Officer.
3.  A  Committee under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Department of Land Resources
had been constituted on the administration of the Registration Act, 1908 and to suggest
amendments to it. The Committee after detailed deliberations has suggested certain
amendments to the Registration Act, 1908. The rapid computerisation of the registration
process in the country has also necessitated certain changes in the provisions of the Act.
4. In view of the above, it has been decided to amend the Registration Act, 1908.
Accordingly, the Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013, inter alia, provides the following,
namely:—
(a) to amend clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 17 of the Act, so as to make
the registration compulsory irrespective of the leases of immovable property for any
term. However, in case the lease is for a term less than one year, the State Government
may specify the amounts of annual  rent, etc., which shall not be less than fifty
thousand rupees per month.
(b) to substitute section 18 of the Act to provide that the Wills, authority to
adopt by a Will and any document notified by the State Government, may be registered
at the option of the parties;
(c) to insert a new section 18A which prohibits the registration of certain
documents relating to (a) transaction which is prohibited by any existing Central or
State Act for the time being in force; (b) transfer of property by way of agreement for
sale, sale, etc., by the Central or State Government or any authority or undertaking
executed by any person other than those statutorily empowered to do so; (c) transfer
of property by way of agreement for sale, sale, etc., which is attached permanently by
competent authority; and ( d) any document which is likely to affect the accrued
interest in immovable properties of the Central or State Government, local bodies,
etc., and other properties as may be notified by the State Government;
(d) to amend section 29 of the Act to provide that the immovable property can
be registered only in the State in which it is actually located. However, the Central
Government or State Government may, by notification with the reasons, allow a
particular document to be registered in any registration office;
(e) to substitute section 32A of the Act so as to provide that every person
presenting any document at the proper registration office shall affix in the document
a passport size colour photograph and get photographed by a digital camera and affix
thumb impression in the document;
9

10
( f) to insert the new sections 80A and 80B so as to make the provisions for the
recovery of deficit registration fee and refund of  excess fees;
(g) amend section 89 of the Act providing that all banks and financial institutions
granting loans on the basis of equitable mortgage, may send the copy of the same on
line to the registering officer within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or
any part of the property so mortgaged is situated.
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the
Registration (Amendment) Bill, 2013.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; JAIRAM RAMESH
The 26th July, 2013.

Notes on clauses
Clause 2.— This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Registration Act, 1908
relating to ‘‘definitions’’. It proposes to substitute clause (7) of section 2 of the Act relating
to the term ‘‘lease’’ so as to define it comprehensively.
Clause 3.— This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Act relating to ‘‘Inspector
General of Registration”. It proposes to insert a new sub-section ( 3) which provides that
the State Government may appoint one or more Additional Inspector- General of Registration,
Joint Inspector-General of Registration, Deputy Inspector-General of Registration and
Assistant Inspector-General of Registration for the territories and may specify the duties of
such officers and authorise them to exercise all or any powers and duties of the Inspector-
General of Registration.
Clause 4.— This clause seeks to amend section 6 of the Act relating to ‘‘Registrars
and Sub-Registrars’’,  so as to omit the expression ‘‘whether public officers or not’’ in the
said section.
Clause 5.— This clause seeks to amend section 8 of the Act relating to ‘‘Inspectors
of  Registration-offices’’, so as to substitute the words ‘‘officers to be called Inspectors of
Registration-offices’’, with the words “officers to be designated as Inspectors of
Registration-offices from time to time.’’.
Clause 6.— This clause seeks to substitute  section 10 of the Act relating to ‘‘Absence
of Registrar or vacancy in his office’’ so as to provide that when any Registrar is absent
otherwise than on duty in his district, or when his office is temporarily vacant, any public
officer whom the Inspector-General appoints in this behalf, shall be the Registrar during
such absence or until the State Government fills up the vacancy’’.
Clause 7.— This clause seeks to amend section 17 of the Act relating to ‘‘documents
of which registration is compulsory’’. It proposes to substitute clause (d) of sub-section (1)
of the said section so as to provide that registration is compulsory in matters relating to
leases of immovable property for any term. However in case where the lease is for a term less
than one year, the State Government may, by notification, specify the amounts of annual
rent, money advance, payment in lieu of rent or premium which shall not be less than fifty
thousand rupees per month. It also proposes that the registration is compulsory in matters
relating to—(i) any document which purports or operates to effect any contract for sale of
any immovable property including developer's or promoter's agreement by whatever name
called for development of any property or construction of structure; (ii) agreement relating
to the deposit of title deeds, where such deposit has been made by way of security for the
repayment of a loan or an existing or future debt, except where it is filed under section 89;
(iii) sale certificate issued by any competent officer or authority under any Central Act or
State Act for the time being in force; (iv) power of  attorney authorising transfer of immovable
property with or without consideration; ( v) instruments in respect of amalgamation,
reconstruction, merger and demerger of companies and transfer of immovable property at
the time of formation of companies pursuant to any order made by the High Court under the
Companies Act, 1956; (vi) instruments which purports or operates to create, declare, assign,
limit, extinguish any right, title or interest whether vested or contingent in immovable
property pursuant to any decree or order or any award made by a court. This clause also
proposes to substitute sub-section ( 3) of the said section so as to provide that Authorities
to adopt a son or a daughter and not conferred by a will, shall also be registered.
Clause 8.— This clause seeks to substitute section 18 of the Act relating to ‘‘documents
of which registration is optional’’ so as to provide that the wills, authority to adopt by a will
and any document notified by the State Government may be registered at the option of the
parties.
11

12
Clause 9.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 18A relating to ‘‘refusal of
registration of certain documents”. The said section provides for the refusal of registration
of certain documents. They are—(a) the document relating to transaction, which is prohibited
by any existing Central Act or State Act for the time being in forcce; ( b) the document
relating to transfer of property by way of agreement for sale, sale, gift, exchange or lease or
otherwise in respect of any immovable property owned by the Central Government or State
Government or any Authority or undertaking of the Central Government or State Government
or any Authority or undertaking constituted or established under any Central Act or State
Act, for the time being in force, executed by any person other than those statutorily
empowered to do so; (c) the document relating to transfer of property by way of agreement
for sale, sale, gift, exchange or permanent alienation or lease or otherwise pertaining to  any
immovable property which is attached permanently or provisionally by any competent
authority under any Central Act or State Act for the time being in force or any court or
Tribunal; ( d) any document or class of documents which are likely to adversely affect
accrued interest in immovable properties of the Central Government, State Governments,
local bodies, educational, cultural, religious or charitable institutions including Waqf Boards,
Bhoodan Yagan and other properties as may be notified by the State Government.
Clause 10.— This clause seeks to omit section 28 relating to ‘‘place for registering
documents relating to land’’.
Clause 11.— This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Act relating to ‘‘place for
registering other documents’’. It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 1) of the said section
so as to omit the words and figures “not being a document referred to in section 28 or a copy
of a decree or order’’.  It is also proposed to amend sub-section (2) of the said section so as
to omit the words ‘‘where the decree or order does not affect immovable property.’’.
Clause 12.— This clause seeks to substitute a new section for section 32 relating to
‘‘persons to present documents for registration’’ so as to provide that except in the cases
mentioned in sections 31, 88 and 89, or when the document is presented by electronic
means, every document to be registered under this Act, whether such registration be
compulsory or optional, shall be presented at the proper registration office, in the manner as
may be prescribed—(a) by the person executing or claming under the same, or, in the case
of a copy of a decree or order, by a person claiming under the decree or order; or (b) by the
representative or assignee of such person; or (c) by the agent of such person, representative
or assignee, duly authorised by the power of attorney executed and authenticated in the
manner hereinafter mentioned.
Clause 13.— This clause seeks to substitute a new section for section 32A relating to
‘‘compulsory affixing of photograph, etc’’. Sub-section (1) of the said section proposes to
provide that every person presenting any document at the proper registration office under
section 32 shall affix in the document his passport size colour photograph and get
photographed by digital camera and affix thumb impression by manual or by biometric
device in the document and both executants and claiment shall sign in the document, if
such document falls in the category of—(a) agreement to sell immovable property including
developer's or promoter's agreement by whatever name called, for development of any
property or construction of structure; ( b) conveyance; ( c) exchange; ( d) gift; ( e) lease
including transfer of lease by way of assignment and surrender of lease; ( f) mortgage; (g)
partition; (h) settlement; (i) trust; (j) power of attorney.
Sub-section ( 2) of the said section proposes to provide that the passport size
photograph and thumb impression of each executants and claimant shall also be affixed to
the document referred to in sub-section ( 1).
Sub-section (3)  of the said section proposes to provide that the State Government
shall notify the order for taking photographs of identifying witnesses before the registering
officer.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the Act relating to ‘‘power of
attorney recognisable for purposes of section 32’’. It is proposed to amend to sub-section

13
(4) of the said section so as to substitute the words ‘‘may be proved’’ with the words ‘‘shall
be proved’’. It is also proposed to insert a proviso in the said sub-section to provide that a
proof to the effect that the person executing the power of attorney is alive shall be produced.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the Act  relating to ‘‘procedure
on admission and denial of execution respectively’’. It is proposed to amend clause ( a) of
sub-section (1) of the said section so as to insert the words ‘‘or through electronic means,
as the case may be’’ after the words ‘‘appear  personally’’.  It is also proposed to amend sub-
section (3) of the said section to insert clause ( d) so as to that the registering officer shall
refuse to register on such circumstances and such documents may be prescribed.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 52 of the Act relating to ‘‘duties of
registering officers when document presented’’. It is proposed to amend clause (c) of sub-
section (1) of the said section so as to provide that when a document is registered through
the electronic means, the rules made by the State Government shall be followed in this
regard.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to amend section 57 of the Act relating to ‘‘registering
officers to allow inspection of certain books and indexes and to give certified copies of
entries’’  so as to provide that the Book No. 4 relating to ‘‘Miscellaneous Registrar’’ is
proposed to be made open to inspection by the public to ensure greater transparency.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to amend section 60 of the Act relating to ‘‘certificate
of registration’’. It is proposed to amend sub-section ( 1)  of the said section to insert the
words ‘‘or the true copy of the document has been filed’’ after the words ‘‘the document has
been copied’’.
Clause 19.— This clause seeks to amend section 61 of the Act relating to the
“endorsements and certificate to be copied and document returned” so as to provide for
keeping the copies of endorsement, certificate and map or plan in the Register-book and
Book No. 1 by electronic means.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend section 64 of the Act relating to the ‘‘procedure
where document relates to land in several sub-districts”. It is proposed to amend the said
section so provide for making of memorandum, endorsement and certificate  in electronic
form by the Sub-Registrar when such documents relate to land situated in several sub-
districts.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to amend section 65 of the Act relating to “procedure
where document relates to land in several districts”. It is proposed to amend the said
section so as to provide for forwarding copies of documents, endorsement and certificate in
electronic form by the Sub-Registrar when documents relate to land situated in several
districts.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to amend section 66 of the Act relating to ‘‘procedure
after registration of documents relating to land’’. It is proposed to amend the said section so
as to provide for forwarding of copies of memorandum of documents electronically by the
Registrar to his subordinate Sub-Registrar if such documents are registrered by the Registrar
himself.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to amend section 69 of the Act relating to‘‘power of
Inspector-General to superintendent registration offices and make rules’’.  It is proposed to
amend the said section so as to provide for powers of Inspector-General to superintend
registration offices and make rules.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to amend sections 80A  and 80B  relating to ‘‘recovery
of deficit registration fee’’ and ‘‘refund of excess fee” respectively. The said new clauses are
proposed to provide the provisions relating to recovery of deficit registration fee if
insufficiently paid or has not been paid and refund of fee if received in excess.

14
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to amend section 82 of the Act relating to ‘‘penalty for
making false statements, delivering false copies or translations, false personation, and
abetment”. It is proposed to amend the said section so as to provide for cancellation of
documents in addition to penalty.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to insert a new  section 82A relating to ‘‘punishment
for failure to send a copy of  order under section 89”. The proposed new section provides
for punishment for officers who fail to send a copy of the order within one month under
section 89.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to amend section 89 of the Act relating to ‘‘copies of
certain orders, certificates and instruments to be sent to regiserting officers and filed”. It is
proposed to amend said section so as to provide for forwarding copies by the banks and
financial institutions, granting loans on the basis of equitable mortgage where immovable
property is mortgaged by deposit of the title deeds for the purpose of securing repayment
of the loan, online to the registering officer.
Clause 28.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 89A of the Act relating to
‘‘power of  State Government to make rules” so as to empower the State Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make, by notification in the
Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2)  specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters,
inter alia, include—(a)  the manner of presentation of every documents to the registration
office under section 32; ( b)  such circumstances and such documents under clause ( d)  of
sub-section (3) of section 35; ( c)  the time within which and the manner of hearing and
disposing of appeals under sub-section ( 3) of section 80A; (d) the manner of cancellation
and the procedure to be adopted under sub-section ( 2) of section 82; and ( e) any other
matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
2. Clause 28 of the Bill provides that every rule made under this Act by the State
Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
15

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REGISTRA TION ACT, 1908
(16 OF 1908)
* * * * *
2.  (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
(1) “addition” means the place of residence, and the profession, trade, rank and
title (if any) of a person described, and, in the case of an Indian, his father’s name, or
where he is usually described as the son of his mother, then his mother’s name:
(2) “book” includes a portion of a book and also any number of sheets connected
together with a view of forming a book or portion of a book:
* * * * *
(7) “lease” includes a counterpart, kabuliyat, an undertaking to cultivate or
occupy, and an agreement to lease:
* * * * *
6.  The State Government may appoint such persons whether public officers or not, as
it thinks proper, to be Registrars of the several districts, and to be Sub-Registrars of the
several sub-districts, formed as aforesaid, respectively.
* * * * *
8. (1) The State Government may also appoint officers, to be called Inspectors of
Registration-offices, and may prescribe the duties of such officers.
(2) Every such Inspector shall be subordinate to the Inspector-General.
* * * * *
10. (1) When any Registrar, other than the Registrar of a district including a Presidency-
town, is absent otherwise than on duty in his district, or when his office is temporarily
vacant, any person whom the Inspector-General appoints in this behalf, or, in default of
such appointment, the Judge of the District Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
the Registrar’s office is situate, shall be the Registrar during such absence or until the State
Government fills up the vacancy.
(2) When the Registrar of a district including a Presidency-town is absent otherwise
than on duty in his district, or when his office is temporarily vacant, any person whom the
Inspector-General appoints in this behalf shall be the Registrar during such absence, or
until the State Government fills up the vacancy.
* * * * *
PART III
O
F REGISTRABLE DOCUMENTS
17. (1) The following documents shall be registered, if the property to which they
relate is situate in a district in which, and if they have been executed on or after the date on
which, Act No. XVI of 1864, or the Indian Registration Act, 1866, or the Indian Registration
Act, 1871, or the Indian Registration Act, 1877, or this Act came or comes into force,
namely:—
* * * * *
16
Definitions.
Registrars
and Sub-
Registrars.
Absence of
Registrar or
vacancy in
his office.
Inspectors of
Registration-
offices.
Documents
of which
registration
is
compulsory.
20 of 1866.
8 of 1871.
3 of 1877.

17
(d) leases of immovable property from year to year, or for any term exceeding
one year, or reserving a yearly rent;
* * * * *
(2) Nothing in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) applies to—
* * * * *
(xii) any certificate of sale granted to the purchaser of any property sold by
public auction by a Civil or Revenue-officer.
Explanation.—A document purporting or operating to effect a contract for the sale
of immovable property shall not be deemed to require or ever to have required registration
by reason only of the fact that such document contains a recital of the payment of any
earnest money or of the whole or any part of the purchase money.
(3) Authorities to adopt a son, executed after the first day of January, 1872, and not
conferred by a will, shall also be registered.
18. Any of the following documents may be registered under this Act, namely:—
(a) instruments (other than instruments of gift and wills) which purport or
operate to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or in future,
any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of a value less than one
hundred rupees, to or in immovable property;
(b) instruments acknowledging the receipt or payment of any consideration on
account of the creation, declaration, assignment, limitation or extinction of any such
right, title or interest;
(c) leases of immovable property for any term not exceeding one year, and
leases exempted under section 17;
(cc) instruments transferring or assigning any decree or order of a Court or any
award when such decree or order or award purports or operates to create, declare,
assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or in future, any right, title or interest,
whether vested or contingent, of a value less than one hundred rupees, to or in
immovable property;
(d) instruments (other than wills) which purport or operate to create, declare,
assign, limit or extinguish any right, title or interest to or in movable property;
(e) wills; and
(f) all other documents not required by section 17 to be registered.
* * * * *
PART V
O
F THE  PLACE OF REGISTRA TION
28. Save as in this Part otherwise provided, every document mentioned in section 17,
sub-section (1), clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e), section 17, sub-section (2), in so far as such
document affects immovable property, and section 18, clauses (a), (b), (c) and (cc) shall be
presented for registration in the office of a Sub-Registrar within whose sub-district the
whole or some portion of the property to which such document relates is situate.
29. (1) Every document not being a document referred to in section 28 or a copy of a
decree or order, may be presented for registration either in the office of the Sub-Registrar in
whose sub-district the document was executed, or in the office of any other Sub-Registrar
under the State Government at which all the persons executing and claiming under the
document desire the same to be registered.
Documents
of which
registration
is optional.
Place for
registering
documents
relating to
land.
Place for
registering
other
documents.

18
(2) A copy of a decree or order may be presented for registration in the office of
the Sub-Registrar in whose sub-district the original decree or order was made, or,
where the decree or order does not affect immovable property, in the office of any
other Sub-Registrar under the State Government at which all the persons claiming
under the decree or order desire the copy to be registered.
* * * * *
PART VI
O
F PRESENTING DOCUMENTS FOR REGISTRATION
32. Except in the cases mentioned in sections 31, 88 and 89, every document to be
registered under this Act, whether such registration be compulsory or optional, shall be
presented at the proper registration-office,—
(a) by some person executing or claiming under the same, or, in the case of a
copy of a decree or order, claiming under the decree or order, or
(b) by the representative or assign of such person, or
(c) by the agent of such person, representative or assign, duly authorised by
power-of-attorney executed and authenticated in manner hereinafter mentioned.
32A. Every person presenting any document at the proper registration office under
section 32 shall affix his passport size photograph and fingerprints to the document:
    Provided that where such document relates to the transfer of ownership of immovable
property, the passport size photograph and fingerprints of each buyer and seller of such
property mentioned in the document shall also be affixed to the document.
33.  ( 1) * * * * *
(4) Any power-of-attorney mentioned in this section may be proved by the production
of it without further proof when it purports on the face of it to have been executed before
and authenticated by the person or Court hereinbefore mentioned in that behalf.
* * * * *
35. (1) (a) If all the persons executing the document appear personally before the
registering officer and are personally known to him, or if he be otherwise satisfied that they
are the persons they represent themselves to be, and if they all admit the execution of the
document, or
* * * * *
(3)( a) * * * * *
(c) if any person by whom the document purports to be executed is dead, and his
representative or assign denies its execution,
the registering officer shall refuse to register the document as to the person so denying,
appearing or dead:
Provided that, where such officer is a Registrar, he shall follow the procedure prescribed
in Part XII:
Provided further that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare that any Sub-Registrar named in the notification shall, in respect of documents the
execution of which is denied, be deemed to be a Registrar for the purposes of this sub-
section and of Part XII.
* * * * *
Compulsory
affixing of
photograph,
etc.
Persons to
present
documents
for
registration.
Power-of-
attorney
recognisable
for purposes
of section
32.
Procedure on
admission
and denial of
execution
respectively.

19
52.  ( 1)( a) * * * * *
(c) subject to the provisions contained in section 62, every document admitted to
registration shall without unnecessary delay be copied in the book appropriated therefor
according to the order of its admission.
* * * * *
57. (1) Subject to the previous payment of the fees payable in that behalf, the Books
Nos. 1 and 2 and the Indexes relating to Book No. 1 shall be at all times open to inspection
by any person applying to inspect the same; and, subject to the provisions of section 62,
copies of entries in such books shall be given to all persons applying for such copies.
* * * * *
(3) Subject to the same provisions, copies of entries in Book No.4 and in the Index
relating thereto shall be given to any person executing or claiming under the documents to
which such entries respectively refer, or to his agent or representative.
(4) The requisite search under this section for entries in Books Nos. 3 and 4 shall be
made only by the registering officer.
* * * * *
60. (1) After such of the provisions of sections 34, 35, 58 and 59 as apply to any
document presented for registration have been complied with, the registering officer shall
endorse thereon a certificate containing the word “registered,” together with the number
and page of the book in which the document has been copied.
* * * * *
61. (1) The endorsements and certificate referred to and mentioned in sections 59 and
60 shall thereupon be copied into the margin of the Register-book, and the copy of the map
or plan (if any) mentioned in section 21 shall be filed in Book No.1.
* * * * *
(C) Special duties of Sub-Registrar
64. Every Sub-Registrar on registering a non-testamentary document relating to
immovable property not wholly situate in his own sub-district shall make a memorandum
thereof and of the endorsement and certificate (if any) thereon, and send the same to every
other Sub-Registrar subordinate to the same Registrar as himself in whose sub-district any
part of such property is situate, and such Sub-Registrar shall file the memorandum in his
Book No.1.
65. (1) Every Sub-Registrar on registering a non-testamentary document relating to
immovable property situate in more districts than one shall also forward a copy thereof and
of the endorsement and certificate (if any) thereon, together with a copy of the map or plan
(if any) mentioned in section 21, to the Registrar of every district in which any part of such
property is situate other than the district in which his own sub-district is situate.
* * * * *
(D) Special duties of Registrar
66 . ( 1) * * * * *
(2) The Registrar shall also forward a copy of such document, together with a  copy
of the map or plan (if any) mentioned in section 21, to every other Registrar in whose district
any part of such property is situate.
* * * * *
Duties of
registering
officers when
document
presented.
Registering
officers to
allow
inspection of
certain books
and indexes,
and to give
certified
copies of
entries.
Certificate of
registration.
Endorsements
and
certificate to
be copied and
document
returned.
Procedure
where
document
relates to
land in
several sub-
districts.
Procedure
where
document
relates to
land in
several
districts.
Procedure
after
registration
of documents
relating to
land.

20
69. (1) The Inspector-General shall exercise a general superintendence over all the
registration-offices in the territories under the State Government, and shall have power from
time to time to make rules consistent with this Act—
* * * * *
(i) declaring the holidays that shall be observed in the registration-offices; and
* * * * *
89. (1) Every officer granting a loan under the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883,
shall send a copy of his order to the registering officer within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the whole or any part of the land to be improved or of the land to be granted as
collateral security, is situate, and such registering officer shall file the copy in his Book
No.1.
(2) Every Court granting a certificate of sale of immovable property under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, shall send a copy of such certificate to the registering officer within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the immovable property
comprised in such certificate is situate, and such officer shall file the copy in his Book No.1.
(3) Every officer granting a loan under the Agriculturists’ Loans Act, 1884, shall send
a copy of any instrument whereby immovable property is mortgaged for the purpose of
securing the repayment of the loan, and if any such property is mortgaged for the same
purpose in the order granting the loan, a copy also of that order, to the registering officer
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the property so mortgaged
is situate, and such registering officer shall file the copy or copies, as the case may be, in his
Book No.1.
(4) Every Revenue-officer granting a certificate of sale to the purchaser of immovable
property sold by public auction shall send a copy of the certificate to the registering officer
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the property comprised
in the certificate is situate, and such officer shall file the copy in his Book No.1.
* * * * *
Power of
Inspector-
General to
superintend
registration-
offices and
make rules.
Copies of
certain
orders,
certificates
and
instruments
to be sent to
registering
officers and
filed.
19 of 1883.
5 of 1908.
12 of 1884.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Registration Act, 1908.
—————
(Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of Rural Development )
GMGIPMRND—1715RS(S4)—06-08-2013.