1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF BIHAR
BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Bihar for providing impetus to 
the economic capability of the State administration; for implementation of development  
and welfare schemes for women, children, citizens, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,  
Other Backward 
Classes and poor people in the State and for the proper utilization
of its resources and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth 
Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial  Assistance to the State of Bihar
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year
, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance 
to the State of Bihar
 to meet  the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken 
by the State with approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XLVII of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8th DECEMBER, 2023
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Bihar.
5
10

2
welfare of women, children, senior citizens, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, other
backward classes and poor people.
3.  The Provisions of this Act  shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Bihar is the third largest State of India by population. It has a glorified past as the State 
was once considered the centre of political and cultural powers and was a great learning 
place. It is the land where the great empires of Mithila and Magadh flourished during V ideha, 
Maurya and Gupta Kingdoms. Culturally
, it is very rich State. It is home to two UNESCO 
world heritage sites, one at Mahabodhi Temple, Gaya and other at Nalanda Mahavihara, one 
o
f the word’s oldest universities. Bihar was a major centre for learning where Nalanda and 
V
ikramshila universities were imparting learning to students form many countries.
Unfortunately, Bihar today is one of the backward States in the country . It is lagging 
behind in terms of social and economic development. Bihar is weakest in health outcome in 
comparison to other States. Though improved governance in the recent past has led to the 
economic revival of the State to some extent, there is a lot which is required to be done to 
improve the lives of peop
le living in Bihar.
There has been a continuous demand for the State Government to grant Special 
Category 
status to the State but the same has been denied to the State so far. It is, therefore, 
high time that sp ecial financial assistance may be given to the State for implementing 
the
 developmental and welfare schemes for the people of Bihar, particulalry, the women, 
children, senior citizens, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, other backword classes and 
poor people.
Hence, this Bill.
A.D. SINGH
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Bihar to meet the costs of such schemes of
development and welfare, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the
Government of India.
2. The Bill, therefor, on enactment, will involve expinduture out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Bihar. As the sums of
money which will be given to the State of Bihar as special financial assistance by appropriation
by law  made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to be implemented
by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are identified and approved,
it  is not poosibile to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved
out of the Consolidated Fund of India  at this stage.
3. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Bihar for providing impetus to
the economic capability of the State administration; for implementation of development
and welfare schemes for women, children, citizens, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes,
other backward classes and poor people in the State and for the proper utilization
of its resources and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri A.D. Singh, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—037—12-12-2023.