 A S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. XLVIII of 2024 
THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL COMMISSION BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a dedicated institution in the form of the National 
Agricultural Commission to address the multifaceted  
challenges faced by the agricultural sector and  
promote its sustainable development  
and  for matters connected  
therewith or incidental 
 thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:– 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Agricultural Commission  Act,
2024.
(2) It  shall come  into force   on  such date,  as  the Central  Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ―agriculture‖ means the basic and applied sciences of cultivating the
soil along with water and land use management, including crop
production and gathering, pest control, horticulture, floriculture, animal
husbandry, sericulture, pisciculture, apiculture , dairy and poultry
farming, forestry including farm forestry, agricultural engineering and
technology, marketing and processing of agricultural, dairy and poultry
products and other allied activities, whether or not undertaken jointly
with agriculture;
(b) ―agricultural produce‖ means anything produced from the land or
water in the course of agriculture and includes forest produce or any
produce of like nature either processed or unprocessed and includes food
items such as wheat, rice, coarse grains, pul ses, edible oilseeds, oils,
vegetables, fruits, sugarcane, edible nuts, spices, coconut, honey, tobacco
etc.; dairy and poultry products intended for human consumption in its
natural or processed form; fish; raw cotton, raw jute and raw silk; cattle
fodder including oil cakes and other unprocessed and processed items
used for feeding livestock; rubber, bamboo and such other agricultural
produce as may be notified by the Central Government, from time to
time;
(c) “agricultural sector‖ encompasses all activities and establishments
primarily engaged in agriculture and other allied activities;
(d) ―Commission‖ means the National Agricultural Commission
established under section 3 of this Act;
(e )―farmer‖ means a person engaged in the production of agricultural 
produce by self or by hired labour or otherwise, and includes the farmer 
producer organisations; 
(f ) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(g) “stakeholders‖ include land owning farmers, agricultural workers,
agricultural scientists, policymakers, government agencies, and other
relevant entities involved in the agricultural sector.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Establishment 
of the National 
Agricultural 
Commission. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Commission to be known as the National
Agricultural Commission for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
(3) The Commission may , in consultation with the Central
Government, establish offices at any other place in the country, as it
may deem fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Commission shall consist of,-
(a ) a Chairperson;
(b ) a Vice Chairperson; and
(c) at least ten Members, including at least one expert in
agriculture/environmental science/rural development, and at least
one representative each from prominent farmers’ organisations
in the country , agricultural universities, and  relevant Central
Government Departments;
to be appointed by the President by warrant under his signature and 
seal. 
(5) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
35 
40 
45 

3 
  5 
(6) The Central Government shall provide such number of experts,
officers and staff to the Commission, as maybe required for its
efficient functioning.
(7) The salary and allowances payable to, the term of office,
qualifications and experience and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Members, experts,
officers and staff of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
 10 
 15 
 20 
 25 
 30 
 35 
4. The objectives of the Commission shall include, but not be limited to,-
(a) conducting comprehensive studies and research on various
aspects of agriculture, including best farming practices,
technology adoption, market dynamics, and policy interventions;
(b) identifying key challenges and opportunities in the agricultural
sector an d recommending strategies and policies for sustainable
agricultural development;
(c) facilitating dialogue and collaboration among st stakeholders to
address issues related to land use, water management, climate
resilience, and natural resource conservation;
(d) providing advice and assistance to the Central Government and
State Governments on matters pertaining to agriculture, includin g
formulation of policies, programs, and regulations  as well as
determination of the minimum support price of agricultural produce;
(e) monitoring and evaluating the implementation of agricultural
policies and programs of the Central and State Governments and
recommending corrective measures as may be deemed necessary;
(f) maintaining the price of agricultural produce at appropriate levels,
monitor the import and export of agricultural produce and suggest
measures for proper storage of agricultural produc e, particularly
perishable items;
(g) promoting innovation, technology transfer, and capacity building
in agriculture to enhance productivity, income, and livelihoods of
farmers; and
(h) performing other such functions as the Commission may deem
necessary for the advancement  of agriculture and welfare of farmers
in the country.
Objectives of the 
Commission. 
 40 
 45 
5. The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions and
exercise the following powers  to achieve the objectives laid down under
section 4 of this Act, namely:–
(a) to summon and examine witnesses, call for documents, and
gather information necessary for fulfilling its objectives;
(b) constitute sub -committees or expert groups to examine
specific issues or undertake specialised tasks as required;
(c) publish reports, studies, and recommendations for the
benefit of policymakers, stakeholders, and the public;
(d) collaborate with national and international organisations,
research institutions, and other relevant bodies to enhance its
effectiveness and impact;
(e) seek grants, donations, or other forms of financial support from
public or private sources to supplement its budgetary allocation ,
Powers and 
functions of  the 
Commission. 

4 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed; and 
(f) such other funct ions as may be assigned to it  by the Central
Government, from time to time.
Commission to 
have powers of 
Civil Court. 
6. The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to it in
under sub-section (a) of section 5, have all the powers of a Civil Court
trying a suit and, in particular in respect of the following matters,
namely,–
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court
or office;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and
documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
5 
10 
15 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
7. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the
Commission for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Annual Report. 8. The Commission shall prepare in such form and at such time in each
calendar year, as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a full
account of its activities findings, recommendations, and financial
statements during the previous year and submit the same to the Central
Government, which shall cause it to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
20 
25 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other
law for the time being in force.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty.
30 
Power to make 
rules. 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule sh all thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
35 
40
45 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
      Agriculture serves as the primary source of livelihood for 
approximately 55  per cent  of the population of India. It contributes 
substantially to the GDP of the country and is a cornerstone of rural 
economies. The decline in agriculture GDP growth signifies distress in 
the sector, necessitating proactive measures to reverse this trend. 
2. The agriculture sector in India grapples with multifaceted challenges,
including stagnant or falling agricultural prices, declining real incomes
of farmers, rural unemployment   and inadequate public investment.
These challenges, if left unaddressed, can exacerbate rural distress and
impede socio-economic development.
3. Small landholdings, outdated farming practices, water s carcity, soil
degradation, inadequate infrastructure, market access constraints
vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters are structural
impediments hampering the sector's growth and resilience. Addressing
these issues requires a holistic and integrated approach.
4. Therefore, National Agricultural Commission , as proposed to be
established under this Bill,  would ensure coherence and continuity in
agricultural policies by providing expert guidance and recommendations
across different government a dministrations. It would serve as a
knowledge repository, facilitating evidence -based policymaking and
fostering innovation in agricultural practices.
5. The voices of farmers and representation in policy formulation
processes are crucial for designing int erventions that address their
specific needs and challenges effectively. The Commission can act as a
platform for fostering dialogue between policymakers, agricultural
experts, and grassroots stakeholders, thereby empowering farmers and
enhancing their participation in decision-making.
6. By adopting a long -term perspective, the Commission can develop
strategic plans and roadmaps for sustainable agricultural development,
encompassing aspects such as technology adoption, infrastructure
enhancement, market re forms, and risk management strategies. It would
promote resilience, innovation, and competitiveness in the agriculture
sector.
 Hence, this Bill. 
FAUZIA KHAN 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National 
Agriculture Commission , appointment of the Chairperson, Vice 
Chairperson, members, experts, officers and staff therein and the salary 
and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service 
thereof. Clause 4 stipulates the objectives of the Commission including 
conducting comprehensive studies and research on various aspects of 
agriculture, including best farming practices, technology adoption, market 
dynamics, and policy interventions and monitoring and evaluating the 
implementation o f agricultural policies and programs and recommending 
corrective measures as may be deemed necessary.  Clause 5 lays down the 
powers and functions of the Commission, including constituting sub -
committees or expert groups to examine specific issues or undertake 
specialised tasks as required; and publishing reports, studies, and 
recommendations for the benefit of policymakers, stakeholders, and the 
public. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall grant funds to 
the Commission for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, if 
enacted, would involve both non -recurring and recurring expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India.  However,it is not possible to estimate the 
exact recurring and non-recurring expenditure at this stage. 

7 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
        Clause 1 1 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
provisions through an order to remove any difficulties likely to arise in 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill, if enacted. Clause 1 2 empowers 
the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the 
Bill. As the orders and rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a dedicated institution in the form of the National 
Agricultural Commission to address the multifaceted  
challenges faced by the agricultural sector and  
promote its sustainable development  
and  for matters connected  
therewith or incidental 
 thereto. 
______________ 
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–041–10.02.2025 