 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA S ABHA 
ON THE 5TH D ECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XLVI of 2024 
THE PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS (PREVENTION OF 
UNFAIR MEANS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
 to amend the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024. 
       BE it en acted by Parliament in the Seventy-f ifth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows: – 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Examinations (Prevention of
Unfair Means) Amendment Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Substitution of 
section 10. 
2. In Chapter III of the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means)
 
1 of 2024 
Punishment for 
offences under this 
Act.
Act, 2024, for section 10, the following shall be substituted, namely: -
“10. (1) Any person or persons resorting  to un fair means and 
offences under this Act, shall be pu nished with imprisonment for a 
term not less than seven years but which may extend to  life 
imprisonment an d with fine up to two crore rupees: 
   Provided that in case of default of payment of fine, an 
additional pu nishment of imprisonmen t shall be imposed, as p er 
the relevant provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
         Provided furth er th at until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 202 3 
is brought into force, the prov isions of the Ind ian Penal Code, shall 
be ap plicable in place of the said Act.  
(2) The service provider shall also be liable to be punished with
imposition of a fine up to five crore rupees and proportionate cost of
examination shall also be reco vered from such service provider and he
shall also be barred from being assigned with any responsibility for the
conduct of any public examination for a period of ten years.
(3) Whe
re it is established during the investigation that offence under
this Act has been committed with the consent or connivance of any
Director, Senior Management or the persons in- charge of the service
provider firm, he shall be liable for imprisonment for a term not less
than seven years but which may extend to life imprisonment a nd with
fine of ten crore rupees:
          P
rovided that in case of default of payment of fine, an additional 
punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed as per the provisions of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023:        
          P
rovided further that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita , 2023 is 
brought into force,the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be 
applicable in place of the said Act. 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable
to any punishment under the Act, if he proves, that the offence w as
committed without his knowledge and that he exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.”
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
45 of 2023. 
45 
of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 
45 of 2023. 
 
45 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 

3 
ST
ATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 
2024 was enacted to prevent “unfair means” in order to “bring greater 
transparency, fairness and credibility to the public examinations 
system”. 
Th
e occurrences of paper-leaks have made the stakeholders put 
a question mark on the credibility of the competitive and higher -
education exams. India for years has seen around seventy paper-leaks 
in the last seven years across fifteen States. The recent alleged NEET-
UG 2024 and UGC-NET paper leak  reportedly affecting twenty-four 
lakh aspirants, has brought to the fore excessive control of the paper 
leak mafia over exams in India. These leaks disrupted the schedules 
of 1.7 crore applicants and there are wide- spread protests over the 
alleged malpractices in the NEET entrance exams. 
As
 per reports, paper leaks over the last five years have resulted 
in forty-one recruitment exams across fifteen  States being cancelled, 
hampering the employment hopes of 1.4 crore applicants. In the case 
of NEET itself, the Central Bureau of Investigatio n is probing alleged 
irregularities in the examinations held in 2018, 2021 and 2022. The 
scale of paper leaks in India is huge. The paper -leak industry is a 
well-oiled one, destroying the dreams of crores of students and job 
aspirants in the last five years alone.   
However, the current law prescribes a maximum imprisonment 
of five years for persons who are found guilty of paper leak. 
Considering the gravity of the offence and the amount of damage it 
does to the career prospects and livelihoods of youth of  the country, it 
is imperative that the quantum of punishment is increased to serve  as 
a deterrent and instill fear in the minds of the people who commit this 
crime.  
The punishment prescribed in the Public  Examinations 
(Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2 024 is much lesser than the anti -
cheating law of various State Governments. Therefore, this  Bill 
proposes to enhance the minimum punishment to seven years and a 
maximum of life imprisonment for paper leak and also seeks to 
increase the fine to rupees two crore. 
Hen
ce, this Bill. 
RAGHAV CHADHA. 

4 
ANNEXURE 
EX
TRACT FROM THE PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS 
(PREVENTION OF UNFAIR 
MEANS) ACT, 2024 
[1
 OF 2024] 
* *                *       *   
Punishment for 
offences under 
this Act. 
10.(1) Any person or persons resorting to unfair means and 
offences under this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term not less than three years but which may extend to five years 
and with fine up to ten lakh rupees. In case of default of payment of 
fine, an additional punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed, 
as per the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
       Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is 
brought into force, the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be 
applicable in place of the said Act. 
(2) The service provider shall also be liable to be punished with
imposition of a fine up to one crore rupees and proportionate cost
of examination shall also be recovered from such service provider
and he shall als o be barred from being assigned with any
responsibility for the conduct of any public examination for a
period of four years.
(3) Where it is established during the investigation that offence
under this Act has been committed with the consent or connivance
of any Director, Senior Management or the persons in- charge of the
service provider firm, he shall be liable for imprisonment for a term
not less than three years but which may extend to ten years and
with fine of one crore rupees. In case of default of  payment of fine,
an additional punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed as per
the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023:
       Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is 
brought into force, the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be 
applicable in place of the said Act.  
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment under the Act, if he proves, that the
offence was committed without his knowledge and that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
45 
of 2023. 
45
 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 
45 of 2023. 
 
45
 of 2023. 
45 of 1860. 
*                   *              *        *           

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
 to amend t
he Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024. 
____________ 
(Shri Raghav Chadha, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)–253–08.12.2025. 