AS BNTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

Bill No. XLVI of 1999
THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHT Y-SIXTH AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1999
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.
Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1999... Shorttitle.

2. In article 243M of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following clause shall be Amendment of
inserted, namely:— article 243M.

“(3A) Nothing in article 243D, relating to reservation of seats for the Scheduled
Castes, shall apply to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.”.

1


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 was brought into force
with effect from the 24th Apnl, 1993 The said Act provided that within one year from the
date of commencement of that Act, all the States shall amend their local laws to bring
them in conformity with the new provisions under the Constitution This exercise was
required to be completed before the 23rd April, 1994

2. Article 243D provides for reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in every Panchayat. Arunachal Pradesh 1s a State inhabited fully by indigenous
tnbal people No Scheduled Castes exist in the State No reservation of seats for the
Scheduled Castes has been made in the State Legislative Assembly and no provssions
exist under any law to that effect There 1s also no reservation for the Scheduled Castes in
State Government services

3. The Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation, 1873 and the Chin Hills Regulation,
1896 provide special protection and safeguard for the peaceful existence of the indigenous
tribal people of Arunachal Pradesh These laws prohubit the entry of outsiders in the tribal
area without “Inner Line Permit” Only the indigenous tribal people are allowed to
participate in the democratic processes.

4 The tribal society in Atunachal Pradesh 1s casteless where social equality among
men and women has prevatled over centuries and ages Since no Scheduled Castes exist in
the State and the State of Arunachal Pradesh 1s singularly free irom the caste system, ॥ 15
proposed to insert a new clause (3A) tn article 243M of the Constitution of india, to
exempt the state of Arunachal Pradesh from the application of article 243D relating to the
reservation of seats का Panchayats for the Scheduled Castes

5 This will provide a legal and constitutional basis for Panchayat Ray Institutions in
Auunachal Pradesh in accordance with the socio-political ethos of the State

6 The Bull seeks to achieve the aforesaid objective

SUNDER LAL PATWA

New DELHi,
The 16th December, 1999


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *
243M. (1) * * * * * Part not to

. apply to certain
* * * ok x Breas


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Sunder Lal Patwa, Minister of Rural Development)

" MGIP(PLU)MRND—~2834RS—16.12.1999,