Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  RURAL  LABOUR  (WELFARE) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the rural labour
employed in the agriculture sector and allied activities thereto and other rural
occupations by establishing a Welfare Fund for such labour and for taking other
measures to improve the living conditions, working conditions and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rural Labour (Welfare) Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. XLVI of 2012
Definitions.
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012

2
(b) "employer" includes cultivator, orchard owner, poultry farm owner, livestock
rearer, agency society, food processing unit, crusher, oil or pulses mill or any such
establishment located in any rural area which employs rural based labour;
(c) "Fund" means  the Rural Labour Welfare Fund established under section 4;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "rural labour" means any person residing in a village and engaged in any
rural vocation such as agriculture, horticulture, sericulture, poultry, rearing of livestock
including piggery, food processing, handicrafts, weaving or any such other
occuppation as a wage earner whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood and includes
any person engaged   through a contractor or engaged as a self employed person.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a National Policy for
the betterment and welfare of the rural labour.
(2) The national policy so formulated under sub-section ( 1) shall be uniformly
implemented throughout the country and the policy may incorporate provisions for
uninterrupted work round the year, minimum remunerative wages, healthcare including
maternity facilities, old age pension, compensation in case of accident and such other facilities
as may be deemed necessary.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, with effect from such date as may be specified by
notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, establish for the purposes of this Act, a
Fund to be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund which shall be administered by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, credit to the Fund in each financial year such sums of money as it considers
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Fund shall also consist of the moneys received from,—
(a) the Government of the States as contributions, towards the fund;
(b) the body corporates as donations;
(c) financial institutions and other institutions, domestic and foreign ones as
assistance;
(d) donations from the employers and general public and bodies.
(4) The Fund shall be utilized to promote the welfare measures for the rural based
labour which are necessary or expedient to do and in particular to defray the costs towards,—
(i)  improving educational facilities for the children of rural based labour;
(ii) improving water supply for drinking and other purposes;
(iii) improving the standard of living and nutrition for the families of rural
based labour;
(iv) amelioration of social condition of rural based labour;
(v) providing housing and recreational facilities;
(vi) providing medical facilities to the rural based labour and their families;
(vii) providing financial assistance in case of infirmity or disability due to
accident etc.;
(viii) Old age pension to the rural based labour;
(ix) 
providing and improving the welfare measures included in the national
policy and such other welfare measures as may be prescribed;
National
Policy for
rural labour.
Establishment
of Rural
Labour
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. The Central Government may require a State Government or Union Territory
Administration or a local authority or any employer to furnish for the purposes of this Act,
such information in such form and within such period as may be prescribed.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure availability of work round the year
to the rural labour through the employers or in such manner as that Government may deem
expedient or necessary.
7. The Central Government shall, after the inputs provided by the Governments of the
States and Union Territory Administrations, submit an annual report, in such form and in
such manner, as may be prescribed, of the administration of the Fund and other welfare
activities carried out under this Act, to the President of India who shall cause the report to be
laid before both the Houses of Parliament along with action taken thereon as soon as it is
received.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
State
Government
etc. to furnish
requisite
information.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
availability of
work round
the year to
the rural
labour.
Annual
Report.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is rightly said that India lives in villages because nearly eighty per cent of its
population lives in the villages and mostly depends on agriculture and agro based
occupations. There are farms, orchards, poultry farms, livestock raring farms where rural
based labour are employed. They work as weavers, small scale entrepreneurs, handicraft
artisans, potters, cobblers, blacksmiths etc. There are millions of such agricultural, home
based and other workers who are unorganized and remain exploited and poor throughout
their lives and live in distress from generations together. Their wages and income are meagre
and they do not get employment round the year. As a result, they are poverty striken and
remain neglected even by the State.
In a welfare State, like ours, it is the duty of the State to introduce welfare measures for
the have-nots like the rural based labour who remain unorganized and exploited. Hence, it is
necessary to formulate a national welfare policy for the rural based labour and constitute a
Welfare Fund for them to ameliorate their living conditions. In pursuance of the said Policy,
the Central and State Governments will implement the welfare measures contained in that
Policy and defray the costs to the Welfare Fund.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  E.M.  SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Rural Labour Welfare Fund for
which the Central Government shall provide funds in each financial year. The Bill, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees ten thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one thousand crore may also involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—3947RS (S3)—07.12.2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the rural labour employed
in the agriculture sector and allied activities thereto and other rural occupations by
establishing a Welfare Fund for such labour and for taking other measures to improve
the living conditions, working conditions and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P.)