THE GIRL CHILD (COMPULSORY  BASIC  EDUCATION)  BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory basic school level education for the girl child free of cost
in order to eradicate their illiteracy and for deterrent punishment for those who
prevent the girl child from going to school and pursuing her studies in any manner
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1)This Act may be called the Girl Child (Compulsory Basic Education) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "basic education" means education in a school up to senior secondary level
or twelfth standard or class;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. XLVI of  2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH JUL Y, 2006.

2
(c) "girl child" means any female human being who is below the age of eighteen
years;
(d) "parent" in relation to a girl child include her father and mother, guardian and
every person who has the actual custody of the girl child for the time being;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding any custom, usage or belief of any section of the society, every
parent shall compulsorily admit his girl child in a school, on completion of five years of age
in order to enable her to get basic education and shall not restrain her in any manner from
attending the school.
(2) whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1)  shall be guilty of an
offence under this Act.
4. For the purposes of section 3 no parent or person shall engage a girl child in any
household chore or employ a girl child in a manner which may prevent the girl child from
attending her school and deprive her from basic education.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory education to
every girl child who is ordinarily residing within its territorial jurisdiction.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) the appropriate Government shall establish
such number of schools within its territorial jurisdiction as it may deem necessary and for
the physically challenged girl child shall establish special schools at such place or places
as the appropriate Government may deem necessary with such facilities as may be
prescribed.
(3) If any girl child intends to pursue higher studies beyond the basic education stage,
the appropriate Government shall provide free higher education to such girl child.
(4) The appropriate Government shall also provide training to the girl child in vocations
like home science, doll making, tailoring, painting, knitting, weaving, food preservation,
beautician, interior decoration, nursing, computer education, etc. for her development.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide necessary funds, from time to time, for the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) If any parent of a girl child, for any reason whatsoever, does not admit, prevents,
restrains or in any manner obstructs the girl child from receiving basic education, he shall be
liable to simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with a fine
which may extend to twenty thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever employs a girl child resulting in obstructing her from attending the school
for basic education shall be liable to imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two
years but may extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law applicable to the girl child.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Parents to
compulsorily
admit the girl
child in
school for
basic
education.
Prohibition of
employing
girl child
hampering
her school
education.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
free and
compulsory
education to
girl child.
Central
Government
to provide
necessary
funds.
Penalty.
Offences to be
cognizable.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is awesome and pitable that even in this age of scientific advancements, modernization
and progress in all walks of life, the girl child is the most neglected and unwanted in the world
and more so in our country. Most of the families do not want to have a daughter. The girl is
killed in the womb of her mother itself if the female foetus is detected in the sex determination
tests, which are conducted illegally on a very large sale throughout the country. The latest
Census (2001) has revealed a stunning fact about the steep decline in male-female ratio in the
country and more so in the northern and western stakes where the female ratio has declined
to the dangerous levels. Further, the hapless girl child is consistently neglected in many
homes. The condition of girl child in the orthodox families particularly in rural and tribal areas
is the worst. While the boy gets the best of attention, the girl is generally neglected. Every
family tries to send the boy to the best school but the girl is not sent for school education.
Girls are denied even the basic schooling. They are forced to do the household chores and
married off at a very tender age. In the cities the poor girls can be seen working as maids in
households which, in fact, is their school going age. In the cities and Metropolitans many
families give equal treatment to the girl child and in some rare cases the girl child is given
more weightage and facilities, love and care but their percentage is negligible. Majority of
girls remain illiterate and exploited throughout their lives. This leads to further illiteracy
among the future generation of the girl child and this vicious cycle goes on.
Hence it has become necessary to take some drastic steps by making basic education
compulsory and mandatory so as to remove illiteracy amongst the girl child. If the girl child
becomes literate she will not allow her children later to remain illiterate. This will eradicate
illiteracy from the country. It is therefore, proposed in this Bill that the parents must send the
girl child to school for basic education otherwise they should be punished. The Government
too should open adequate number of schools for the girls and provide necessary facilities in
such schools. This will have the desired results and illiteracy amongst the girl child will be
eradicated very soon.
Hence this Bill.
SUSHMA  SWARAJ.
3

4
FINANCIAL   MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education to girl child by opening
schools, special schools, etc. Clause 6 provides that Central Government shall provide
necessary funds for the purposes of the Bill. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from
the  Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per year.
A sum of rupees five thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory basic school level education for the girl child free of cost in
order to eradicate their illiteracy and for deterrent punishment for those who prevent
the girl child from going to school and pursuing her studies in any manner and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1770RS(S-4)—28-07-2006.