THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (i) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(ii) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In article 15 of the Constitution,—
‘‘(i) in clause (1), after the words "place of birth", the word ‘‘,disability’’ shall be
inserted.
(ii) in clause (2), after the words ‘‘place of birth’’, the word ‘‘disability’’ shall be
inserted.
(iii) in clause ( 4), after the words ‘‘the Scheduled Tribes’’, the words ‘‘or the
persons with disabilities’’ shall be inserted.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 15.
Bill No. XLVI of 2017
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 29TH DECEMBER, 2017

2
(iv) in clause ( 5), after the words ‘‘the Scheduled Tribes’’, the words ‘‘or for
persons with disabilities’’ shall be inserted.
3. In article 16 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (2) after the words ‘‘place of birth, residence’’, the word ‘‘disability’’
shall be inserted.
(ii) in clause (4) after the words ‘‘under the State’’, the words ‘‘or in favour of the
persons with disabilities’’ shall be inserted.
4. In article 39 of the Constitution,—
(i) in sub-clause ( a) for the words ‘‘and women’’, the words ‘‘, women and
persons with disabilities’’ shall be substituted.
(ii) in sub-clause ( d) for the words ‘‘and women’’, the words ‘‘, women and
persons with disabilities’’ shall be substituted.
(iii) in sub-clause ( e) for the words ‘‘and women’’, the words ‘‘, women and
persons with disabilities’’ shall be substituted.
5. After article 46 of the Constitution, the following be inserted, namely:—
"46A. The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic
interests of persons with disabilities and shall protect them from social injustice and
from all forms of exploitation.
Amendment
of article 16.
Insertion of
new article
46A.
Amendment
of article 39.
Promotion of
educational
and economic
interests of
persons with
disabilities.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Persons with disabilities remain one of the most marginalised communities in the
country. Occurrences of stigma and discrimination are common in the lives of these persons.
This is despite India's engagement with international conventions for persons with disabilities.
India had adopted the Proclamation on the Full Participation and Equality of Persons with
Disabilities in the Asian and the Pacific Region in December, 1992. Nine years after India
ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with disabilities (UNCRPD)
in 2007, the Rights of  Persons with Disabilities  Act, 2016 came into force. The Act aimed to
empower persons with disabilities by providing legal redress against discrimination, access
to education and employment.
Despite the 22 year long existence of Persons With Disabilities (Equal Opportunity
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995; its revamp through Rights of  Persons
with Disabilities Act, 2016 and India's ratification of UNCRPD, progress has been slow.
70 million disabled Indians continue to face discrimination and don't get access to public
services, formal employment and education. Reportedly only seven states have a separate
department for dealing with matters concerning persons with disability. According to the
World Disability Report 2011, 87% of persons with disabilities work in the informal sector in
India. The same report also pointed that the share of disabled children not enrolled in
schools in the more prosperous states in India is more than five times the national rate. The
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is responsible for special schools for children
with disabilities while the Department of Education is responsible for children in mainstream
schools. This segregation has developed a cultural perception that more than eqality of
opportunity, children with disabilities are in need of welfare. These perceptions lead to
stereotyping children with disabilities and breed negative attitudes.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Jeeja Ghosh versus Union of India observed
that, equality not only implies preventing discrimination, but goes beyond in remedying
discrimination against groups suffering systematic discrimination in society. In concrete
terms, it means embracing the notion of positive rights, affirmative action and reasonable
accommodation. The move from the patronising and paternalistic approach to persons with
disabilities represented by the medical model to viewing them as members of the community
with equal rights has also been reflected in the evolution of international standards relating
specifically to disabilities, as well as in moves to place the rights of persons with disabilities
within the category of universal human rights.
Although Section 3 of the Rights of persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 ensures equality
and non-discrimination  the same has not been matched with amendments in the Constitution.
Therefore, it has been proposed that Article 15, Article 16 and Directive Principles of
the Constitution be amended so that all policies, laws and regulations are designed keeping
in view the interests of persons with disabilities. It will empower persons with disabilities as
they can seek redressal for violation of their fundamental right against discrimination. By
amending its Constitution, India will join the league of developed nations like Canada,
Germany, UK that guarantee equal Rights to persons with disabilities in their Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
HUSAIN DALWAI
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
15.  (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment;
or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general
public.
(3) *** *** ***
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the
State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than
the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.
16. (1)* * * * *
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth
residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of, any
employment or office under the State.
(3) * * * * *
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
(4A) * * * * *
(4B) * * * * *
(5) * * * * *
39. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate
means of livelihood;
(b)* * * * *
(c)* * * * *
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender age
of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to
enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;
(f)* * * * *
* * * * *
4
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.
Equality of
opportunity
in matters of
public
employment.
Certain
principles of
policy to be
followed by
the State.

GMGIPMRND—3416RS(S3)—02-01-2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri  Husain Dalwai,  M.P.)