1
THE BEGGARS (EMPOWERMENT, SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND
REHABILITATION) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for beggars to lead a life with dignity through skill development by imparting
them compulsory vocational training and programs for their rehabilitation and to
enable them towards self sustainable livelihood and the prevention of begging and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the premable of the Constitution of India mandates to ensure equality of
status and of opportunity and Justice, social, economic and political to all its citizens
AND WHEREAS article 14 provides for quality of all before law, article 16 provides for
equality of opportunity in matters of public employment, article 21 provides the right to
protection of life and article 23 provides for the right against exploitation, all of which being
fundamental rights bestowed by the Constitution to all citizens of the country.
A
ND WHEREAS  the United Nations Convention against Transnational organized Crime
identifies forced begging as a form of exploitation through trafficking in human beings.
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said protocol.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Beggars (Empowerment, skill Development and
Rehabilitation ) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XLVI of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH FEBRUARY, 2015

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for coming into force
of different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be constructed as a reference to the coming into force of
that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means,—
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment wholly or
substantially financed by that Government, or a Cantonment Board constituted
under the Cantonments Act, 2006, the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or
substantially financed by that Government, or any local authority, other than a
Cantonment Board, the State Government.
(b) "begging" means,—
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place or entering on any private
premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms whether under the
pretence of singing, dancing, fortune-telling, performing tricks or selling articles
or otherwise;
(ii) exposing or exhibiting with the object or obtaining or extorting alms
any sore, wounds, injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any
other person or of an animal;
(iii) allowing oneself to be used as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting
or receiving alms;
(c) "child" means a child who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(d) "children Homes" means the children's home established under the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000;
(e) "co-operative Society" means an society registered or deemed to be
registered, under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or any other law relating to
co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State;
(f) "institution" means an institution for the reception, care, protection,
educaiton, training, rehabilitation and any other activities for persons detained or
involved in begging;
(g) "mentally Challenged" means a condition of arrested or incomplete
development of mind of person, which is specially characterized by sub-normality of
intelligence;
(h) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression "notify" or "notified" shall be construced accordingly;
(i) "differently abled persons" means a person suffering from any of the
conditions relating to autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation or a combination of
any two or more of such conditions and includes a person suffering from severe
multiple disability;
(j) "physically Handicapped" includes all such persons who have any kind of
loco motor disability or visual or hearing impairment;
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this act;
(l) "receiving vocational shelters" means an institution for the receiving and
rehabilitation of beggars provided by the appropriate government where vocational
training shall be imparted free of cost to all persons;
Definitions.
56 of 2000
2 of 1912
41 of 1946.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(m) "rehabilitation" refers to a process aimed at enabling persons to attain and
maintain optimal, physical, intellectual, psychiatric, sensory or social funciton levels.
3. (1) Whoever employs or uses any person for the purposes of begging or causes
any person to beg shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not less than three
years which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both;
(2) Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over a child, abets the commission
of the offence punishable under sub-section (1), shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term not less than three years which may extend to ten years, or with fine or with both.
(3) The offence punishable under sub-section (1), shall be cognizable and non-bailable;
(4) The Competent Court, may increase punishment or penalty on trial under sub-
section (1) on finding aggravating circumstances or heinous offences, depending on the
nature of the crime, such that;
Any person convicted of human rights violations or an offence under Indian Penal
Code of 1860  or other laws that involve as human right violation trafficking of human body
parts, rape, Molestation, Sexual Harassment and torture;
(5) The sentence in such cases may extend of life imprisonment or death
sentence.
4. (1) The appropriate Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, order
the detention of persons found begging and may further lay guidelines and make provisions
for such a detention:
(2) Any person found begging shall be detained by the police and before making
such a detention, the officer—in-charge of the concerned police jurisdiction shall satisfy
himself as to the bona fide of the detained beggar:
Provided that no person found begging on any premises, not being a public place
shall be detained or shall be liable to any proceedings under this Act except on a complaint
made by the occupier of such premises:
Provided further that a person, other than a police official, may hand over the beggar
to the Police if they find it convenient:
Provided also that if the beggar is a minor, the detention shall take place with sureties;
(3) Any person detained under sub-section ( 2) shall be sent to receiving shelters
established under Clause 5, 6 and 7 with immediate effect, for a period of not less than one
year extending up to five years;
(4) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, shall
prescribe an appropriate procedure for rehabilitation of detaining person found begging
under sub-section (2) of Section 4.
5. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain, in every district, either
by itself or through voluntary or non-Governmental organisations a Receiving V ocational
Shelter, for persons detained under Section 4  with the exception of children and differently
abled persons, with the following provisions:
(i) The receiving vocational  shelter shall have reasonable lodging, food and
medical facilities with qualified doctors available round the clock at free of cost to all
beggars;
(ii) Mandatory education skills and basic physical fitness training would be
imparted to each beggar in the receiving vocational shelter, monitored and evaluated
continuously by a qualified training officer for their overall development;
Detention of
Beggars.
Detained
Beggars to be
sent to
Receiving
Vocational
Shelters.
45 of 1860
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Abetment to
bagging as
cognizable and
non-bailable
punishable
offence.
45

4
(iii) Each beggar at the Receiving vocational shelter shall be guaranteed a
minimum of 100 days of employment where they would engage themselves in work to
earn their livelihood and develop skill to further their employability under programmes
for Night Shelter-cum-Work;
(iv) Reinforcement sessions by Phychatrists and Consulting doctors would be
arranged at the receiving vocational shelters for conducting personal sessions with
all beggars; and
(v) Each of these receiving vocational Shelters must be equipped with
recreational facilities to engage beggars in a playing field, chess, carom and other
indoor activities.
6. The appropriate Government may establish and maintain, in every district, either by
itself or through voluntary or non-governmental organisations, Children Shelters, which
shall be registered as such, for all children with the exception of those with physical or
mental disability, detained under Section 4, with the following provisions;
(i) Reasonable in house lodging, food and medical facilities with qualified doctors
available round-the-clock and-in-house shall be provided free of cost to all Children;
(ii) Free and Compulsory Education under the The Right of Children to Free
and compulsory Education Act, 2009;
(iii) Free Education till class twelfth for all children under any scheme of an
appropriate Government;
(iv) Remedial sessions for children for aiding them to get at par with their age
appropriate class;
(v) Mandatory Physical fitness and Sports:
Provided that the required infrastructure or access to nearest district infrastructure
for the holistic development of children shall be provide by the Appropriate Government.
(vi) At least one Female Counsellor in each Children Shelter to address the
issues faced by children, closely monitored by the District Welfare Officer on whose
recommendation action will be taken as the appropriate Government deems fit;
(vii) For those children with families, visitor hours may be availed by family
members to meet, interact and track the development of their children at a frequency
prescribed by the appropriate Government; and
(viii) Children, above fourteen years of age, shall have Skill Development
programmes by the Government for which they shall receive a montly stipend as
prescribed appropriate Government.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette shall
establish separate Receiving Vocational Shelters in each district for differently abled beggers;
(2) The shelters registered under this Clause, shall, be provided, for the propose of
rehabilitation and re-integration of persons, with the following in such a manner as may be
prescribed, which may include;
(a) Reasonable(maintain a minimum standard of quality) lodging, food and
medical facilities, that would be accessible by differently abled persons, with qualified
doctors available round-the-clock and in-house shall be provided free of cost to all
beggars with disabilities;
(b) Accessible infrastructure and equipment for differently abled persons like
ramps, wheel-chairs, prosthetic devices, hearing aids, braille kits, or any other suitable
aids and appliances as required;
(3) Appropriate V ocational and Skill Development programs for differently abled
beggars shall be carried out in shelters for differently able persons such in a manner as may
be prescribed, which may include;
Separate
Shelters for
Children.
Separate
Shelters for
biggers with
disabilities.
35 of 2009.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(i) Special Trainers equipped and certified to take care of differently
abled persons;
(ii) Required material for training and skill development of persons with
special needs; and
(4) Physiotherapists and doctors, according to the special needs, shall be provided in
such shelters to hold special weekly sessions with all the Beggars at the Shelter.
8. The appropriate Government shall designate any Children Shelter as a home fit for
children with disabilities or special needs and provide for delivering specialised services, in
addition to those mentioned in sub-sec. (i) of section 7, depending on the requirement and
may include the following:
(i) Monitoring and management of the Children Shelter for children with
disabilities, including the standards and the nature of services to be provided by
them, are based on individual care plans for each child; and
(ii) The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 using
special equipments and materials as may be required.
9. The Central Government, in consultation with the State Government, shall establish
a Beggar's Welfare Fund for the purpose of skill development, vocation training, medical
facilities and Education among others in such manner as may be prescribed.
10.  (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure the imparting of V ocational courses
at each of the shelter institutions established under this act, with the exception of children
and differently able beggars established under this Act where Free and Compulsory training
in varied fields of industry, agriculture, textiles, micro-financing, media, computer
applications and software development among others as designed in the skill development
program by the appropriate Government for the Skill Development of beggars shall be
provided in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2)   A stipend per month as an incentive to all the beggars for the training sessions in
such manner as may be prescribed the appropriate Govt. shall pay.
11. The appropriate Government shall help the beggars and children with disabilities
to overcome their disability in a manner as may be prescribed by utilising the Beggar's
Welfare Fund, which may include the following:
(i) Treatment and Rehabilitation facilities for differently abled persons due to
ailments like poliomyelitis, cerebral palsy, congenital deformities, leprosy, burn
contracture, paraplegia, hemiplegia free of cost;
(ii) Support and Aid to differently abled persons, post their treatment.
12. The appropriate Government shall also provide additional assistance to those
detained under section 5 in such a manner as may be prescribed, which may include,—
(i) birth registration and obtaining the proof of identity;
(ii) legal aid where required;
(iii) Referral services for education, vocational training, de-addiction, treatment
of diseases where required; and
(iv) any other service that may reasonably be provided in order to ensure the
well being and development of the persons detained, either directly by the appropriate
Government, registered or fit individuals or institutions or through referral services.
Separate
Designated
Shelter for
Children with
Disabilities.
Established of
Beggar's
Welfare Fund.
Vocational
Training
Courses at
each shelter.
Treatment
and
Rehabilitation
of Beggars
with
Disablities
Additional
Assistance to
Beggars at
Shelters.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
35 of 2009

6
13. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Cooperative Society for Beggars, with a centre in either each district or a group of districts,
where,
(i) beggars sent to Receiving V ocational Shelters, Special Shelters or Children
Shelters shall be introduced and familiarized with several concepts of micro financing,
credit system, banking, entrepreneurship among others for skill development;
(ii) The products created by beggars in the Shelters during the vocational
training sessions under section 10, may be sold to the public or bought by the
appropriate Government and the procceds to acquired shall go to the Beggar's Welfare
Fund; and
(iii) beggars in shelters may take financial aid from the Beggar Welfare Fund to
sell their  products through the Cooperative, the profit from which shall go to the
Beggar or group of beggars.
14.  (1) The appropriate Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, carry
out strict monitoring of the institutions set up under this Act, by establishing a monitoring
committee, within three months of the coming into force of the Act in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) The Monitoring Committee shall consist of:
(a) The Secretary of Ministry of Social Welfare and Justice;
(b) Officers from Ministry of Law and Justice;
(c) Secretary Ministry of Urban Development,
(d) Five Experts from the field of Skill Development and V ocational Training,
appointed by the appropriate Government;
(e) Not less than two members from Non-Government Organisations working in
the field of Social Welfare and Justice; and
(f) Not less than two retired judges of High Court, appointed by the appropriate
Government.
(3) The monitoring committee shall submit a report by 10th day of every month to the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
(4) Each institution set up under this Act, shall submit a report to the Monitoring
Committee by 10th day of every month.
15. The appropriate Government shall assist the Beggars detained under sub-section (1)
of  section 4, after completion of their detention period under sub-section (2) of section 5 to
get jobs for sustaining their livelihood or provide jobs in Government or Government aided
organisations.
16. The appropriate Government, shall arrest, sentence and impose penalty on persons,
whoever having been previously detained and sent to the Receiving V ocational Centres
under section 5, if found begging again, in such a manner as may be prescribed.
17. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of the Act.
18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any thing inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
19. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or  give
such direction, not inconsistent with the provision of this Act, as appears to it to be
necessary or expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
20. The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Establishment
of
Cooperative
Society for
Beggars.
Establishment
of Monitoring
Committee.
Assistance in
Jobs and
Employment
Opportunities.
Begging again
would be
punishable.
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make Rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Act to have
Overriding
effect.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are a large number of people in the country whose only source of livelihood is
through the act of asking for alms. Over the years, this has turned into one of the largest
organised crimes of human trafficking in the country. The community of Beggars is one of
the most ignored in the Country. Some State Acts make it a punishable offence to beg and
according to the law, arrest beggars and sentence them to a minimum of 3 to 10 years of
imprisonment. The Government of India does not run any scheme or plan solely for Beggars
in  the Country and with regard to their Skill Development. There is no robust mechanism or
framework that provides them with an opportunity to develop skill and earn a respectable
livelihood or fulfil their basic daily needs like food, housing or shelter. These people are
denied their fundamental constitutional rights.
This Bill aims to provide adequate facilities for skill development programs for
empowering beggars to earn their livelihood. It has provisions for the treatment and
rehabilitation for the differently abled as through as counselling and a separate Beggars
Welfare Fund along with establishing a Cooperative Society that supports them.
It is felt there is a need for a framework that creates positive responsibilities on the
State and provides for a more effective protection of the rights of the destitute and people
into begging, guaranteed under the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
 VIVEK GUPTA
7

8
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5, Clause 6, Clause 8 and Clause 9 of the Bill seek to establish Shelter Homes
in each district for the differently abled, children and those detained while found begging.
Clause 10 establishes a Welfare Fund for Beggars, Clause 11 directs the Appropriate
Government to make provisions for Free and Compulsory V ocational Training courses and
Skill Development. Clause 12 gives the differently abled beggars access to free treatment
and rehabilitation that will help them overcome their disability. Clause 13 establishes a
Cooperative Society for beggars and Clause 14 establishes a Monitoring Committee to
supervise and overlook all institutions established under the Act.
Clause 17 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the appropriate Government to provide
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill.
there is no easy way of estimating the full financial order likely to be increased if the
privisions of this legislation are to be implemented. However, the expenditure, whether
recurring or non-recurring, will be met out of the Consolidated fund of india or the
consolidated fund of the concerned state.

9
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 20 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government, in consultation with the
State Governments, to make necessary rules for making rules, by notification in the official
gazette for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details
only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for beggars to lead a life with dignity through skill development by imparting
them compulsory vocational training and programs for their rehabilitation and to
enable them towards self sustainable livelihood and the prevention of begging and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4849RS(S3)—27-02-2015.