AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XLVIMI of 2001

THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BLL
Further to amend the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962.

Bz it enacted by Rarliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

1. (J) This Act may be called the Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2001. Short title and

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
5 inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

58 of 1962. 2. In section 11 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred toas Amendment of
the principal Act),— section 11.
(a) in clause (a), after the words “in India”, the words “or abroad” shall be inserted;
(b) in clause (e), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be omitted;
10 (c) after clauses (०), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ea) enter into, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
joint ventures with any corporation established by or under any Central Act or
any State Act or with any company formed and registered under the Companies
1 of 1956. Act, 1956 including foreign company or through its subsidiary companies, for
15 carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Explanation —Fot the purposes of this clause, the expression “foreign
company” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause (23A) of section 2
43 of 1961. of the Income-tax Act, 1961;

(eb) establish subsidiary companies; and".


Amendment
of section 20.

Amendment
of section 21.

Amendment
of section 22.

Amendment
of section 24.

2

3. In section 20 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), in clause (९), for the words “with the previous approval
of”, the words “under intimation to” shall be substituted;

(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “with the previous approval of”, the words
“under intimation to” shall be substituted.

4. In section 21 of the principal Act, in clause (v), the words “the Central Warehousing
Corporation or” shall be omitted.

5. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “with the previous
approval of”, the words “under intimatiort to” shall be substituted.

6. In section 24 of the principal Act,—

(a) in clause (a), for the words “with the previous approval of”, the words “after
consultation with” shail be substituted;

(b) in clause (d), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(c) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(da) enter into, with the previous approval of the State Government, joint
ventures with the Central Warehousing Corporation; and”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 provides for the incorporation and regula-
tion of Warchousing Corporations for the purpose of warehousing of agricultural produce
and other commodities notified by the Government. In the changed liberalized economic
scenario, there is need to diversify their activities. The Warchousing Corporations Act, 1962
also needs to be amended in the light of the past experience and improvements required in
the functioning of the Warehousing Corporations. The proposed amendments would—

(i) enable the Central Warehousing Corporation to 5९ up warehouses abroad
and also to enter into joint ventures;

(ii) empower the Central Warchousing Corporation to nominate its officers on
the Board of the State Warehousing Corporations;

(iii) empower the State Governments to appoint and remove Chairmen and
managing directors of the State Warehousing Corporations without the approval of
the Central Warehousing Corporation;

(iv) empower the State Warehousing Corporations to acquire and build godowns
and warehouses without the approval of the Central Warchousing Corporation.

2. With a view to incorporating the provisions on the lines proposed, it is necessary to
amend sections 11, 20,21, 22 and 24 of the Warehousing Corporations Act.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI,
The Sth July, 2001. SHANTA KUMAR.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE WAREHOUSING CorPoRATIONS AcT, 1962
(S80F 1962)

* * * * *

11. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Warehousing Corporation may—
(a) acquire and build godowns and warehouses at such suitable places in India
as it thinks fit;

* * * * *

(e) act as agent of the Government for the purposes of the purchase, sale,
storage and distribution of agricultural produce, seeds, manures, fertilizers, agricul-
tural implements and notified commodities; and
* * * * *

20. (1) The general superintendence and management of the affairs of a State Ware-
housing Corporation shall vest in a board of directors which shall consist of the following,
namely:—

* * * * *

(c) a managing director, appointed by the State Government in consultation with
the directors referred to in clauses (a) and (b) and with the previous approval of the
Central Warehousing Corporation.

(2) The Chairman of the board of directors shall be appointed by the State Government
from among the directors of the State Warehousing Corporation with the previous approval
of the Central Warehousing Corporation.

* * * * *

21. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a director of a
State Warehousing Corporation—
* * * * *

(v) except in the case of the managing director, if he is a salaried official of the
Central Warehousing Corporation or a State Warehousing Corporation; or
* * * * *

22. (J) The State Government may, at any time, with the previous approval of the
Central Warehousing Corporation, remove the managing director from office after giving him
a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed removal.

* * * * *

24, Subject to the provisions of this Act, a State Warehousing Corporation may—

(a) acquire and build godowns and warehouses at such places within the State
as itmay, with the previous approval of the Central Warehousing Corporation, determine;
* * * * *

(d) act as an agent of the Central Warehousing Corporation or of the Government
for the purposes of the purchase, sale, storage and distribution, of agricultural produce,
seeds, manures, fertilizers, agricultural implements and notified commodities; and
* * * * *

Functions
of Central
Warehousin,
Corporation

Management
of a State

Warehousing
Corporation.

Disqualification
for office of
director of the
Corporation.

Removal of
directors from
office.

‘Functions of

the State
Warehousing
Corporation.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962.

(Shri Shanta Kumar, Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1 142RS—23.07.2001.