AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No.XLVI of 2025 
THE WATER BODIES (PROTECTION, REVIVAL AND 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
t o provide for the protection, revival and sustainable development 
of water bodies in the country in consultation with the State  
Governments and for the constitution of a Board for 
 recommending and taking measures for the said 
 purpose and for matters connected  
therewith and incidental  
thereto. 
     BE it enacted by Parliament in the  Seventy-sixth Year of  the Republic of 
 India as follows: — 
5
 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Water Bodies (Protection, Revival and
Sustainable Development) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
c
ommencement. 

2 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "appointed day" means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for 
the purpose of section 4; 
(b) "Board" means the National Water Bodies Board 
constituted under section 4; 
(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board; 
(d) "Member" means a member of the Board; 
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(f) "regulations" means regulations made by the Board under 
this Act; 
(g) “State Government” in relation to a Union territory having 
a Legislature, means the Administrator thereof functioning under 
article 239AA or any other provision of the Constitution, as the case 
may be; and includes the Government of such Union territory for the 
purposes of this Act; and 
(h) “water body” includes natural and manmade water 
resources, lakes, ponds, tanks and wetlands but does not include sea, 
river and stream. 
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, or in the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, or in the rules made thereunder, shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the said Acts, as the 
context may require. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 of 1986. 
 6 of 1974. 
Comprehensive 
plan for 
protection, 
revival and 
sustainable 
development of 
water bodies. 
 
    3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State 
Governments, within six months from the date of the commencement of 
this Act, prepare a Comprehensive Plan for the protection, revival and 
sustainable development of water bodies in the country. 
(2) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments 
may, by notification in the official Gazette, amend the Comprehensive 
Plan from time to time, as may be necessary. 
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), every State Government shall 
within one month from the date of the commencement of this Act, 
furnish to the Central Government, such detailed data of water bodies 
within its territorial jurisdiction, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) Every State Government shall, within four months from the date of 
the commencement of this Act, prepare a list of all water bodies situated 
within the State and notify such list in the official Gazette, in such form 
as may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
Constitution of 
the National 
Water Bodies 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   4. (1) With effect from the appointed day, the Central Government 
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, for the 
purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the National Water 
Bodies Board. 
(2)The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to contract and shall, by the said name, sued and 
be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Patna in the State of 
Bihar or at such other places as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify and the Board may, with 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 50 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices or 
agencies at other places in the country. 
(4) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely,— 
   (i)  Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti, —Chairperson ex-officio ;  
   (ii)  Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Urban Affairs, —Member ex-officio ; 
  (iii)  Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Rural Development – Member ex-officio ; 
  (iv)  Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change – 
Member ex-officio ; 
   (v)  Ten  Member ex-officio , to be nominated by the 
Central Government, to represent the Governments of  the 
States, by rotation in the alphabetical order of th e names of 
such States, for such period of time as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the nomination shall be made from 
officials of the State Government not below the ran k of 
Secretary to the State Government and dealing with the 
subject of water resources;  
  (vi)  not more than three Members, to be appointed by 
the Central Government, from amongst persons having  
experience in conservation of water bodies and wate r 
management, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
  (vii)   not more than four Members, to be appointed by 
the Central Government, from amongst persons having  
experience in the fields of irrigation, water harve sting, 
environment protection and sanitation, in such mann er as 
may be prescribed.  
(5) The qualifications and experience, term of office, salaries and/or 
allowances of and other terms and conditions of ser vice of the 
Chairperson and Members of the Board shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(6) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding ove r the meetings of 
the Board, exercise and discharge such powers and d uties, as may be 
prescribed or delegated by the Board. 
(7) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalida ted merely by 
reason of,— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution o f the 
Board; 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as  a 
member of the Board; 
(c)  any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting 
the merits of the case. 
(8)  The Board shall regulate its own procedure with re gard to transaction 
of its business and the procedure of the Committees thereof. 
  
 
 
 
50 
   5. (1)  The Board may appoint such number of officers and employees 
as it considers necessary for the efficient dischar ge of its functions 
under this Act. 
(2) The manner of appointment, qualifications and exper ience, terms 
and conditions of service including salary and allo wances of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Officers and 
employees of 
the Board. 

4 
 
officers and employees of the Board shall be such a s may be specified 
in the regulations made by the Board.  
(3) The Board may engage the services of personnel, bot h from within 
and outside the country as consultants, and visitin g academicians on 
such terms and conditions and remunerations as may be specified in 
the regulations made by the Board and shall facilit ate their 
operations within the country.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Committees of 
the Board. 
 
   6. (1)  Subject to the rules made in this behalf, the Boar d may constitute 
such Committees as may be necessary for the efficie nt discharge of its 
duties and performance of its functions under this Act. 
(2)  The Board shall have the power to co-opt as member s of any 
Committee appointed under sub-section (1) , such number of persons who 
are not members of the Board as it may think fit, a nd the person so co-
opted shall have the right to attend the meetings o f the Committee, and 
take part in the proceedings of the Committee. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Powers and 
Functions of the 
Board. 
 
   7.  (1)  The Board shall serve as a body for the protection , revival and 
sustainable development of water bodies in the country. 
 (2) The powers and functions of the Board, shall,  incl ude the following, 
namely — 
  (i)  serve as a monitoring agency for the protection, 
revival and sustainable development of water bodies; 
 (ii) prepare national coordinated programmes to 
promote the spirit of conservation of water bodies; 
 (iii) assist in setting up infrastructure and 
environment for enhancing the storage capacity of w ater 
bodies; 
 (iv )  ensure restoration of water reservoirs; 
 (v )  assist in creating infrastructure for de-siltati on of 
water bodies; 
 (vi ) suggest prevention and removal of encroachment 
on water bodies; 
 (vii ) ensure cleanliness and hygiene in water bodies; 
 (vii i) prevent pollution in water bodies; 
 (ix ) oversee the utilization of water from water 
bodies; 
 (x) help in preparing infrastructure for rain water 
harvesting; 
 (xi ) determine citizen and community rights over 
water bodies; 
 (xii ) create public awareness and education on water 
bodies; 
 (xiii ) make recommendations for amendment(s) in 
the Comprehensive Plan prepared under section 3; and 
 (xiv)  such other functions as may be assigned to it by 
the Central Government, from time to time. 
(3)  The Board shall submit its recommendations and obs ervations, state-
wise, to the Central Government in such form and ma nneras may be 
prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 

5 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
   8. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State 
Government, consider the recommendations and observ ations of the 
Board and prepare a concrete action plan in a State -wise format for 
implementation of the same by the State Governments.  
(2)  The Central Government shall forward the action pl an referred to in 
sub-section (1)  to the respective State Government.  
(3)  Every State Government shall constitute a Task For ce consisting of 
such number of officers and other persons, as may b e deemed necessary, 
and vest it with such powers, as may be prescribed,  for the purpose of 
implementation of the action plan so received from the Central 
Government under sub-section (2) for protection, revival and sustainable 
development of water bodies. 
(4)  Every State Government shall ensure that the actio n plan forwarded 
by the Central Government is implemented in letter and spirit, and shall 
submit a quarterly compliance report in this regard  to the Central 
Government, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
 Proposals by 
Central 
Government to 
the State 
Governments 
for 
implementation. 
  
 
 
20 
   9. The Central Government may, after due appropriation  made by 
Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Boar d grants of such 
sums of money as that Government may consider neces sary, to 
enable it to perform its functions under the Act. 
 Grants by 
Central 
Government. 
  
 10. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such t ime in each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, givi ng a full account of its 
activities during the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to 
the Central Government. 
 Annual Report. 
 25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 11. (1)  The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other  relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such  form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultatio n with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the C omptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or by any other person so appointed by him in 
this behalf, annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with 
such audit shall be payable by the Board to the Com ptroller and Auditor-
General. 
(3) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government, before such date 
as may be prescribed, the audited copy of its accou nts together with the 
auditor's report. 
 Accounts and 
Audit. 
   12. The Central Government shall cause the annual repor t and accounts of 
the Board along with the auditor's report thereon t o be laid, as soon as 
may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament. 
 Annual report 
and auditor's 
report to be laid 
before 
Parliament. 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 13. (1)  Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of t his Act, the Board 
shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties  under this Act, be bound 
by such directions on questions of policy as the Ce ntral Government may 
give in writing to it from time to time: 
           Provided that the Board shall, as far as  practicable, be given an 
opportunity to express its views before any directi on is given under this 
sub-section. 
(2) The decision of the central Government, whether a  question is one of 
the policy or not, shall be final. 
 Power of the 
Central 
Government to 
issue directions. 
 
 
 
50 
 14. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or the Board or any Committee constitute d by it or the 
Chairperson or any Member of the Board or such Comm ittee, or any 
officer or employee of the Central Government or th e Board or any other 
person authorised by the Central Government or the Board for anything 
 Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 

6 
 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the 
rules or regulations made thereunder. 
Powers of the 
Central 
Government to 
make rules. 
 
 15. The Central Government may, in consultation with th e State 
Government, by notification in the official Gazette , make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act. 
 
 
5 
 
Power of the 
Board to make 
regulations. 
 
 16. The Board may, with the prior approval of the Centr al Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulati ons consistent with this 
Act and the rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
  
Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 
 
 17. Every rule made by the central Government and every  regulation made 
by the Board under this Act shall be laid, as soon as after it is made 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in ses sion, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one sessio n or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of t he session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions af oresaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or reg ulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be, so, however, that any such modification or annu lment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previ ously done under that 
rule or regulation. 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Overriding 
effect of the 
Act. 
 
 18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwit hstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law f or the time being in 
force on the subject and save aforesaid the provisi ons of the Act shall be 
in addition to and not in derogation of any other law in this regard, for the 
time being in force. 
20  
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.  
 
 19. (1)  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the p rovisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in t he Official Gazette, 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the pro visions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
   Provided that no such orders shall be made after  the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2)  Every order made under this section shall be laid,  as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

7 
 
            STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
   Water bodies, including lakes, ponds, wetlands, an d reservoirs, play a 
vital role in India’s ecological balance, biodivers ity, agriculture, and drinking 
water supply. However, rapid urbanization, industri alization, and unsustainable 
practices have severely impacted their health. Prot ection, revival and 
maintenance of these water bodies are now critical for ensuring water security, 
environmental sustainability, and climate resilience. 
 According to the National Wetland Atlas and report s from the Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB), over 30 percent. of  natural water bodies have 
disappeared in the past few decades. Satellite data  and field surveys reveal 
significant shrinkage and encroachment of lakes and  wetlands across cities like 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, and Delhi. Untreated sewage, industrial effluents, and 
solid waste dumping are major pollutants. More than  60 percent of monitored 
water bodies in urban areas are polluted and unfit for direct human use. 
Lakes and ponds are being filled for real estate an d infrastructure projects. 
Wetlands, especially in urban and peri-urban areas,  are often encroached upon, 
disrupting their ecological functions. Water bodies  are filling with silt and 
sediments due to upstream deforestation and poor la nd management. Erratic 
rainfall and prolonged droughts, influenced by clim ate change, have affected the 
seasonal inflow and recharge of water bodies. Many small water bodies dry up 
during summer, reducing groundwater recharge and increasing water scarcity. 
The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has passed severa l orders to protect 
water bodies from pollution and encroachment. Court s have directed 
municipalities and development authorities to demar cate and restore lakes and 
ponds. But the situation on the ground is pathetic.  There are multiple agencies 
with overlapping responsibilities which hinder effe ctive planning and execution. 
Lack of updated data on waterbody size, quality, and status hampers planning.  
Water bodies in the country are under severe stress , but their revival is 
both possible and essential. Protecting water bodie s is not just an environmental 
concern but a necessity for ensuring water security , public health, and 
sustainable development in the country. 
Despite the growing awareness and multiple efforts by various 
stakeholders, the absence of a unified central legi slation specifically focused on 
the protection, revival, and sustainable management  of water bodies has been a 
major gap in India’s water governance. Water bodies  are currently governed by 
a patchwork of State laws, environmental regulation s, and urban planning codes. 
Agencies responsible for water, environment, land, and urban development often 
operate in silos, leading to poor coordination and jurisdictional conflicts. There 
is no single accountable authority at the national level to ensure the protection 
and restoration of all types of water bodies. Many wetlands and lakes are inter-
state or inter-jurisdictional in nature.  
Existing environmental laws such as the Environment Protection Act, 1986 
or the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 do not adequately 
provide focused attention on water bodies like pond s, lakes, and wetlands. 
Encroachments and pollution often go unpunished due  to regulatory loopholes 
and weak enforcement. Water bodies play a critical role in climate adaptation by 
recharging groundwater, preventing floods, and supporting biodiversity. 
Countries like Australia, the USA, and the EU have integrated water laws 
that protect inland water bodies through centralize d frameworks combined with 
local implementation. 
 
 
 
  
    

8 
 
A central law would provide a uniform regulatory fr amework and ensure 
coordinated action. The current state of India’s wa ter bodies urgently demands a 
comprehensive central legislation that moves beyond  piecemeal and reactive 
measures.  
         Hence, this Bill. 
A.D. SINGH. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
     Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constituti on of a National Water 
Bodies Board for the protection, revival and sustai nable development of water 
bodies, its composition, the salaries and allowance s payable to and other terms 
and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Me mbers thereof. Clause 5 
provides for the officers and employees of the Boar d and for their salaries and 
allowances and other terms and conditions of their service as well as for the 
engagement of consultants and visiting academicians , as required and for the 
payment of remuneration to them. Clause 9 provides that the Central 
Government after due appropriation shall provide ad equate funds to the Board to 
carry out the purposes of the Bill. 
    The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve ex penditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  It is estimated that a  sum of 100 crore rupees is 
likely to be required as recurring expenditure. Non -recurring expenditure to the 
tune of 5 crore rupees is also likely be involved. 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

10 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
    Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Govern ment to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill, whereas Clau se 16 empowers the National 
Water bodies Board, with the prior approval of the Central Government to make 
regulations.  Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Ce ntral Government to make 
such provisions through an order for removing any d ifficulty that might arise in 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.   
  As the matters in respect of which rules and regu lations or orders may be 
made are matters of procedure and administrative de tail, the delegation of 
legislative power is, of a normal character. 
  
 
  

  

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the protection, revival and sustainable development 
of water bodies in the country in consultation with the State  
Governments and for the constitution of a Board for 
 recommending and taking measures for the said 
 purpose and for matters connected  
therewith and incidental  
thereto. 
_____________ 
(Shri  A. D. Singh, M.P.) 
  RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–321–08.12.2025 