10

As INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

Bill No. XLVI of 2000 lo. of
THE FARMERS (QLD AGE ALLOWANCE) BILL, 2000
A
BILL

to provide for the payment of old age allowance to the farmers by the Central and
State Governments who are unable to maintain themselves dyring the old age
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Bg it enacted by the Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as

follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers (Old Age Allowance) Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come jnto force at once.

2. In this Act, unjess the confext otherwise requires,—

( ae be ropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of thal Sate dh ather cae ihe chair Government.

(b) “farmeg” includes the spouse of «farmer;

(9 “old age” means where the farmer has attained the age of sixty years or
more;

(व) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made unless this Act.


Appropriate
Government to
pay old age
allowance to
farmers,

Central
Government to
provide funds.

Annual reports.

Savings.

Power to make
rules,

2

3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, on an application made in the prescribed
form, pay old age allowance to every farmer at the rate of rupees one thousand per mensem
from the date of commencement of this Act.

(2) The allowance payable under sub-section (7) shall be subject to alteration on the
basis of prevailing price index as may be determined by the Central Government in con-
sultation with the Governments of the States from time to time.

(3) The old age allowance payable under this Act shall be paid to the farmers by the
appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.

(4) Every farmer who is eligible for old age allowance under this Act but who is in
receipt of pension from the appropriate Government other than the prescribed under this
Act or having adequate source of income shall forfeit his right to claim old age allowance
under this Act.

4, The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by
Parliament in this behalf, provide adequate funds at the disposal of States and Union
Territories to meet the expenditure incurred by them for the purposes of this Act.

5. (1) Every State Government and Union Territory Administration, after the end of
every financial year, as soon as may be, submit a status report about the implementation
of this Act within its territorial jurisdiction to the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed.

(2) The Central Government shall cause the reports received under sub-section (1)
along with its action taken report laid before each House of Parliament.

6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force in any part of the country.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10

15

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There are crores of old farmers in the country and their number is increasing due to
increase in the life expectancy of the people. Although the children of the farmers
particularly their sons are expected to look after them in their old age and many of them in
fact do so but in many cases the economic condition of the children is such that it is not
possible for them to support the old parents. As a result the old farmers and their spouses
at the fag end of their lives have to fend for themselves and are forced to lead a miserable
life. It is so because they do not have a permanent source of income or they suffer from
chronic ailment or infirmity, They live in hunger and are left uncared for. Being a welfare
State, the Government is bound to provide social security to the farmers who produce
foodgrains for the nation. Though some State Governments are giving old age pension to
old persons including farmers but that is very meagre, It is felt that at least one thousand
rupee be given as old age allowance to the farmers to enable them to maintain their living.
This allowance should be revised with the rise in the price index. The Central Government
has to bear the cost of implementation of the Bill since the financial condition of the
States can not bear this burden.

Hence this Bill.

SOLIPETA RAMACHANDRA REDDY.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bull provides that the Central Government shall provide funds for
the implementation of the Bill. The Bill 11 enacted will involve expenditure from the
consolidated Fund of India to the tune of one thousand crore rupee per annum as recurring
expenditure.

No non recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the payment of old age allowance to the farmers by the Central and State
Governments who are unable to maintain themselves during the old age and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—2050RS—27,7.2000