THE ACID (CONTROL) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for control of sale and distribution of acids in order to prevent
 the acid attacks on human being particularly women and girls and
 for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Acid (Control) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the Union Territories only.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “acid” means any acidic solution sale and distribution of which is declared
by the Central Government to be governed by  or under the provisions of this Act.
(b) "dealer" means a person carrying on either personally or through any other
person the business of selling any acid whether wholesale or retail.
(c) "Controller" means the Controller of Acids appointed by the Central
Government under section 4.
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2009
Bill No.  XLVI of  2009
Short title,
extent and
commen-
c ement.
Definitions.

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, publish a
list of acids to which the provisions of this Act shall apply.
(2) The Central Government may, at any point of time, may amend the list published
under sub-section (1) above.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a
Controller of Acids to control and regulate the sale and distribution of acids in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the Controller shall be empowered to,—
(a) ban the retail sale of acid to specified persons;
(b) prescribe compulsory licences for dealers authorised to sell acid in retail;
(c) ensure that the dealers, who sell acids, shall record the sale transactions in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Controller shall be assisted by such number of officers, inspectors and
employees as may be prescribed.
(4) The salaries, allowances and terms and conditions of appointments of the officers
and employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. Subject to provisions of section 6, no person other than the authorised dealers shall
sell or possess any acid.
6. The Controller may, by notification, exempt any bonafide industrial or academic user
from the provisions of this Act.
7. (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or fails to comply with
any direction made under authority conferred by this Act shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, which may extend to
fifty thousand rupees or with both.
(2) A Court convicting any person of an offence punishable under this Act may order
that the whole or any part of the stock of acids in respect of which the offence was committed
shall be forfeited to the Government and the establishment from which the stock was released
shall be sealed.
(3) It shall be a defence for a person charged with a contravention of any of the
provisions of this section to prove that, in relation to matter in respect of which he is
charged, he acted in the course of his employment as a servant or agent of another person on
the instructions of his employer or of some other specified person.
8. Where a person committing an offence punishable under this Act is a company or an
association or a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, every director, manager,
secretary, agent or other officer or person concerned with the management thereof, shall,
unless he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has
exercised all due diligence to prevent its commission, be deemed to be guilty of such offence.
9. In all trials for offences under this Act or the rules made thereunder, the magistrate
shall follow the procedure prescribed in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, for the trial of
summary cases in which an appeal lies.
10. In trials under this Act, it may be presumed unless and until the contrary is proved,
that the accused has committed an offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder in
respect of any acid preparations for the possession of which he fails to account satisfactorily.
11. Any person competent to investigate any offence under this Act may search any
place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been, or is being
Central Govt.
to publish list
of acids to
which this Act
apply.
Appointment
of Controller
of Acids.
Authorised
dealers to sell
acid.
Exemptions
on use of
acids.
Penalties.
Offences by
corporations.
Procedure for
appeal.
Presumption
of possession.
Power of
search and
seizure.
1 of 1974.

committed, and take possession of any stock of acid in respect of which the offence has been
or is being committed and the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far
as may be applicable, apply to any search or seizure under this Act as they apply to any
search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under that Code.
12. Any officer exercising powers under this Act or under the rules made thereunder
who—
(a) without reasonable ground for believing that it is necessary so to do, searches
or causes to be searched any house, building or enclosed place or any vehicle, vessel
or aircraft;
(b) vexatiously or unnecessarily seizes any acidic preparation;
(c) vexatiously or unnecessarily details, searches or arrests any person; or
(d) commits, as such officer, any other act to the injury of any person, without
having reason, believe that such act is required for the execution of his duty;
shall for every such offence be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty thousand
rupees.
(2) Any person willfully and maliciously giving false information and so causing an
arrest or a search to be made under this Act shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to twenty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or
with both.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, makes rules to
carry out the purposes of this Act.
3
Vexatious
search and
seizure.
Saving of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
1 of 1974.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
During the past few years there is sudden spurt in the incidents relating to acid attacks
particularly, on women in the country. Every year many women are killed, maimed, blinded or
scared for life by the acid attacks. The main and simple reason for this increase in such
incidents is that there is no law in the country to regulate the sale of acids. As of now,
anybody can walk down to the nearby store and can purchase any amount of acid over the
counter for less than twenty rupees. In many countries, including Bangladesh there is an
Acid Control Act which regulates the sale of acid and also the way it is produced, stored and
transported. Unfortunately, in our country the acid is carelessly allowed to become a deadly
weapon. Once this weapon is used on any women, the victim goes through a trauma throughout
her life as even after many cosmetic surgeries and corrections the scar does not leave.
Besides, there is permanent scar on the mind of the women reminding her of the gruesome
incident throughout her life. There is a constant demand that a separate law should be in
place to punish offenders of acid attacks but at the same time there is also a proposal that the
focus of the remedial action should be on controlling the sale of acids, rather than punishing
the perpetrators. It is, therefore, high time that a law on controlling the retail sale of acids
should be framed and the violators should be severely punished. However, the bonafied
users for industrial, research and academic purposes should be exempted from the purview
of such law which shall be applicable to Union Territories only in view of the jurisdiction of
the respective Governments on the subject.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
KALRAJ  MISHRA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for appointment of controller of Acids, Officers, Inspector
and Employees by the Central Government to control and regulate the sale and distribution
of Acids. It is estimated that an amount of rupees one hundred crore would be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India annually. It is also estimated that a non-recurring expenditure
of rupees fifty crore will also be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—5147RS(S-5)—4.12.2009.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for control of sale and distribution of acids in order to prevent
the acid attacks on human being particularly women and girls and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra, M.P .)