THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF SIKKIM
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Sikkim for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Tribes and other sections of the people of the
State and for the development and exploitation of its vast natural  resources
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Sikkim
Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XLVIII of 2010
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH AUGUST, 2010

2
2. (1) There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Sikkim to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken
by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purposes of promoting the
welfare of people and for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources
in the State.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) above, the
following projects/schemes shall be given priorities while undertaking any welfare or
developmental work under this Act:—
(a) early completion of the Airport at Pakyong and to convert it into an
international Airport.
(b) time bound completion of rail link to the State.
(c) construction of an alternative National Highway via Bhutan.
(d) early census for reservation of Tamang and Limboo Tribes in the Legislative
Assembly.
(e) development of Sikkim as an international tourist destination.
(f) preservation of the flora and fauna of the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Sikkim.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Sikkim was merged with the Union of India  in 1975. The peace loving people of the
State are proud to be Indian. Even after thirty-five  years of its merger, not much development
has taken place mainly due to financial constraint. It is a landlocked State with no air and rail
connectivity as of now, with the rest of the country. The only life line of the State i.e., NH-31A
is often blocked due to various bandh and agitations called in the hilly terrain of
West Bengal which causes a lot of difficulties in sustaining the supplies to the State. There
is a constant demand for an alternative National Highway via Bhutan for better connectivity
of the State. This State is also strategically located geographically as it shares its international
borders with Nepal, Bhutan and China. Sikkim is also popularly known as mini Switzerland of
India with abundance of natural and scenic beauty and has the third highest peak of the
world i.e. Mt. Kanchenjunga. If adequate financial assistance is provided, it can be developed
into an international tourist destination. There is a lot of resentment among the people of the
State due to inadequate development and welfare of Schedule Tribes and other sections of
people of the State. It is, therefore, essential that special financial assistance should be given
to the State of Sikkim so that the plans can be implemented for an all-round development of
this State.
Hence this Bill.
O.T.  LEPCHA

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides special financial assistance to the State of Sikkim to meet
the cost of such schemes of development as undertaken by the State with the approval of
the Government of India. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure,
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India. No non-recurring expenditure
is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.

GMGIPMRND—4355RS(S3)—27-08-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Sikkim for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Tribes and other sections of the people of
the State and for development and exploitation of its vast natural resources
and  for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri O.T. Lepcha, M.P.)