1
THE PRESS COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Press Council Act, 1978.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Press Council (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In long title of the Press Council of India Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act) for the words "newspapers and news agencies", the words "newspapers,
news agencies and news channels" shall be substituted.
3. Throughout the principal Act, for the words "newspaper, news agency",
"newspapers, news agencies", "newspapers and news agencies", "newspaper or news
agency" and "the newspaper, the news agency", wherever they occur, the words "newspaper,
news agency, news channel", "newspapers, news agencies, news channels", "newspapers,
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. XLVII of 2022
Amendment
of long title.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022
37 of 1978.
Substitution of
references to
certain
expression by
certain other
expression.

2
news agencies and news channels", "newspaper, news agency or news channel" and
"the newspaper, the news agency, the news channel", shall respectively, subject to such
changes as the rules of grammar require, be substituted.
4. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) "fake news" means publication, knowingly or intentionally, of false,
misleading or distorted information purporting to be news that:
(i) defames, undermines or benefits a person or entity;
(ii) causes fear or alarm among people;
(iii) incites violence, hatred or enmity towards a group of people; or
(iv) threatens the security, sovereignty, unity, integrity or public
order of or within India.";
(ii) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ca) "news" includes newly received or noteworthy information or
analysis thereof, especially about recent events primarily of sociopolitical,
economic or cultural nature and shall also include any news that is digitally
transmitted over the internet or computer network;
(cb) "news channel" means a television channel which predominantly
telecasts news programmes through cable television network or digital
addressable systems, etc.;
(cc) "newspaper" means any printed periodical work containing news and
current affairs content and shall include digitised version of the newspaper
transmitted over the Internet or computer network;";
(iii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(da) "press" includes newspapers, news channels, news agencies or
such other entity, by whatever name called;";
(iv) in clause (e), for the words "expressions "editor" and "newspaper" have the
meanings respectively assigned to them", the words "expression "editor" has the
meaning assigned to it" shall be substituted.
5. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),—
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(b) six shall be nominated in accordance with such procedure as may be
prescribed from among persons who own or carry on the business of management
of newspapers and news channels, so, however, that there shall be one
representative each from the categories of big newspapers, medium newspapers,
small newspapers, big news channels, medium news channels and small news
channels;"
(ii) in clause (e) for the Explanation, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"Explanation —For the purpose of clause ( b)—
(i) a 'newspaper' shall be deemed to be categorized as big, medium or
small newspaper on the basis of its circulation per issue, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, notify from time to
time; and
(ii) a 'news channel' shall be deemed to be categorized as big, medium
or small news channel on the basis of its viewership, as the Central
Amendment
of Section 2.
Amendment
of Section 5.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, notify from time to
time.".
6. In section 14 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted namely:—
"(I A) Where, on receipt of a complaint made to it or otherwise, the Council has
reason to believe that a newspaper, news agency, news channel or journalist has been
found to be responsible for spreading fake news, such persons or entity shall be liable
for the following penalties—
(i) in the event of first violation, suspension of accreditation, registration,
licence, or permission, as the case may be, to operate for up to thirty days;
(ii) in the event of second violation, suspension of accreditation,
registration, licence, or permission, as the case may be, to operate for up to
ninety days; and
(iii) in the event of third violation, suspension of accreditation, registration,
licence or permission, as the case may be, to operate for up to one-hundred and
eighty days:
Provided that in the event of failure to comply with any of the penalties
imposed, the accreditation, registration, licence, or permission, as the case may
be, shall be revoked for the remaining period of its validity, and the newspaper,
news agency, news channel or journalist shall also be disqualified for fresh
application or renewal for up to five years.".
Amendment
of Section 14.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECT  AND  REASONS
As the fourth pillar of our democracy, the press owes a duty to the public to adhere to
the highest ethical standards and to strive towards bringing the truth to the fore. In many
ways, the press is the bloodstream of representative democracy as it enables the disclosure
of information for the benefit of the masses and fosters the formation of informed public
opinion.
However, the role of the press as a conduit for transparency and accountability in our
governance system has been severely compromised over time. Ulterior motives, political
propaganda and anti-social elements have impacted the independence and neutrality of our
press and have fuelled a drastic increase in the incidence of fake news. As per the latest data
by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), a total of 1,527 cases of fake news were
recorded in 2020, which is a 214% increase as compared to the 486 cases registered in 2019.
Although the Indian Penal Code imposes criminal punishment on any person who
makes statements that conduce to public mischief, it neither provides a regulatory and
procedural framework for governing the instances of fake news that are perpetuated by the
press nor imposes any meaningful sanction on the news organisations that knowingly or
intentionally facilitate such fake news.
To place a greater responsibility on the Press to put forth accurate facts and information
before the public, this Bill seeks to amend the Press Council Act, 1978 to impose graded
penalties for spreading fake news. At the same time, the Bill also brings television news
channels under the ambit of the Press Council Act, 1978, considering that they are a major
constituent of the Press and exert great influence in shaping public opinion. This will ensure
that the malpractices and wrongdoings of the television news channels are brought under
the control of the Press Council. Lastly, the Bill inserts a definition for 'news', which includes
any news that is digitally transmitted over the internet or computer network. The Bill bring all
forms of digital news within the purview of the Press Council.
Hence, this Bill.
V.  VIJAYASAI  REDDY
4

Long title.
Definitions.
5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  PRESS  COUNCIL  ACT, 1978
[ACT  NO.  37  OF 1978]
* * * * *
An Act to establish a Press Council for the purpose of preserving the freedom of the
Press and of maintaining and improving the standards of newspapers and news agencies in
India
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(e) the expressions "editor" and "newspaper" have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, and the expression
"working journalist" has the meaning assigned to it in the Working Journalists and
other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions
Act, 1955.
* * * * *
5. * * * * *
(3) Of the other members—
* * * * *
(b) six shall be nominated in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed
from among persons who own or carry on the business of management of newspapers,
so, however, that there shall be two representatives from each of the categories of big
newspapers, medium newspapers and small newspapers;
* * * * *
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause ( b), a "newspaper" shall be deemed to be
categorised as big, medium or small newspaper on the basis of its circulation per issue, as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, notify from time to time.
* * * * *
25 of 1867.
45 of 1955.
Composition
of the
Council.

MGIPMRND—869RS(S3)—08-08-2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Press Council Act, 1978.
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)