1
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
57 of 1955.
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
(AS PASSED BY THE RAJYA SABHA)
A
BILL
 further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 2,—
(i) for clause (ee), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(ee) “overseas Indian cardholder” means a person registered as an over-
seas Indian cardholder by the Central Government under section 7A;’;
(ii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ff) “person of Indian Origin” means a person who or either of whose
parents, was born in undivided India or in such other territories which became
part of India after the 15th day of August, 1947;’.
 A
S PASSED BY THE RAJYA  SABHA
ON 13TH AUGUST, 2013
Bill No. XLVIII-C of  2011
5
10

2
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause ( f), for the words “has been residing”, the words “is ordinarily
resident” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause ( g), for the words “has been residing”, the words “is ordinarily
resident” shall be substituted;
(c) for Explanation 1 and 2, the following Explanation shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Explanation 1.—An applicant shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident
of India for the purpose of,—
(i) clauses (a), (c), (f) and (g), if he has resided in India throughout
the period of twelve months immediately before making an application for
registration:
Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied that special
circumstances exist, it may after recording the circumstances in writing
relax the period of twelve months specified in clause (i) for a period not
exceeding thirty days; and
(ii) clauses ( a) and ( c), if the applicant has also resided in India
during the eight years immediately preceding the said period of twelve
months for a period of twelve months for a period of not less than six
years.”.
4. For sections 7A,7B,7C and 7D of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“7A. The Central Government may, subject to such conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed, on an application made in this behalf, register as an overseas
Indian cardholder—
(a) any person of full age and capacity,—
(i) who is a citizen of another country, but was a citizen of India at
the time of, or at any time after, the commencement of the Constitution; or
(ii) who is a citizen of another country, but was eligible to become a
citizen of India at the time of the commencement of the Constitution; or
(iii) who is a citizen of another country, but belonged to a territory
that became part of India after the 15th day of August, 1947; or
(iv) who is a child or a grand-child or a great grand child of such a
citizen; or
(b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in clause (a); or
(c) a person, who is a minor child, and whose both parents are citizens of
India or one of the parents is a citizen of India; or
 (d) such spouse of a citizen of India or spouse of an overseas Indian
cardholder registered under clause ( a) or spouse of a person of Indian origin
who is a citizen of another country and whose  marriage has been registered and
subsisted for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately
preceding the presentation of the application under this section:
Provided that for the eligibility for registration as an overseas Indian
cardholder, such spouse shall be subjected to prior security clearance from a
competent authority in India:
Substitution  of
new sections
for  sections
7A, 7B, 7C
and 7D.
Registration
of overseas
Indian
cardholder.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Amendment
of section 5.

3
Provided further that no person, who is or had been a citizen of Pakistan,
Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify, shall be eligible for registration as an overseas
Indian cardholder.
7B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, an overseas Indian cardholder shall be entitled to such rights [other than the
rights specified under sub-section (2)] as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
 (2) An overseas Indian cardholder  shall not be entitled to the rights conferred
on a citizen of India—
(a) under article 16 of the Constitution with regard to equality of
opportunity in matters of public employment;
(b) under article 58 of the Constitution for election as President;
(c) under article  66 of the Constitution for election of Vice-President;
(d) under article 124 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the
Supreme Court;
(e) under article 217 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the
High Court;
(f) under section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 in regard
to registration as a voter;
(g) under sections 3 and 4 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the House of  the People or of
the Council of States, as the case may be;
(h) under sections 5, 5A and 6 of the Representation of the People Act,
1951 with regard to eligibility for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or
a Legislative Council, as the case may be, of a State;
(i) for appointment to public services and posts in connection with affairs
of the Union or of any State except for appointment in such services and posts
as the Central Government may, by special order, in that behalf specify.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
7C. (1) If any overseas Indian cardholder of full age and capacity makes in
prescribed manner a declaration renouncing the card registering him as an overseas
Indian cardholder, the declaration shall be registered by the Central Government, and
upon such registration, that person shall cease to be an overseas Indian cardholder.
 (2) Where a person ceases to be an overseas Indian cardholder under sub-
section (1), the spouse and every minor child of such person  registered as an over-
seas Indian cardholder shall thereupon cease to be an overseas Indian cardholder.
7D. The Central Government may, by order, cancel  the  registration granted
under sub-section (1) of section 7A if it is satisfied that—
(a)  the registration as an overseas Indian cardholder was obtained by
means of fraud, false representation or the concealment of any material fact; or
(b) the overseas Indian cardholder has shown disaffection towards the
Constitution of India as by law established; or
(c) the overseas Indian cardholder has, during any war in which India may
be engaged, unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy or been engaged
in, or associated with, any business or commercial activity that was to his
knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist an enemy in that war; or
Renunciation
of overseas
Indian card.
Cancellation
of registration
as overseas
Indian
cardholder.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Conferment of
rights on over-
seas Indian
cardholder.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
43 of 1951.

4
(d) the overseas Indian cardholder has, within five years after registration
under sub-section (1) of section 7A has been sentenced to imprisonment for a
term of not less than two years; or
(e) it is necessary so to do in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign
country, or in the interests of the general public; or
(f) the marriage of an overseas Indian cardholder, who has obtained such
card under clause (d) of section 7A,—
(i) has been dissolved by a competent court of law or otherwise; or
(ii) has not been dissolved but, during the subsistence of such
marriage, he has solemnised marriage with any other person.”.
5.  In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, in clause (c), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
 “Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied that special circumstances
exist, it may, after recording such circumstances in writing, relax such period by a
period not exceeding thirty days.”.
Amendment
of Third
Schedule.
5
10
15

GMGIPMRND—2012RS(S3)—14-08-2013.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act 1955.
————
(As passed by the Rajya Sabha)