THE VISUALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS (EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for creation of employment opportunities by way of reservation and other
means and for compulsory payment of unemployment allowance by the Central
Government to the visually handicapped citizens and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Visually Handicapped Persons (Employment
Opportunities and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "employer" means any person who employs twenty or more persons to do
any work in an establishment for remuneration;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XLVII of 2006
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH JUL Y, 2006.

2
Act not to
apply to
certain
employments.
Compulsory
reservation of
certain
percentage of
vacancies in
employment
by employers.
(c) "establishment" means,—
(i) any officer; or
(ii) any place where any industry, trade, business or occupation is carried
on;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "registration officer" means the officer who shall be responsible for the
registration of visually handicapped persons for the purposes of this Act;
(f) "visually handicapped person" means any person who has total absence of
sight or vision.
3. The provisions of this Act shall not apply in relation to,—
(a) any employment in agriculture or horticulture;
(b) any employment in domestic or household service;
(c) any employment, the total duration of which is less than three months;
(d) any employment which carries remuneration of less than rupees two hundred
per month.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
from the date of commencement of  this Act, every employer shall reserve not less than five
percent of the vacancies occurring  in any calendar year in any employment in his
establishment to be filled in from amongst the visually handicapped persons registered
under this Act.
5. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
as many Registration Officers as it may deem necessary for the purpose of registration of
visually handicapped persons and may also demarcate the area within which each such
officer shall exercise jurisdiction.
6. (1) Every visually handicapped person possessing the prescribed qualifications or
experience, as the case may be, shall get himself registered on an application made, in such
form and containing such particulars, as may be prescribed, to the respective Registration
Officers within whose jurisdiction he resides.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Registration Officer may
cause such enquiries, as it deem necessary, to be made and if he is satisfied that the applicant
is a visually handicapped person and possesses the prescribed qualifications or experience,
shall register his name in a register and issue to the applicant a certificate of registration in
the prescribed form or an identity card, as the case may be.
(3) The Registration Officer shall maintain the Register in such form and in such
manner as may be prescribed.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every employer shall, before filling up any reserved vacancy in his establishment shall
notify that vacancy to the concerned Registration Officer within whose jurisdiction that
establishment is situated.
8. (1) As soon as may be, after the receipt of information about vacancies under
section 7, the Registration Officer shall furnish a list of visually handicapped persons
registered with it containing such particulars as may be prescribed to the employer notifying
the vacancies who shall within the prescribed period fill up the requisite percentage of
vacancies prescribed in Section 4 by appointing such of the visually handicapped persons
as he considers suitable and shall inform in writing the fact of such appoinment to the
Registration Officer.
Appointment
of Registra-
tion officers.
Registration
of visually
handicapped
persons.
Employers to
notify
vacancies.
Actions to be
taken by the
Registration
Officer.

3
Removal of
names from
the Register.
Vacancies to
be carried
forward.
(2) If any dispute arises between the employer and the Registration officer as to the
suitability of a visually handicapped person for appointment or as to whether such person is
visually handicapped or not, such dispute shall be referred to the appropriate Government
whose decision thereon shall be final.
9. (1) When a visually handicapped person has been appointed to fill up any vacancy
in an establishment, the Registration Officer shall remove the name of such person from the
register after a period of one year from the date of his appointment.
(2) Where a visually handicapped person is discharged or removed after being appointed
by the employer on just and genuine grounds, nothing in this Act shall preclude such person
to get himself registered again with the Registration Officer in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
10. (1) Where in any year any vacancies in an establishment reserved under this Act
can not be filled up either due to non availability of suitable visually handicapped candidates
or for other genuine reasons, such vacancies shall be carried forward to the succeeding year
and so on upto the end of the fourth year.
(2) For the purposes of sub section ( 1), a visually handicapped person shall not be
deemed to be unsuitable to fill up the vacancy unless a certificate in this behalf is obtained
by the employer from the Registration Officer.
11. (1) Every employer shall maintain such records giving such particulars of the visually
handicapped persons employed in his establishment in  such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The records maintained under sub-section ( 1) shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable hours by such persons as may be authorized in this behalf by general or special
order by the appropriate Government.
12. Every visually handicapped person registered under this Act and who remains
unemployed thereafter shall be entitled for unemployment allowance till such time he is
given an employment and the Central Government shall give unemployment allowance of
rupees one thousand per month to him in such manner as may be prescribed.
13. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the purposes of this Act.
14. If any employer contravenes the provisions of this Act, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less than one year but may extend to three years
and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
15. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Company, every person
who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge and that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
16. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any department of the
Central Government, the Secretary or the head of department by whatever name called of
such department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render the head of such department
liable to any punishment under this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without
Employer to
maintain
records.
Payment of
unemploy-
ment
allowance.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Penalty.
Offences by
Companies.
Offences by
Government
departments.

4
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
17. The provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to visually handicapped persons.
18. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As per National Survey on Blindness (2001—03) there are estimated 1.2 crore visually
handicapped or blind persons in the country and the estimated prevalence of blindness is
0.91 per cent in males and 1.29 per cent in females. For these unfortunate visually handicapped
persons darkness has become part of their lives. Shockingly their number is increasing
despite the fact that a National Programme for Control of Blindness is under implementation
in the country. The visually handicapped persons face all sorts of odds in their day to day life
and more so the visually handicapped females. To provide education to the visually
handicapped persons Governments are running Blind Schools and Training Centres to give
them vocational training but number of such schools and Training Centres is awfully very
short. But the worst comes when the visually handicapped despite acquiring educational
qualifications and vocational training do not get employment and remain neglected in the
society. Many of them are very talented and can deliver the goods but they are denied
employment on one pretext or the other. In Government jobs one per cent vacancies are
reserved for visually handicapped persons but even this small percentage is not fully filled
up and there remains backlog of vacancies for one reason or the other whereas qualified
visually handicapped persons are running from pillar to post to find employment leading to
frustration and distress. Now they are agitating in streets and before Government offices.
Hence in a Welfare State like ours adequate employment opportunities have to be provided
to these unfortunate brothers and sisters of our society so that they too can lead a good life.
Hence this Bill.
SUSHMA   SWARAJ
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Registration Officers. Clause 12
provides for the payment of unemployment allowance to the visually handicapped persons.
Clause 13 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds for the purposes
of the Bill. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crores may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
No non recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 18 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for creation of employment opportunities by way of reservation and other
means and for compulsory payment of unemployment allowance by the Central
Government to the visually handicapped citizens and for matters connected
 therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1768RS(S-4)—28-07-2006.