AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XLVII of 2025 
THE ECOCIDE (PREVENTION AND ACCOUNTABILITY) BILL, 2025 
________________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
_________________ 
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Interpretation.
3. Meaning of wanton.
4. Meaning of unlawful.
5. Environmental destruction amounting to ecocide.
CHAPTER II 
INVESTIGATION AND COGNIZANCE 
6. Nature of ecocide.
7. Cognizance by Magistrates.
8. Establishment of the Special Environmental Investigation Wing.
9. Composition of the Wing.
10. Powers and functions of the Wing.
11. Power to call for information and records.
12. Power of arrest, seizure and inspection.
CHAPTER III 
DISTRICT ECOCIDE PREVENTION COMMISSION 
13. District Ecocide Prevention Commission.
14. Composition of the Commission.
15. Powers and functions of the Commission.
16. Reporting mechanism.
CHAPTER IV 
PENALTIES AND PUNISHMENTS 
17. Punishment for the offence of ecocide.
18. Penalty for certain acts.
19. Offences by companies.
20. Environmental disqualification of companies.

(ii) 
CLAUSES
21. Principles and components of restoration orders.
22. Mandatory measures in case of unintentional or imminent ecocide.
23. Power of the Central Government for prevention, control and remediation of ecocide.
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.
CHAPTER V 
COMPENSATION AND FUND MECHANISMS 
25. Ecocide Restoration Bonds.
26. Establishment of the National Ecocide Remediation Fund
27. Utilization of the Fund.
28. Local Ecocide Remediation Funds.
29. Environmental audit and third-party oversight.
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
30. Adjudication of disputes by the Tribunal.
31. Bar of jurisdiction.
32. Central Government to provide funds.
33. Act not in derogation of any other law.
34. Power to amend Schedules.
35. Power of Central or State Government to make rules.
36. Savings.
37. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XLVII of 2025 
THE ECOCIDE (PREVENTION AND ACCOUNTABILITY) 
BILL, 2025 
A
BILL 
to provide for the recognition, prevention, and punishment of ecocide,  ensure 
restoration of environmental harm, and promote environmental justice in 
accordance with constitutional and international environmental 
principles and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:–– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Ecocide (Prevention and Accountability) Act,
2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Interpretation. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) “Board” means the National Ecocide Remediation Board
constituted under section 26; 
(c) “Bond” means the Ecocide Restoration Bond under section 25;
(d) “Commission” means the District Ecocide Prevention
Commissions established in every district under section 13; 
(e) “ecocide” means any unlawful or wanton act or omission,
committed with knowledge of substantial likelihood o f severe, 
widespread or long-term damage to the environment, including harm to 
ecosystems, biodiversity, and natural resources; 
(f) “environment” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
under clause (a) of section 2 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986; 
(g) “Fund” means the National Ecocide Remediation Fund
established under section 26; 
(h) “Local Fund” means the Local Ecocide Remediation Funds
established under section 28; 
(i) “long-term” means irreversible or non-recoverable damage for
a period not less than ten years; 
 Bharatiya Nagarik (j) “Magistrate” means a Magistrate, as per the
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023;
(k) “person” includes any company or association or body of
persons, whether incorporated or not; 
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed under the rules made under this
Act; 
(m) “restoration” means the process of ecological remediation of
environmental damage as ordered by a competent authority; 
(n) “Tribunal” means the National Green Tribunal;
(o) “widespread” means extending beyond a  limited geographical
area, crossing ecological boundaries and impacting multiple regions or 
ecosystems or ecological units; and 
(p) “Wing” means Special Environmental Investigation Wing
established by the Central Government under section 8. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
29 of 1986. 
46 of 2023. 
Meaning of 
wanton. 
3. For the purposes of this Act, a n act or omission shall be deemed to be
“wanton” where it is performed with reckless disregard for substantial and
foreseeable environmental harm, wherein the actor is aware of the high
likelihood of causing serious ecological damage, but proceeds without
justifiable reason or adequate safeguards to prevent or mitigate such harm.
Explanation.— The term shall include, but not limited to, – 
(i) a conduct that demonstrates callous indifference to
environmental consequences of the act or omission; 
(ii) a failure to conduct due diligence or necessary environmental
impact assessment, as per the criteria given in the Second Schedule to 
the Act; or  
(iii) implementing risk mitigation measures in the face of credible
ecological warnings or objections. 
35 
40 
45 

3 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
4. For the purposes of this Act, an act or omission shall be deemed to be 
“unlawful” where it,–  
 (a) violates any provision of this Act, or the rules or regulations or 
notifications made thereunder;  
 (b) contravenes any law for the time being in force inten ded to 
protect the environment, biodiversity, forests, wildlife, water bodies, 
climate, or human health; or  
 (c) is conducted without obtaining necessary consent, clearance, 
license, or authorization mandated under applicable environmental laws 
or judicial orders in India.  
Explanation.— The term shall also include, but not be limited to 
activities that,–  
(i) continue after suspension, revocation, or expiry of lawful 
permission; or 
(ii)   are carried out in defiance of stop-work, remediation, or 
cease-and-desist orders. 
 Meaning of 
unlawful. 
 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
5. Whoever commits any unlawful or wanton act or omission  with knowledge 
that such act or omission is likely to cause severe and either widespread or 
long-term damage to the environment, which includes, but is not limited to- 
(i)  large-scale destruction of protected ecosystems, as given in the 
First Schedule to the Act or other ecosystems, habitats, or biodiversity in 
the country, as may be notified by the Central Government, in 
consultation with the State Governments; 
(ii)  release, dumping, emission, or discharge of toxic or hazardous 
substances or pollutants that causes irreparable harm to air, soil, water, 
marine or terrestrial life;  
(iii)  alteration, degradation, or contamination of protected areas, 
critical wildlife corridors, wetlands, coastal zones, glaciers, or protected 
ecological sites;  
(iv)  wilful denial of ecological access or environmental rights to 
communities resulting in mass displacement, disease, or livelihood loss; 
whether caused by industrial activity, developmental operations, 
extractive projects, military activity, or any other anthropogenic 
intervention, and irrespective of the presence or absence of a declared 
environmental emergency; 
shall be guilty of the offence of ecocide.   
Explanation . — The offence of ecocide  shall be deemed to 
constitute a grave environmental offence crime amounting to a serious 
threat to ecological integrity, public health, intergenerational  equity and 
the constitutional values.   
 Environmental 
destruction 
amounting to 
ecocide. 
   CHAPTER II 
INVESTIGATION AND COGNIZANCE 
  
 
46 of 2023. 45 
6. (1) Every offence of ecocide shall be deemed to be —  
(i) cognizable, within the meaning of sub -clause (g) of clause (1) 
of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023;  
(ii) non-bailable: 
 Provided that no person accused of ecocide shall be entitled to bail 
as a matter of right;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nature of 
Ecocide. 

4 
 
(iii) non-compoundable and not subject to compromise, settlement, 
or withdrawal, except with the express leave of Tribunal, Sessions Court 
or the High Court, as the case may be, upon satisfaction that such leave 
will not in any way compromise environmental interest.  
(2) Every offence of ecocide shall be tried by a court not below Sessions 
Court.   
(3) The investigation into an offence of ecocide shall be completed within a 
period of ninety days from the date of filing of the First Information Report:      
          Provided that the Sessions Court may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, extend the period for completion of such investigation by such 
further period, as it may deem necessary. 
 
5 
10 
Cognizance by 
Magistrates. 
 7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 210 of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, any Magistrate may take cognizance of an 
offence under this Act upon—  
(i) a police report thereof;  
(ii) receipt of a complaint made by any aggrieved person, local 
authority, or registered environmental group, in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed; or 
(iii) suo motu   
(2) No prior sanction of the Central or State Government shall be required for 
taking cognizance of any offence under this Act. 
15 
20 
46 of 2023. 
Establishment 
of the Special 
Environmental 
Investigation 
Wing. 
 8. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a specialized body to be called the Special Environmental 
Investigation Wing, for the purposes of enforcement, oversight, 
intelligence gathering, and prosecution of offences under this Act. 25 
 
Composition of 
the  Wing. 
 9. (1) The Wing shall consist of the following officers, to be appointed by 
the Central Government in consultation with the Union Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, in such manner as may be 
prescribed — 
(i) a Director-General, who shall be an of ficer of the rank not 
below Additional Secretary to the Government of India or 
equivalent, having special knowledge of environmental science, 
ecology, or environmental law;  
(ii) such number of Additional Directors, Deputy Directors, 
Investigating Officers, Environmental Analysts, Legal Officers, and 
other staff, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The qualifications and experience, term of office, salary and/or 
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the officers of the 
Wing shall be such as may be prescribed. 
30 
35 
 
 
Powers and 
functions of the 
Wing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.  (1) The Wing shall exercise the following powers and perform all or any of 
the following functions, namely– 
(i) to investigate into any violations of the provisions of this Act 
including acts amounting to ecocide, extending across the territories of 
two or more States within the territorial boundaries of the country;  
(ii) to supervise and coordinate with the District Ecocide 
Prevention Commissions constituted under section 13;  
(iii) to maintain a National Register of Ecocide and Environmental 
Offenders, in such form and manner as may be prescribed;  
(iv) to advise the Central Government on matters relating to 
prevention, control, and prosecution of offences of ecocide;  
40 
45 
50 
 

5 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
(v) to coordinate with other statutory and environmental 
enforcement agencies including the Tribunal, the State Pollution Control 
Boards, and forest and wildlife authorities;  
(vi) to receive and examine quarterly and special reports submitted 
by the District Commissions and issue appropriate advisories or 
directives based thereon;  
(vii) to issue directions for forensic environmental audits, satellite 
surveillance, and scientific damage assessments;  
(viii) to institute or assist in the institution of prosecutions before 
the competent court or Tribunal under this Act; and 
(ix) to maintain a sec ure central repository of evidence, 
investigations, and judgments under this Act. 
(2)  The Wing shall, while investigating any matter referred to it under clauses 
(i) and (viii) of sub-section (1), have all the powers of a Civil Court while 
trying a suit and, in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely,– 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court 
or office;  
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and 
documents; and  
(f) any other matter as may be prescribed. 
 25 11. The Wing may, by notice in writing, require any person, authority, company, 
or agency to furnish such information or produce such records or documents 
as may be necessary for the performance of its functions under this Act. 
 Power to call 
for 
information 
and records. 
29 of 1986. 
30 
12. The Investigating Officers of the Wing shall have power equivalent to officers 
under the Environment Protection Act, 1986, for arrest, search and seizure, 
inspection of premises, and collection of evidence. 
 Power of 
arrest, seizure 
and inspection. 
   CHAPTER III 
DISTRICT ECOCIDE PREVENTION COMMISSION 
  
 
35 
40 
13. 
 
 The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, constitute,  in every district within the States and Union 
territories, a body to be known as the District Ecocide Prevention 
Commission, for the purposes of—  
(a) monitoring, preventing, investigating and reporting acts of 
ecocide within the territorial jurisdiction of the district; and  
(b) facilitating community -based ecological restoration and 
coordination with environmental authorities. 
 District 
Ecocide 
Prevention 
Commission.  
 
 
 
 
45 
14. 
 
(1) The Commission shall consist of the following members, to be 
appointed or nominated in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government, namely –  
 (i) the Executive Magistrate of the district, not below the rank 
of Sub -Divisional Magistrate, who shall be the ex-officio 
Chairperson of the Commission;  
(ii) one representative of the State Pollution Control Board – 
Member ex-officio;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Composition 
of the 
Commission. 

6 
 
(iii) one officer of the Forest Department, not below the rank of 
Range Forest Officer – Member ex-officio;  
(iv) at least one scientist or ecologist of repute from any 
recognised academic or research institution - Member;  
(v) one member representing the local self -government 
institution, either from the Zila Parishad or the Municipal Council, 
as the case may be;  
(vi) one representative of a registered civil society organisation 
involved in environmental protection having demonstrable activity 
within the district for such period preceding the date of nomination, 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government; and  
(vii) at least one legal practitioner or academician having  not 
less than ten years of experience in the field of environmental or 
criminal law; 
(2) The appropriate Government may, having regard to the ecological 
sensitivity, geographical spread, and administrative requirements of 
the district, prescribe by rules the number of members to be appointed 
under clauses (iv) and (vii) of sub-section (1). 
(3) The appropriate Government may appoint such number of officers 
and staff to the Commission, as may be deemed necessary, to assist it 
in the efficient discharge of its functions under the Act. 
(4)The terms and conditions of appointment, remuneration, tenure,  
qualifications and experience of non -governmental members of the 
Commission as well as the method of recruitment, salaries and 
allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and staff of the Commission, shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government.  
(5) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure with the regard to 
transaction of its business. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Powers and 
functions of the 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) The Commission shall exercise the following powers and discharge all or 
any of the following functions, namely:—  
(i) receive and record complaints of acts amounting to, or likely to 
result in, ecocide within the district in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government;  
(ii) conduct or cause to be conducted environmental site 
inspections, preliminary inquiries on the complaints received under 
clause (i) or otherwise, and ecological audits in response to complaints 
received or suo motu;  
(iii) direct temporary cessation of act ivities posing an imminent 
threat to the ecological integrity of the district, subject to confirmation 
within seventy-two hours of receipt of information regarding such threat 
by the District Magistrate;  
(iv) recommend preventive or remedial action to the  concerned 
authorities including the State Pollution Control Board, Forest 
Department, or the Central Government, as the case may be;  
(v) assist law enforcement agencies in the initiation of prosecution 
under this  Act or any other applicable law;  
(vi) refer matters involving trans -district or inter -State 
consequences to the  Tribunal or to the Wing, as the case may be; Act;  
(vii) facilitate, supervise and monitor community -led ecological 
restoration in accordance with the approved restoration orders issued by 
it under this  Act;  
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 1908. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) maintain a District Register of Ecological Offences and 
Restoration Measures, in such form and manner as may be prescribed;  
(ix) administer and maintain the Local Ecocide Remediation Funds 
established under section  28 of this Act; and 
(x) such other functions as the appropriate Government may assign 
from time to time for the fulfilment of the provisions of this Act. 
(2) The Commission shall while investigating any matter referred to it under 
clauses (ii), (iii) and (v) of sub-section (1), have all the powers of a civil court, 
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the 
following matters, namely:—  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court 
or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 
 
25 
30 
16. 
 
(1) The Commission shall, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, 
submit quarterly and special reports to the Wing containing therein—  
(i) the details of complaints received and action taken thereon;  
(ii) records of inspections conducted and restoration orders or 
directives issued;  
(iii) updates on investigations or prosecutions pending or 
concluded; and  
(iv) urgent matters warranting national attention or intervention.  
(2) The Wing may issue such directions as may be necessary, on the basis of 
the reports under sub-section (1) and may require the Commission to furnish 
further information or documents in such  form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 
 Reporting 
mechanism. 
 
 
 
 
   CHAPTER IV 
PENALTIES AND PUNISHMENTS 
  
 35 17.  Whoever commits the offence of ecocide shall be punished with 
imprisonment  for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which 
may extend to imprisonment for life, or with fine which may extend to five 
lakh rupees, or with both.  
 Punishment 
for the offence 
of ecocide. 
 
40 
45 
18. (1) Any person who,—  
(i) fails to comply with any direction, order, or notice issued under 
this Act; or  
(ii) obstructs any officer or authority in the discharge of their 
functions under this Act; or  
(iii) provides false or misleading information in any environmental 
statement, report, audit, or restoration plan required under this Act; or 
(iv) destroys, tampers with, or conceals evidence relating to an 
environmental offence under this Act; or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalty for 
certain acts. 

8 
 
(v) fails to furnish data, documents, or returns as required by any 
authority empowered under this Act;  
shall be  punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
(2) Where the contravention continues after conviction, the offender shall be 
liable to an additional fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees 
for every day during which such contravention continues. 
(3) The offences under this section shall be deemed cognizable and non -
bailable and may be tried summarily by a Magistrate or a Special Ecocide 
Court. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the a pplicability of other penalties 
under this Act for graver offences, including ecocide, and this section shall 
operate in addition to and not in derogation of any other provisions of this  
Act. 
5 
10 
15 
Offences  by 
companies.    
 
 19. (1) Where an offence under this  Act is committed by a company, every person 
who, at the time of the commission of the offence, was in charge of and 
responsible to the company for the conduct of its business or operations, as 
well as the company itself, shall  be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that no such person shall be liable for punishment under this  
Act, if they prove—  
(a) that the offence was committed without their knowledge, or  
(b) that they had exercised due diligence to prevent the commission 
of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence 
under this Act is proved to have been committed with the consent, 
connivance, or attributable neglect of any director, managing partner, 
managing director, company secretary, compliance officer,  or any other 
officer of the company, such individual shall also be deemed guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished in 
accordance with this Bill.  
(3) In the case of a Government company, Public Sector Undertaking, or 
statutory authority, the person appointed or acting in the capacity of Chief 
Executive Officer, Project Head, or Controlling Officer of the activity giving 
rise to the offence shall be deemed responsible unless proven otherwise. 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section—  
(a) “company” means any body corporate, and includes a firm, 
limited liability partnership, trust, public -private partnership, 
consortium, or any other association of persons (whether incorporated or 
not);  
(b) “director” in relation to a firm or LLP means a partner or a 
designated partner, as the case may be;  
(c) “officer” includes key managerial personnel, persons 
exercising control over environmental functions, or any other person 
declared by notification to be covered under this provision. 
(4) When an offence is committed by a company, every person who was in 
charge at the time shall be deemed guilty unless proved otherwise.  
(5) Where the company is convicted of the offence of ecocide or any other 
offence under this Act, the court may, in addition to any other penalty, direct 
the suspension, cancellation, or blacklisting of the company’s environmental 
approvals, permits, or licences for such period as it deems fit. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
  20.  Any company or corporate entity convicted under this Act shall be 
blacklisted from government contracts and foreign trade incentives for a 
minimum of  five years. 
 Environmental 
disqualification 
of companies. 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
21. (1) Every restoration order issued under the provisions of this  Act shall be 
founded upon the principles of ecological justice and sustainability, and shall 
be guided by the following doctrines,–  
(i) “Polluter Pays” Principle, wherein the individual, entity,  or 
authority responsible for causing ecocide or significant ecological harm 
shall bear the entire cost of restoration, rehabilitation, and remediation, 
including ancillary community support;  
(ii) Principle of Intergenerational Equity wherein the restorat ion 
measures shall prioritise the preservation of ecological health and natural 
capital for the benefit of present and future generations;  
(iii) Restoration to Original Ecological State wherein the 
restoration efforts shall, to the extent feasible and scientifically possible, 
aim to reinstate the affected ecosystem to its pre-damage baseline, or to 
an equivalent level of biodiversity, productivity, and resilience;  
(iv) Community-led Rehabilitation wherein the formulation, 
design, and execution of restoration activities shall actively involve 
local, tribal, and indigenous communities, ensuring their free, prior, and 
informed participation in all relevant stages; and 
(v) Principle of Ecological Integrity wherein the restoration shall 
consider ecological interconnectedness, prioritising biodiversity 
conservation, functional ecosystem recovery, and avoidance of 
monoculture or artificial substitutes unless ecologically justified. 
(2) Every restoration plan  mandated under this  Act shall include, but not be 
limited to, the following components,—  
(i) a site-specific ecological damage assessment report, conducted 
in accordance with the criteria laid down in the Second Schedule of this 
Act, by an accredited environmental scientist, institution, or agency, 
outlining the type, scale, and extent of damage to air, water, soil, flora, 
fauna, and ecological services;  
(ii) a valuation of biodiversity and ecosyste m loss, including but 
not limited to loss of endangered species, critical habitats, traditional 
livelihoods, and ecosystem functions;  
(iii) a scientifically designed restoration roadmap, comprising a 
realistic and time -bound schedule of remedial actions, ecological 
monitoring checkpoints, community engagement mechanisms, and 
adaptive strategies to ensure sustained recovery;  
(iv) third-party certification and independent verification by a 
recognised environmental institute or scientist, attesting to the adequacy 
and credibility of the proposed restoration measures, before initiation 
and upon completion; and  
(v) a financial estimate and plan indicating source of funds, liability 
obligations, and contribution to the Fund established under section 26, 
wherever applicable. 
(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the  Wing established 
under section 8, prescribe model guidelines, standards, and monitoring 
frameworks for restoration activities under this  Act, having regard to 
ecological fragility, cultural relevance, and climate resilience. 
(4) The competent court, Tribunal, or authority may impose additional 
restoration-related obligations on the offender, including but not limited to—  
(a) payment of interim ecological damages;  
(b) community livelihood rehabilitation;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principles and 
components of 
restoration 
orders.   

10 
 
(c) periodic progress reporting; and 
(d) independent environmental audit on completion. 
(5) No restoration plan shall be considered complete unless it results in 
tangible eco logical recovery, verified through longitudinal ecological 
monitoring, and reviewed periodically for a minimum period of five years 
from the date of initial restoration. 
 
 
 
 
5 
Mandatory 
measures in 
case of 
unintentional or 
imminent 
ecocide. 
 22. 
 
(1) Where any act, omission, or accident results in, or is likely to result in, 
grave and widespread environmental destruction amounting to ecocide, the 
following persons shall be legally bound to act without delay –  
(i) the person or entity directly responsible for the act or process; 
and  
(ii) the person in charge of the premises, operation, machinery, or 
site from which such act or event originates or is apprehended to occur,  
shall immediately – 
(a) take all effective measures to prevent, control, or minimize 
the ecological damage;  
(b) report the occurrence or apprehension of ecocide to the 
prescribed authority and local magistrate within twenty-four hours, 
in such form and manner as may be prescrib ed by the Central 
Government; and  
(c) cooperate fully with any agency, officer, or environmental 
authority in the conduct of investigation or mitigation, and render 
technical, logistical, or material assistance as may be required. 
(2) Upon receipt of such information, or otherwise, if any authority under this 
Act has reasonable grounds to believe that ecocide has occurred or is 
imminent, it shall—  
(a) immediately initiate a field-based ecological risk assessment;  
(b) issue interim orders to suspend, restrict, or seal operations in the 
affected area; and  
(c) cause emergency remedial, containment, or evacuation 
measures to be undertaken, in coordination with disaster management 
and restoration agencies. 
(3) Any expenses incurred by the appropriate Governme nt or any authority, 
as the case may be, in connection with the measures under sub -section (2), 
including ecological restoration, health and habitat rehabilitation, and 
monitoring, shall be recovered from the responsible party as –  
(a) damages under the “Polluter Pays” principle; and  
(b) arrears of land revenue or public demand, together with interest 
at such rate as may be notified by the Central Government. 
(4) The invocation of this sub -section (3) shall not prevent the initiation of 
criminal prosecution under this l Act for the offence of ecocide, nor shall 
compliance under this section constitute a defence to liability. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
 
Power of the 
Central 
Government for 
prevention, 
control, and 
remediation of 
ecocide. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall have 
the power to take such measures as it may deem necessary or expedient for 
the purposes of —  
 (i) preventing and deterring acts of ecocide; 
(ii) protecting, conserving, and improving ecological health, and  
(iii) ensuring effective restoration, reparation, and compensation 
for environmental harm. 
45 
 

11 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the measures referred 
to in sub-section (1) may include but shall not be limited to the following–  
(i) coordinating actions of the State Governments, statutory 
authorities, public agencies and local bodies—  
(a) under this Act and the rules made thereunder, or  
(b) under any other law in force rela ting to environmental 
protection, biodiversity, or conservation of natural resources;  
(ii) planning, financing, and implementing a National Programme 
for Ecocide Prevention and Restoration, including public awareness 
campaigns, capacity-building, and ecological literacy;  
(iii) prescribing national standards for ecosystem integrity, 
biological thresholds, and permissible levels of anthropogenic stress on 
ecosystems; 
(iv) notifying thresholds and limits for emissions, discharges, noise, 
light, or hazardous substances from all sectors, with power to 
differentiate based on zone, ecosystem type, or risk level;  
(v) declaring certain areas as Ecologically Vulnerable Zones or No-
Degradation Zones, and imposing restrictions or conditionalities on 
industrial, mining, construction, or infrastructure activities therein;  
(vi) issuing precautionary and emergency protocols for the 
prevention of ecological disasters, industrial accidents, or natural 
resource collapse, and directing immediate remedial action;  
(vii) regulating, prohibiting or monitoring the use, storage, 
handling, transport or disposal of substances or technologies considered 
environmentally hazardous or ecocidally potent;  
(viii) reviewing, evaluating, and modifying manufacturing or 
developmental practice s likely to cause irreparable ecological 
degradation;  
(ix) undertaking, funding, or mandating scientific research and 
environmental surveillance to detect, quantify, and mitigate emerging 
ecocidal threats; 
 (x) authorising the inspection, seizure, or shut down of premises, 
plants, processes, or technologies in contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or in active violation of ecological rights;  
(xi) establishing and recognizing centres of ecological excellence, 
restoration institutes, and laboratories for ecological audit, bio -
restoration, and forensic assessment;  
(xii) promoting open -access environmental information systems, 
community right-to-know initiatives, and ecological damage registers;  
(xiii) preparing and issuing national ecological codes, restoration 
manuals, or guidelines relevant to prevention, mitigation, and reversal of 
ecocidal harm; and 
(xiv) taking such other actions as may be necessary for giving effect 
to the provisions of this Act and securing long -term ecological 
sustainability. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Ecocide Authorities at the national, regional, or local 
level by such name as may be specified, for the purpose of exercising any or 
all of the powers referred to in sub-section (2), subject to such conditions and 
supervision as may be prescribed. 

12 
 
Explanation.— Any autho rity constituted under this section shall be 
deemed to have the power to issue binding directions, impose compliance 
obligations, and initiate prosecution or restoration proceedings under this Act, 
as if it were empowered directly by the Central Government. 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 24. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Government or any officer of the Government or any member or any officer 
or other employee of the Wing or Commission or Board, in respect of 
anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith in pursuance of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
5  
   CHAPTER V 
COMPENSATION AND FUND MECHANISM 
10  
Ecocide 
Restoration 
Bonds. 
 25. (1)  Where any person, company, or body corporate is found guilty of the 
offence of ecocide, the competent court may, in addition to any other penalty 
imposed, direct such person or entity to  deposit a monetary Bond, to be called 
the Ecocide Restoration Bond, to cover future restoration expenses. 
(2)  The amount of such Bond shall be equivalent to the value of 
environmental harm or degradation as assessed by such authorised 
expert in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government, 
together with an additional sum not less than twenty-five per-cent of such 
assessed value.  
Explanation.– For the purpose of this sub -section, t he Central 
Government may, by rules, designate one or more authorised expert(s)  
for the purpose of assessing the value of environmental damage and cost 
of ecological restoration. 
(3) Bonds shall be held in an escrow account administered under the Fund  
established under section 26, and shall be released only upon satisfactory 
implementation of the restoration plan, as be certified  by such authority, as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
15 
20 
25 
 
Establishment 
of the National 
Ecocide 
Remediation 
Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Fund to be called the National Ecocide Remediation Fund, for 
providing relief and compensation to tribal, forest and coastal 
communities adversely affected by damage or har m to the environment 
of their natural residence and for other purposes as may be prescribed.   
(2)  The Fund shall be a non-lapsable public account under the Consolidated 
Fund of India.  
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a National Ecocide Remediation 
Board, to be constituted by the Central Government, by notification in 
the Official Gazette and shall be chaired by the Secretary to the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change and shall consist of such other members a s may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) There shall be credited to the Fund :  
(i) all amounts recovered by way of fines, penalties, and  amounts 
of Bonds under section 25 of this Act;  
(ii) budgetary allocations from the Central Government;  
(iii) grants, donations made by any individual, institution, or 
organisation or international contributions permitted under the Foreign 
Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010; and 
(iv) voluntary contributions made by companies as part of their 
Corporate Social Responsibility  obligations  under section 135 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 or otherwise. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 of 2010. 
 
 
 
18 of 2013. 
 

13 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
27. (1) The  Fund shall be  utilised for following purposes, namely,–  
(i)    ecosystem restoration and biodiversity conservation projects;  
(ii) compensation to displaced or affected individuals and 
communities including relief and compensation to tribal, forest, and 
coastal communities;  
(iii) scientific research and baseline data generation on damaged 
environments;  
(iv)  capacity-building and training of environmental officials; and 
(v) emergency response to environmental disasters caused by 
ecocide.  
(2) There shall be maintained under the Fund, a dedicated escrow account, 
wherein shall be deposited the bond amounts collected under section 25 of 
this Act. 
 Provided that if restoration plan is not satisfactorily implemented as 
provided under sub -section (3) of section 25, the bond amount held in the 
escrow account shall stand forfeited and credited to the general corpus of the 
Fund. 
(3) The Board  shall prepare and publish within such period of time and in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Cen tral Government, an 
annual statement of accounts and impact assessment reports and forward the 
same to the Central Government, which shall cause it to be laid before both 
Houses of  Parliament. 
 Utilization of 
the Fund. 
 
25 
30 
28. (1)  The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, establish Local Ecocide Remediation Funds  at the district level, 
which shall be administered and maintained by the  Commission  
constituted under section 13 of this Act. 
(2)   There shall be credited to the Local Fund, such amounts either by 
way of grants, donations or contributions, as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government and such budgetary allocations as may be 
made by the appropriate Government, from time to time. 
(3) The Local Fund shall be utilised for such purposes as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government in consultation with the Commission. 
 Local Ecocide 
Remediation 
Funds.  
 
35 
29. (1) All restoration projects funded under the provisions of this Act shall 
undergo independent third-party environmental audits by such auditors and 
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Reports of audit done under sub -section (1) shall be  placed in public 
domain in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government and submitted to the State Pollution Control Board and Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 
 Environmental 
audit and 
third-party 
oversight. 
 40  CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
  
 
45 
30. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order, direction, action, or decision of the 
Central Government, the State Government, the Ecocide Prevention 
Commission, or any other authority empowered under this Act, may file an 
application for adjudication of the dispute before the  Tribunal.  
(2) Such application shall be made in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, within a period of six months from 
the date on which the cause of action arose:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adjudication 
of disputes by 
the  Tribunal. 

14 
 
Provided that the Tribunal may entertain the application after the expiry 
of the said period if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not making 
the application within that period.  
(3) The  Tribunal shall have the jurisdiction to provide relief, compensation, 
and restitution of damaged ecosystems, and may issue any direction, 
including for restoration, remediation, or imposition of environmental costs 
as may be deemed fit in accordance with this Act. 
5 
 
 
Bar of 
jurisdiction.   
 31. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of anything done, action taken or order or direction issued by the 
Central Government or State Government or any other authority or officer in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or in relation to its or his functions under 
this Act. 
10 
 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
 32. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law on this behalf, provide, from time to time, adequate 
funds for the implementation of the provisions and purposes of this Act. 15 
 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law.   
 33. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
 
 
Power to amend 
Schedules. 
 34. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so 
to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First or the 
Second Schedule and thereupon the First or the Second Schedule, as the case 
may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly. 
(2) A copy of every notification made under sub -section (1) shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 
20 
 
Power of 
Central or State 
Government to 
make rules. 
 35. 
 
(1) The appropriate Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this  Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive session s 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislature of that State, where it 
consists of one House, or where it consists of two Houses, before both Houses 
of the Legislature. 
25 
30 
35 
 
Savings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36. 
 
(1) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to—  
 (a) affect the operation of any other law for the time being in force in India 
that governs the protection, conservation, and management of the 
environment,  biodiversity, or natural resources, unless such law is 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act;  
 (b) limit or interfere with any action, proceeding, or  remedy that may have 
been initiated or taken by any person or authority under any other law for the 
protection of the environment or against acts of environmental destruction or 
harm prior to the commencement of this Act; 
 (c) affect any right, privilege, or liability accrued under any other law before 
the commencement of this Act, or any act that may have been performed 
under such law, which is consistent with the protection and improvement of 
the environment.  
40 
45 
50 
 

15 
 
5 
(2) In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Act and any 
other law, the provisions of this Act shall prevail, unless otherwise explicitly 
provided in that other law.  
(3) The provisions of this Act shall not invalidate any actions or orders taken 
by the Government or any authority under the provisions of any existing 
environmental laws that are consistent with the objectives of this Act. 
 
10 
37. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period 
of three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 Power to 
remove 
difficulties.  
 
  

16 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
 [See section 5(i)] 
The following ecosystems are designated as protected under this Bill. Any 
substantial harm, degradation, or irreversible alteration to these shall constitute 
prima facie ecocide, unless otherwise permitted under law: 
1. Forested Ecosystems
(a) Reserved Forests and Protected Forests under Indian Forest Act, 1927
(b) Biodiversity-rich areas notified under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002
(c) Sacred Groves and Indigenous Forest Zones
2. Wetland Ecosystems
(a) Ramsar Sites in India
(b) Freshwater lakes, marshes, swamps, mangroves, and coastal wetlands
(c) Estuarine systems and river deltas
3. Marine and Coastal Ecosystems
(a) Coral reefs
(b) Seagrass meadows
(c) Marine Protected Areas notified under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972
4. Riverine and Freshwater Ecosystems
(a) Nationally important rivers, their tributaries, and ass ociated catchment
zones
(b) Glacial lakes and high-altitude freshwater bodies
5. Mountain and Highland Ecosystems
(a) Himalayan alpine zones
(b) Western Ghats, Eastern Ghats, Aravalli Range, and other sensitive
mountain systems
6. Grassland and Savannah Ecosystems
(a) Shola grasslands
(b) Terai-Duar grasslands
(c) Semi-arid savannahs of Central India and Deccan
7. Desert and Semi-arid Ecosystems
(a) The Thar Desert and associated salt marshes (e.g. Rann of Kutch)
(b) Desert National Park, scrubland reserves
8. Agro-ecological and Pastoral Landscapes
(a) Traditional agro-forestry zones
(b) Community-conserved areas and pasturelands under Forest Rights Act,
2006
9. Urban Natural Habitats
(a) Urban lakes, wetlands, and green belts
(b) Biodiversity parks and peri-urban ecological corridors
10. Cultural and Indigenous Ecosystems
(a) Sacred rivers, mountains, forests associated with traditional and tribal
practices
(b) Customary fishing and agricultural zones

17 
 
 
  THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See Explanation (i) to section 3 and section 21(2)(i)] 
Criteria for environmental impact or ecological damage assessment  
under the Act 
The following multi-criteria matrix shall be used by regulatory authorities, 
scientific panels, and ecocide courts to determine the impact severity of any act or 
project: 
Criterion Measurement 
Indicators 
Severity Thresholds 
1. Biodiversity Loss Species richness, 
endemic/endangered 
species, IUCN status 
≥ 30% species loss in 
affected area 
2. Ecosystem Services 
Disruption 
Water filtration, soil 
fertility, carbon storage 
≥ 25% loss in ecological 
functions 
3. Area of Impact Size and continuity of 
affected zone 
≥ 10 sq. km. or regionally 
interconnected 
4. Reversibility Regeneration potential 
within 10 years 
Irreversible damage or >10-
year recovery 
5. Health & 
Community Impact 
Displacement, disease 
incidence, food 
insecurity 
>100 affected individuals 
or villages 
6. Cultural and 
Indigenous Harm 
Loss of traditional 
livelihood or sacred 
sites 
Documented community 
cultural erosion 
7. Cumulative Impact Combined effect with 
past/present activities 
≥50% cumulative threshold 
met 
8. Climate 
Vulnerability 
Measurable degradation 
or conflict risk 
>10,000 tCO₂ -eq/year or 
deforest >100 ha 
9. Regulatory Non-
compliance 
Violation of 
Forest/Wildlife/Environ
ment laws 
Unauthorised or fraudulent 
clearances 
10. Transboundary or 
Downstream 
Effect 
Impact on neighbouring 
state/country 
ecosystems or rivers 
Measurable degradation or 
conflict risk 
 
 
 
  
 
  

18 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Constitution of India, under Article 48A, mandates the State to protect and 
improve the environment and safeguard forests and wildlife. Article 51A(g) casts a 
fundamental duty upon every citizen to protect and improve the natural environment, 
including forests, lakes, rivers, and wildlife, and to have compassion for living 
creatures. 
Despite these constitutional obligations, India continues to witness systematic, 
large-scale destruction of ecologically critical areas due to industr ial, commercial, 
and extractive activities. This environmental degradation, often irreversible in 
nature, has led to biodiversity collapse, displacement of indigenous communities, 
and severe public health crises. However, the existing legal framework spread across 
various statutes such as the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 1972, and the Forest Conservation Act, 1980; does not criminalize 
acts of ecocide, nor does it impose personal criminal liability for severe, reckless or 
willful harm to ecosystems. 
The need for a comprehensive and deterrent legal mechanism to prevent, 
punish, and restore damage caused by such acts has become increasingly urgent in 
light of India’s growing industrial activity, unsustainable development practices, and 
the disproportionate impact of environmental harm on marginalised communities. 
The international community has already taken cognizance of this gap through 
legislative measures criminalising ecocide in countries such as France, Russia, 
Belgium, and Georgia, where willful or reckless destruction of the environment is 
treated on par with crimes against peace and humanity. 
In line with these international precedents and India’s constitutional 
commitment under Articles 48A and 51A(g) to protect an d improve the natural 
environment, the present Bill seeks to define the offence of ecocide, establish clear 
accountability for both the State and non -State actors, and provide for institutional 
mechanisms for prevention, investigation, prosecution, and ecological restoration. It 
aims to enforce principles such as the Polluter Pays Principle, Intergenerational 
Equity, and the Right to a Healthy Environment, and to ensure that affected 
communities are actively engaged in restorative efforts. 
In its spirit, the Bill represents a vital step in fortifying India’s environmental 
governance, preventing future ecological catastrophes, and reaffirming the country’s 
leadership in the global movement for environmental justice. 
Hence, this Bill. 
SUJEET KUMAR. 

19 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Special Environment 
Investigation Wing,  whereas Clause 9 provides for its composition and the salaries 
and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Officers of the Wing. 
Clause 13 provides for the constitution of the District Ecocide Prevention  
Commission in every  district  within the States and Union territories.  Clause 14 
provides for the composition of the Commission and that the appropriate 
Government shall appoint or nominate such number of Members thereto.  The said 
clause also provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint such number of 
officers and staff to the Commission as well as for the remuneration of non -
governmental employees of the Commission and salaries and allowances payable to 
and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and staff.  Explanation to 
sub-clause (2) of clause 25 provides that the Central Government may designate one 
or more authorized expert(s) for the purpose of assessing the value of environmental 
damage and cost of ecological restoration to determine the amount the Ecocide 
Restoration Bond.  Clause 26 provides that the Central Government shall establish 
the National Ecocide Remediation Fund under the Consolidated Fund of India, 
which shall be administered by the National Ecocide Remediation Board with such 
number of members as may be prescribed and that the Fund shall be credited inter 
alia with budgetary allocations made by the Central Government.  Clause 28 
provides that the appropriate Government shall establish Local Ecocide Remediation 
Funds at the district level which shall be credited inter alia  with budgetary 
allocations made by the appropriate Government, from time to time.  Clause 32 
provides that the Central Gove rnment shall provide adequate funds for the 
implementation of the provisions and carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India and of the States.  It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about 20 crore rupees would be incurred per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  A non-recurring expenditure of about 50 crore rupees 
is also likely to be involved. 

20 
 
  MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government  to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  Clause 37 empowers the Central Government 
to make such provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise 
in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 
As the rules or orders will relate to matters of administrative and procedural 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
 
  
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
_________ 
A
BILL 
to provide for the recognition, prevention, and punishment of ecocide,  ensure 
restoration of environmental harm, and promote environmental justice in 
accordance with constitutional and international environmental 
principles and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
_________ 
(Shri Sujeet Kumar, M.P .) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–331–08.12.2025. 