1
THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition)  Amendment
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XLVI of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 12TH JULY, 2019
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.5

2
Amendment
of Section 23.
2. In the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act) for section 10, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law in force, the
employment of any contract labour is prohibited in any process, service, operation or work
for the time being in any establishment, unless that process, service, operation or work is:
(a) not necessary or essential for the industry, trade, business, manufacture or
occupation that is carried on in the establishment;
(b) of a temporary nature, that is, not of sufficient duration to constitute the
routine activities of the establishment;
(c)  not ordinarily done by regular workmen in that establishment or an
establishment similar thereto; or
(d) of such a nature that it would not be adequate to employ full-time workmen.
(2) The employment of any contract labour is prohibited in any process, service,
operation or work in any establishment unless permission is granted by the appopriate
Government under sub-section (3).
(3) The appropriate Government may, after consultation with the Central Board or, as
the case may be, a State Board, permit, by notification in the Official Gazette, employment of
contract labour in any process, service, operation or work in an establishment (3). In granting
permission for employment of contract labour on an application by an establishment, in such
manner as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall consider the factors mentioned
in sub-section (1) amongst other relevant factors.
(4) Even during the pendency of any appliation under sub-section ( 3) or under this
act, any workman, irrespective of the nomenclature or status awarded by the employer,
engaged in any process, service, operation, or work in the establishment shall be deemed to
be a workman of the said establishment and shall be eligible to all rights of a workman under
any applicable Act.
(5) Any workman appointed in violation of this Act shall be deemed to be a workman
of the said establishment and shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges accordingly,
arising out provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Industrial Employment (Standing
Orders) Act, 1946 and any other Act applicable to the establishment.”
3. In Section 23 of the principal Act—
(a) for the words “one thousand rupees” the words “five thousand rupees per
contract labour or twenty-five thousand rupees, whichever is higher” shall be
substituted; and
(b) for the words “one hundred rupees” the words “two thousand five hundred
rupees” shall be substituted.
4. In section 35 of the principal Act, after sub-clause (c) the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ca) the form of application for grant of permission to employ contract labour
under section 10 and the particulars it should contain;”
Substitution
new section for
Section 10.
37 of 1970.
14 of 1947.
20 of 1946.
Amendment
of Section 35.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Prohibition of
employment
of contract
labour.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is at a critical juncture in her growth, with a burgeoning middle-class and the
world's largest youth population, and needs to meet the aspiration of those who are joining
it's workforce. As it makes the transition towards formalization of labour, new forms of
informal employment such as contract labour have emerged. This is mainly due to the demand
for greater flexibility and pressures from the global economy that establishments in India
facts. Contract labour is an arrangement where the workmen are hired through a contractor,
instead of directly through the employer. Recent trends in India have shown that contract
labour has risen from aproximately 12% in 1985 to nearly 35% today in the organized
manufacturing industry in India. This number is much higher, at nearly 50% in some states
like Maharashtra, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh. Contract Labourers face more legal hurdles
while enforcing their right to regular working hours, just and humance conditions of work
and social security benefits. Therefore, a contract labourer generally draws a fraction of the
salary of a regular workman and is often paid less than the minimum wage.
Although the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 was passed nearly
50 years ago, the component of abolition has been sidetracked, as the Act lacks the necessary
enforcement mechanism to remove contract labour where it is not appropriate. There is no
general prohibition of contract labour in the Act, and instead it provides a procedure by
which the Central or State Governments may prohibit contract labour on a case to case basis,
based on an application made to the Central or State Board by the contract labourer himself.
This cumbersome procedure relies on the proactivity of the worker to enforce his rights,
instead of placing the burden of compliance on the employer. This gap in the law has proven
to be a fertile ground for the growth of contract labour in India. Additionally, as per the
Supreme Court's judgement in Steel Authority of India Limited & Others v. National Union
Waterfront Workers and Others, after the Central or State Government passes the prohibition
order, there is no automatic absorption of the workmen into the establishment as permanent
workers. The Act places no penalties on the employer for employing contrtact labour and
therefore encourages him to subvert the provisions of other labour laws by employing
workers through contract labour.
This amendment seeks to change the structure of this law in order to allow it to fulfill
its desired outcomes. It retain similar conditions to determine whether contract labour is
required, but shifts the burden of compliance to the employer. It prohibits the employment of
contract labour in establishments where it is not required, and mandates that an employer
must obtain a licence in order to employ contract labour. If this license is not obtained, then
the employer could have to pay a fine for contravention of the provisions of the Act.
Additionally, it protects the rights of workmen, since they are entitled to the same benefits as
regular workers if they are appointed in violation of this Act. Lastly, the Bill also amends the
penalty clauses in order to make them more in line with today's economic reality. Therefore,
this Bill seeks to achieve the original aims of the Act.
Hence, this Bill.
VANDANA CHAVAN
3

ANNEXURE
THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970
(ACT NO. 37 OF 1970)
* * * * *
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the appropriate Government
may, after consultation with the Central Board or, as the case may be, a State Board, prohibit,
by notification in the Official Gazette, employment of contract labour in any processs, operation
or other work in any establishment.
(2) Before issuing any notification under sub-section (1) in relation to an establishment,
the appropriate Government shall have regard to the conditions of work and benefits provided
for the contract labour in that establishment and other relevant factors, such as—
(a) whether the process, operation or other work is incidental to, or necessary
for the industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation that is caried on in the
establishment;
(b) whether it is of perennial nature, that is to say, it is of sufficient duration
having regard to the nature of industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation
carried on in that establishment;
(c) whether it is done ordinarily through regular workmen in that establishment
or an establishment similar thereto;
(d) whether it is sufficient to employ considerable number of whole-time workmen.
Explanation.—If a question arises whether any process or operation or other work is
of perennial nature, the decision of the appropriate Government threon shall be final.
23. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules made thereunder
prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of contract labour, or contravenes any
condition of a licence granted under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine
which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such contravention
continues after conviction for the first such contravention.
* * * * *
35. * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
ruels may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(c) the manner in which establishments may be registered under section 7, the levy of
a fee thereof and the form of certificate of registration;
(d) the form of application for the grant or renewal of a licence under section 13 and the
particulars it may contain;
* * * * *
4
Prohibition of
employment of
contract labour.
Contravention
of provisions
regarding
employment of
contract labour.
Power to make
rules.

MGIPMRND—1572RS(S3)—15-07-2019.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
————
(Shrimati  Vandana Chavan,  M.P .)