THE  HIGH  COURTS  (USE  OF  OFFICIAL  LANGUAGES)  BILL,  2016
A
BILL
to provide for the use of official language in the proceedings of High Courts and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the High Courts  (Use of Official Languages) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazettee appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context is otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointed day” means the date as may be notified by the appropriate
Government for the purposes of this Act;
(b) “appropriate Government” means,—
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XLVI of  2016
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 10TH MARCH, 2017

2
(i) in relation to the High Court for a State, the respective State Government;
and
(ii) in relation to other High Courts the Central Government;
(c) “documents” means documents as defined in section 3 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872;
(d) “High Court” means any Court as defined in clause (14) of article 366, or
established under article 231 of the Constitution and includes its Benches;
(e) “Official language” means the official language of the Union under article 343
of the Constitution and includes the language in use for official purposes in any State
in which the High Court for that State is located;
(f) “party” includes any person authorized by the party to the matter or an
advocate for the party; and
(g) “proceedings” includes pleadings, petition, application, appeal, reference,
revision, review, affidavit, counter affidavit, other documents filed or received during
course of conduct of the matter, appearance, leading of arguments, during hearing in
any matter, judgment, decree or order and such other matters as may be prescribed by
the High Court.
3.  (1) From the appointed day any party to the proceedings before a High Court shall
have the right to prefer the official language in conduct of such proceedings in that
High Court.
(2) The party to the proceedings shall make an application to the High Court for the
conduct of the proceedings in the official language in such manner as may be laid down by
that High Court under section 4.
4.  (1) Where any party to the proceedings has made preference for the conduct of
proceedings in official language, the High Court shall conduct proceedings before it in the
official language.
(2) The High Court may lay down by rules the procedure for conduct of proceedings
in the official language:
Provided that such procedure shall not entail any additional expense on any party to
the case for conducting such proceedings in the official language.
5. The appropriate Government shall take such measures as may be necessary to
ensure availability of requisite infrastructure the concerned High Court within its jurisdiction
for conduct of proceedings in the official language in that High Court from the appointed
day.
Explanation. —  For the purpose of this section, requisite infrastrucutre includes
appropriate translation and typing facility in the official language and such other facilities as
may be necessary for conduct of the proceedings in the official languages.
Right of the
party to
prefer
official
language in
conduct of
proceedings.
Conduct of
proceedings
in High
Court.
Measures by
appropriate
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1 of 1872.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 348 of the Constitution of India envisages law by Parliament that may prescribe
a language other than English for the proceedings of the High Courts. The right to fair
hearing cannot be done until the litigant understands the language of the hearing. There is
a legal maxim that justice should not only be done but the same should also appear to have
been done.
Hence, this Bill.
BHUPENDER Y ADA V
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government shall take such measures as may
be necessary to ensure availability of requisite infrastructure to the concerned High Court
within its jurisdiction for conduct of proceedings in the official language in that High Court
from the appointed day. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantity the exact amount of
recurring and non-recurring expenditure to be involved.
4

GMGIPMRND—4923RS(S3)—10-03-2017.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the use of official language in the proceedings of High Courts and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhupender Yadav, M.P .)