THE PESTICIDES MANAGEMENT BILL, 2008
________
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application of other laws not barred.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
C
ENTRAL PESTICIDES BOARD
4. Constitution of Central Pesticides Board.
5. Term of office of nominated members.
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board, Registration Committee or
any other committee.
7. Functions and powers of Board.
8. Procedure, etc., of Board.
9. Officers and  employees of Board and Registration Committee.
10. Other Committees and allowances payable to members of Board, Registration
Committee and other committees.
CHAPTER III
R
EGISTRATION OF PESTICIDES
11. Registration Committee and its functions.
12. Registration of pesticides.
13. Suspension or cancellation of registration.
14. Appeal against refusal or suspension or cancellation or registration.
15. Power of Central Government to review decision of Registration Committee.
CHAPTER IV
G
RANT OF LICENCES
16. Licensing  officers.
17. Grant of licence.
18. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licenses.
19. Effect of suspension or cancellation of licence.
20. Appeal against decision of a licensing officer.
21. Central Pesticides Laboratory.
CHAPTER V
P
ROHIBITION OF  IMPORT,  EXPORT AND MANUFACTURE OF CERTAIN PESTICIDES
22. Prohibition of import, export and manufacture of certain pesticides.
23. Prohibition of sale, of certain pesticides, etc.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. XLVIII of 2008

CHAPTER VI
ANALYSIS OF PESTICIDES
CLAUSES
24. Pesticides analysts.
25. Pesticides inspectors.
26. Power of Pesticide Inspectors.
27. Powers to Customs.
28. Procedure to be followed by Pesticides Inspectors.
29. Persons bound to disclose place where pesticides are manufactured or kept.
30. Report of Pesticide Analyst.
31. Confiscation.
32. Notification of  poisoning.
33. Prohibition of sale, etc., of pesticides for reasons of public safety.
34. Notification of cancellation of registration, etc.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PUNISHMENT
35. Punishment for use of pesticide in contravention of Act.
36. Punishment for obstruction.
37. Punishment for misbranded pesticide.
38. Punishment for sub-standard pesticide.
39. Punishment in certain cases.
40. Publication of name, etc., of offender.
41. Offences by companies.
42. Defences which may or may not be allowed in prosecution under this Act.
43. Cognizance and trial of offences.
44. Special courts.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
45. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Governments.
46. Members and officer of Board and Registration Committee and Pesticide Inspector to
be public servants.
47. Protection of action taken in good faith.
48. Power of Central Government to make rules.
49. Power of State Government to make rules.
50. Exemption in certain cases.
51. Compensation to farmer or affected persons.
52. Segregation and disposal of pesticides.
53. Repeal and savings.
54. Power to remove difficulties.
(ii)

THE PESTICIDES MANAGEMENT BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to regulate the import, manufacture, export, sale, transport, distribution, quality and use
of pesticides with a view to—
(i) control pests;
(ii) ensure availability of quality pesticides;
(iii) allow its use only after assessing its efficacy and safety;
(iv) minimize the contamination of agricultural commodities by pesticide residues;
(v) create awareness among users regarding safe and judicious use of pesticides,
and to take necessary measures to continue, restrict or prohibit the use of pesticides on
reassessment with a view to prevent its risk on human beings, animals or environment, and
for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pesticides Management Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States and
for different provisions of this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. XLVIII of 2008

2
Definitions.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
2. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "active ingredient" means the technical grade pesticide present in a
formulation;
(b) "animals" means animals useful to human beings and include fish and fowl,
and such kinds of wild life as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify, being kinds which in its opinion is desirable to protect or
preserve;
(c) "batch" means an identifiable quantity of a technical grade pesticide or its
formulation which has been manufactured and processed under uniform conditions in
a single lot;
(d) "Board" means the Central Pesticides Board constituted under section 4;
(e) "Central Pesticides Laboratory" means the Central Pesticides Laboratory
established, or as the case may be, the institution accredited under section 21;
(f) "deemed registered pesticides" means the pesticides registered on the basis
of their being imported or manufactured immediately before the commencement of this
Act;
(g) "environment" includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship which
exists among and between water, air and land, and human beings, other living creatures,
plants, micro-organisms and property;
(h) "export" means taking out to any place outside those territories to which this
Act extends from a place inside the territories;
(i) "formulation" means manufacture of a preparation containing one or more
technical grade pesticide in a definite proportion along with other specified ingredients;
(j) "household pesticide" means any pesticide that is sold to the user for the
purpose of use only in household and intended to destroy, deter, render harmless,
prevent the action of or otherwise exert a controlling effect on any harmful pest by
chemical or biological means, which is not used on fields or farms or for commercial
storage applications;
(k) "import" means bringing into any place within the territories to which this
Act extends from a place outside those territories;
(l) "label" means any written, printed or graphic matter on the immediate package
and on every other covering in which the package is placed or packed and includes
any written, printed or graphic matter accompanying the pesticide;
(m) "licensing officer" means a licensing officer appointed under section 16;
(n) "manufacture", in relation to any pesticide, includes—
(i) any process or part of a process for making, altering finishing, packing,
repacking, labelling, breaking up or otherwise treating or adopting any pesticide
with a view to its sale, distribution or use without changing the date of manufacture
or expiry of such pesticide; and
(ii) any process by which a preparation containing a pesticide is
formulated;
(o) "misbranded"—a pesticide shall be deemed to be misbranded—
(i) if its label or leaflet contains any statement, design or graphic
representation relating thereto which is false or misleading in any material
particular, or if its package is otherwise deceptive in respect of its contents; or

3
(ii) if  its label does not contain a warning or caution which may be
necessary and sufficient, if complied with to prevent risk to human beings or
animals; or
(iii) if any word, or statement or other information required by or under
this Act to appear on the label is not displayed thereon in such conspicuous
manner as the other words, statements designs or graphic matter have been
displayed on the label in such terms as to render it likely to be read and
understood by any ordinary individual under customary conditions of purchase
and use; or
(iv) if it is not packed or labelled as required by or under this Act; or
(v) if the label contains any reference to registration other than the
registration number; or
(vi) if the date of manufacture and the date of expiry printed on its label is
at variance with the shelf-life as approved by the Registration Committee;
(p) "nominal value" means the registered strength of a pesticide;
(q) "other Ingredients" means inert material, wetting agents, dispersing agents,
emulsifying agents, stabilizers or other substances which are added in a specified
proportion to technical grade pesticide to make a formulation;
(r) "package" means a box, bottle, casket, tin, barrel, case, receptacle, sack, bag,
wrapper, or such other things as approved by the Registration Committee, in which an
pesticide is placed or packed;
(s) "pesticide" means any substance or mixture of substances of chemical or
biological origin intended for preventing, destroying, attracting, repelling, mitigating
or controlling any pest including unwanted species of plants or animals during the
production, storage, transport and distribution of agricultural commodities or animal
feeds including substances intended for use as plant growth regulator, defoliant,
desiccant, fruit thinning agents, or sprouting inhibitor and substances applied to
crops either before or after harvest to protect them from deterioration during storage
and transport;
(t) "Pesticide Analyst" means an Pesticide Analyst appointed under section 24;
(u) "pest control operator" means any person who undertakes pest control
operations and includes the person or the firm or the company or the organisation
under whose control such person is operating.
(v) "Pesticide Inspector" means an Pesticide Inspector appointed under
section 25;
(w) "premises" means any land, shop, stall or place, where any pesticide is sold
or manufactured or stored or used, and includes any vehicle carrying pesticides;
(x) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(y) "registered", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means
registered under this Act;
(z) "sale", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means the
sale of any pesticide whether for cash or on credit and whether by wholesale or retail,
and includes an agreeement for sale, an offer for sale, exposing for sale or having in
possession for sale of any pesticide or an attempt to sell any such pesticide;
(za) "sub-standard"— a pesticide shall be deemed to be sub-standard—
(i) if it does not conform to the active ingredient test approved for it by the
Registration Committee and its active ingredient is within five per cent. of the
nominal value when applied beyond the upper and lower limits prescribed for
conforming to the test:

4
Provided that no tolerance limit shall apply in case of pesticides, which are
registered on minimum purity basis; or
(ii) if it does not conform to other tests specified or approved for it by the
Registration Committee while granting registration;
(zb)  "spurious"— a pesticide shall be deemed to be spurious—
(i) if it is not registered or licensed in the manner required by or under this
Act; or
(ii) if on test or analysis it shows active ingredient higher or lower even
beyond the limits prescribed under clause (v); or
(iii) if it is an imitation of, or is sold under the name of, another pesticide;
or
(iv) if the container bears the name of the person or company purporting
to be the manufacturer of the pesticide, which is either fictitious or does not
exist; or
(v) if the chemical composition as approved by the Registration Committee
is not adhered to or is modified or changed by adding or substituting any
ingredient or substance; or
(vi) if it has outlived its shelf-life, as evident by the date of manufacture
and the date of expiry as printed on its label, approved by the Registration
Committee and displayed for sale, distribution, use or caused to be used or not
disposed of as per provision under section 52; or
(vii) if its import, manufacture, use or sale is prohibited and it is found to
be imported, manufactured, stocked, distributed, transported, sold or exhibited
for sale, caused to be used;
(zc) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, means the
administrator of that Union territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the
Constitution;
(zd) "stockist" in relation to any household pesticide means, any person who
purchases such packages for distribution or re-sale from any manufacturer of such
pesticide;
(ze) "technical grade pesticide" means purest form of a pesticide produced for
commercial use, prior to being formulated;
(zf) "worker" means a person employed under a contract of service or
apprenticeship.
CHAPTER II
C
ENTRAL PESTICIDES BOARD
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Board to be called
the Central Pesticides Board to advise the Central Government and the State Governments
on scientific and technical matters arising out of administration of this Act and to carry out
the functions assigned to it by or under this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) Director General of Health Services,  who shall be the Chairperson; ex officio
(ii) Joint Drugs Controller  General of India; ex officio
(iii) Agriculture Commissioner, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation,
Ministry of Agriculture; ex officio
(iv) the Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of India; ex officio
Constitution
of Central
Pesticides
Board.

5
(v) a representative of—
(a) Director of Storagte and Inspection, Ministry of Food, Consumer
Affairs and Public Distribution;
(b) Chief Adviser of Factories;
(c) Director, National Institute of Communicable Diseases;
(d) Director-General, Indian Council of Medical Research;
(e) Director, Zoological Survey of India;
(f) Director-General, Bureau of Indian Standards;
(g) Director-General of Shipping, Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways;
(h) Joint Director, Traffic (General), Ministry of Railways (Railway
Board);
(i) Secretary, Central Committee for Food Standards;
(j) Animal Husbandry Commissioner, Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries;
(k) Joint Commissioner (Fisheries), Department of Animal Husbandary,
Dairing and Fisheres, Ministry of Agriculture;
(l) Deputy Inspector-General of Forests (Wild Life), Ministry of
Environment and Forests;
(m) Industrial Adviser (Chemical), Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion, Ministry of Commerce;
(n) Department of Biotechnology;
(o) Ministry of Commerce, Department of Commerce;
(p) Central Ground Water Board;
(q) National Institute of Nutrition;
(r) Ministry of Law;
 (vi) Assistant Director-General (Plant Protection), Indian Council of
Agricultural Research,  ex officio;
(vii) Director, Central Pesticides Laboratory, ex officio;
(viii) Assistant Director-General (Prevention of Food Adulteration), Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, ex officio;
(ix) Additional Industrial Adviser (Chemicals), Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, ex officio;
(x) Director, Hazardous Substances Management, Ministry of Environment
and Forests, ex officio;
(xi) Director, National Institute of Occupational Health, ex officio;
(xii) one Pharmacologist to be nominated by the Central Government;
(xiii) one medical toxicologist to be nominated by the Central Government;
(xiv) one person who shall be in charge of the department dealing with public
health in a State, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(xv) five persons who shall be Directors of Agriculture or Horticulture in
States, representing five respective agro-climatic zones, to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(xvi) one person to represent the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,
to be nominated by the Central Government; and
(xvii) one ecologist to be nominated by the Central Government.

6
(3) The Central Government may appoint an officer from the Directorate of Plant
Protection as the Member-Secretary to the Board having such qualifications as may be
prescribed.
5. The person nominated under clauses (xii) to (xviii) of sub-section (2) of section 4
shall, unless their seats become vacant earlier by resignation, death or otherwise, hold office
for a period of three years from the date of their nomination but shall be eligible for re-
nomination:
Provided that the persons nominated under clauses (vi) to (xi) shall hold office only
for so  long as they hold the appointments by virtue of which their nominations were made.
6. No act or proceeding of the Board, the Registration Committee or any other committee
constituted under this Act, shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence
of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Board, the Registration Committee
or such committee, as the case may be.
7. The matters on which the Board may advise the Central Government and the State
Governments shall, inter alia, include—
(a) prevention of risk to human beings, animals and environment during the
manufacture, sale, storage, transport, distribution, handling and use of pesticides and
necessary safety measures and practices relating thereto;
(b) monitoring performance of registered pesticides in improvement of agricultural
production;
(c) review of the toxicity and safety of pesticides from time to time;
(d) suggest development and availability of safer alternatives to existing
pesticides as per latest global research and development; and
(e) disposal of obsolete, date-expired and banned pesticides.
8. The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make
regulations for the purpose of regulating its procedure and the procedure of any committee
thereof and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it or such committee.
9. The Central Government shall provide the Board and the Registration Committee
with such technical and other staff, as it considers necessary.
10. (1) The Board may constitute such committees as it considers necessary and may
appoint to them, persons who are not memebrs of the Board to exercise such powers and
perform such duties as may, subject to such conditions, if any, as the Board may impose, be
delegated to them by the Board.
(2) The members of the Board, the Registration Committee and other committees
shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
R
EGISTRATION OF PESTICIDES
11. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Registration Committee consisting
of the Chairperson and following ex officio members, namely:—
(a) Agriculture Commissioner in the Ministry of Agriculture as Chairperson;
(b) Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of India;
Term of
office of
nominated
members.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Board,
Registration
Committee
or any other
committee.
Functions
and powers
of Board.
Procedure, etc.,
of Board.
Officers and
employees of
Board and
Registration
Committee.
Other
Committees and
allowances
payable to
members of
Board,
Registration
Committee and
other
committees.
Registration
Committee and
its functions.

7
(c) Joint Drugs Controller General of India;
(d) Assistant Director General (Plant Protection), Indian Council of Agricultural
Research;
(e) Director, National Institute of Occupational Health;
(f) Additional Industrial Adviser (Chemicals), Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers;
(g) Assistant Director General (Prevention of Food Adulteration), Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare;
(h) Director, Hazardous Substances Management, Ministry of Environment
and Forests;
(i) Director, Industrial Toxicological Research Centre;
(j) Member-Secretary, Central Pesticide Board as Member-Secretary.
(2) The Registration Committee shall—
(i) register pesticides after scrutinising their formulae and verifying claims made
by the importer or the manufacturer or the exporter, as the case may be, as regards their
efficacy and safety to human beings, animals and environment;
(ii) allow the continued use or restrict or prohibit the use on reassessment of
their safety and availability of safer alternatives;
(iii) specify requirements of necessary infrastructure inclduing machinery,
equipment and technically qualified personnel for grant of licence for manufacture and
storage of pesticides;
(iv) specify guidelines for the regulation of advertising of pesticides in all media
to ensure that it is in accordance with label directions and precautions to be observed
in its application;
(v) specify protocols, procedures and good manufacturing practices for
manufacture of pesticides;
(vi) maintain a national register of persons engaged in import, manufacture and
export of pesticides;
(vii) perform such other functions as are assigned to it by or under this Act; and
(viii) notify the pesticides registered under this Act from time to time; and specify
the pesticides having pesticidal properties and its uses in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Registration Committee may co-opt such number of experts and for such
purpose or period as it may consider necessary but the expert so co-opted shall have no right
to vote.
(4) The Registration Committee may constitute one or more sub-committees consisting
of at least three persons who are members of the Committee to exercise such powers and
perform functions delegated to them by the Committee, subject to such conditions, if any, as
the Committee may impose:
Provided that the sub-committee shall submit details of the decisions taken by them
for the ratification by the Registration Committee.
12. (1) Any person desiring to import or manufacture or export any pesticide shall
apply to the Registration Committee for the registration of such pesticide and there shall be
separate application for each pesticide:
Provided that the insecticides registered under the provisions of the Insecticides Act,
1968, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be the registered
pesticides under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Registration of
pesticides.
46 of 1968.

8
(2) Every application under sub-section ( 1) shall be made in such form and contain
such particulars as may be prescribed, including claims regarding expected performance,
efficacy and safety along with usage instructions and infrastructure available or proposed to
be made available to manufacture and to stock that pesticide.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of all applicants applying for registration to provide
complete information on all the known inimical effects of the pesticide on human beings,
animals and the environment.
(4) On receipt of the application complete in all respects for the registration of a
pesticide, the Committee may, after such enquiry as it considers necessary and after satisfying
itself that the pesticide to which the application relates conforms to the claims made by the
importer or by the manufacturer or by the exporter, as the case may be, as regards the
expected performance and efficacy of the pesticide as well as its safety to human beings,
animals and environment, and availability or provision of requisite minimum infrastructure
to manufacture and stock that pesticide, register the pesticide on such conditions as may be
specified by it and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed and allot a registration
number thereto and issue a certificate of registration as a token thereof within a period of two
years:
Provided that the Committee may, in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be
recorded in writing, extend the period up to six months.
(5) No pesticide shall be registered for import or manufacture unless its tolerance limit
are specified for its residues on crops and commodities under the Food Safety and Standards
Act, 2006.
(6) The data submitted for the purpose of registration in respect of a pesticide under
this section which has not been previously registered shall not be relied upon for grant of
registration of the same pesticide in respect of any other person for a period of three years.
(7) Subject to sub-section (6), where a pesticide has been granted a patent, the period
of non-reliance on data shall be limited to the period of the patent.
Explanation.— The words "not been previously registered" in respect of a pesticide
shall include its name or label expansion through "new uses":
Provided that the provisions of non-reliance on data submitted for registration of a
pesticide by the first registrant shall be available for the period with effect from the date of
the first marketing approval granted anywhere in the world and this shall not apply to the
data relating to bio-efficacy and shelf-life part of pesticides where data is to be generated for
use under Indian conditions.
(8) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), the Central Government may relax or
exempt the provision of non-reliance of data submitted for registration of a pesticide by the
first registrant in the following circumstances, namely:—
(i)( a)national exigency; or
(b) in cases of urgency; or
(c) public interest; or
(ii) for use by the Government for academic and research purposes.
(9) If the Committee is of the opinion that the precautions claimed by the applicant as
being sufficient to ensure safety to human beings or animals are not such as can be easily
observed or that notwithstanding the observance of such precautions the use of the pesticide
involves serious risk to human beings or animals or environment, or that infrastructure to
manufacture or stock that pesticide is inadequate, it may refuse to register the pesticide.
(10) Where the Registration Committee is of opinion that the pesticide is being
introduced for the first time in India, it may pending an enquiry, register it provisionally for a
34 of 2006.

9
period of two years on such conditions as may be specified by it for the purpose of generation
of data for making an application under sub-section (1):
Provided that the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Registration
Committee and if no other appropriate pesticide is registered or available, allow
commercialization of such pesticide on such conditions as may be specified to meet national
exigency.
(11) The Registration Committee may, having regard to the efficacy of the pesticide
and its safety to human beings and animals, vary the conditions subject to which a certificate
of registration has been granted and may for that purpose require the certificate-holder by
giving notice in writing to produce the certificate before it within such time as may be
specified in the notice.
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where a pesticide has been
registered on the application of any person, any other person desiring to import or manufacture
the pesticide or engaged in the business of import or manufacture thereof, shall, on application
and on payment of prescribed fee, be allotted a registration number and granted a certificate
of registration in respect thereof on the same conditions on which the pesticide was registered
under sub-section (4):
Provided that registration in respect of a pesticide, data of which cannot be relied upon
under sub-section (6) shall not be granted during a period of three years of the date of its
registration unless a letter of consent is enclosed with the application, in original, from the
registrant of that pesticide.
(13) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (12), the Central Government may allow
grant of registration under this sub-section in respect of a pesticide, data of which is not
relied upon under sub-section ( 6) even within the period of three years of the date of
registration of such pesticide in the following circumstances, namely:—
(a) National exigency; or
(b) in cases of urgency; or
(c) public interest;
13. (1) If the Registration Committee, either suo motu or otherwise, is prima facie
satisfied of violation of any provision of the Act or the rules framed thereunder, or any of the
conditions of certificate of registration, if may, after giving an opportunity of hearing to the
registrant and for reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend the registration certificate for a
period not exceeding three months.
(2) The certificate of registration issued under section 12 shall be deemed cancelled if
the registrant fails to submit a copy of the manufacturing licence and satisfy the Registration
Committee of having set up necessary manufacturing facilities and started production of
that pesticide within a period of three years in case of manufacture or a copy of the licence to
manufacture, stock, distribute or sale within a period of one year in case of import.
(3) The Registration Committee may either itself or through any of its officers, may
cause the inspection of the manfacturing premises or processing facility of that registrant
with respect to adequacy of infrastructure to manufacture, stock that pesticide and cancel
the Certificate of Registration if the infrastructure is found inadequate.
(4) (a) The Registration Committee, having satisfied itself with the adverse impact of a
pesticide of a particular registrant on crops, human beings, animals or environment or to
minimise the risk of such adverse impact through risk assessment or risk benefit analysis,
either on its own motion or on receiving evidence of adverse impact may after giving an
opportunity of hearing to the registrant, and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, cancel
the registration of that pesticide;
(b) The Registration Commitee, having satisified itself with the evidence that any of
the conditions of certificate of registration in respect of a pesticide has been violated, may
Suspension or
cancellation of
registration.

10
after giving an opportunity of hearing to the registrant, and for the reasons to be recorded in
writing, cancel the registration of that pesticide.
(5) The Registration Committee at any time, either suo motu or on the basis of a
complaint, may visit and inspect any manufacturing premises or facilities, or may cause the
said manufacturing presmises or facility to be visited and inspected through any of its
officers and if it is found by way of such inspection that the facility of manufacturing and
laboratory thereof are sub-standard or that the capacity is inadequate for manufacture of
registrered pesticide, such registration shall be cancelled by the Reigstration Committee,
after giving an opportunity of hearing to the registrant and for the reasons to be recorded in
writing.
(6) If it is found that the data submitted by the applicant is false or misleading or has
been deliberately suppressed, such registration shall be cancelled by the Registration
Committee, after having been given an opportunity of hearing to the registrant and for the
reasons to be recorded in writing.
14. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Registration Committee under section
12 or 13 may, within a period of thirty days from the date on which the decision is communicated
to him, appeal in the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fees to the Central
Government whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided that the Central Government may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing
the appeal in time:
Provided further that no order under this section shall be made without giving an
opportunity of hearing to the applicant.
15. The Central Government may, at any time, call the record relating to any case in
which the Registration Committee has given a decision under section 12 or 13 for the purpose
of satisfying itself as to the grounds for arriving at any such decision and may pass any
order in relation thereto as it considers necessary:
Provided that no such order shall be passed after the expiry of a period of one year
from the date of decision of the Registration Committee:
Provided further that the Central Government shall not pass any order prejudicial to
any person unless that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
CHAPTER IV
G
RANT OF LICENCES
16. The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such
person as it thinks fit to be licensing officers for the purposes of this Act having such
qualifications as may be prescribed by the State Government and define the areas in respect
of which they shall exercise jurisdiction.
17. ( 1) Any person desiring to manufacture or sell or stock or exhibit for sale or
distribute any pesticide or to undertake commerical pest control operations with the use of
any pesticide, who himself possesses, or employ a person possessing, such qualifications
as may be prescribed, may make an application to the licensing officer for grant of a licence:
Provided that the person except a manufacturer, holding the licence on the date of
coming into force of this Act shall be exempted from the condition of himself possessing, or
employing a person possessing prescribed qualification, for a period of five years.
(2) Every application under sub-section ( 1) shall be made in such form and shall
contain such particulars as may be prescribed.
(3) On receipt of an application complete in all respect for the grant of a licence, the
licensing officer may grant a licence, within a period of  three months from the date of receipt
Appeal against
refusal or
suspension or
cancellation
registration.
Power of
Central
Government
to review
decision of
Registration
Committee.
Licensing
officers.
Grant of
licence.

11
of the application complete in all respect, in such form, on such conditions and on payment
of such fees as may be prescribed.
(4) A licence granted under this section shall be issued for such period, which may be
renewed from time to time on payment of such fees, as may be prescribed.
(5) In prescribing fees for the grant or renewal of licences under this section, different
fees may be prescribed for the sale or distribution of pesticides for domestic use and for
other purposes.
(6) (i) Any persons who intends to manufacture household pesticide shall obtain a
separate licence for stocking, distribution or sale of each of the household pesticide.
(ii) Any persons who desires to distribute or stock for distribution household pesticides
shall obtain only one licence for stocking or distribution of all the household pesticides.
(iii) A retailer shall not require a licence to sell, stock or exhibit for sale, a household
pesticide.
(7) The licensing officer shall—
(a) maintain a register of persons engaged in manufacture, distribution, stocking
and sale of pesticides and of persons engaged in commercial pest control operations
with the use of any pesticide in such form as may be prescribed;
(b) provide information to the State Government on infrastructure facilities
possessed by pesticide manufacturers;
(c) provide information to the State Government on performance of registered
pesticides in improving agricultural production; and
(d) provide information to the State Government on the monitoring of the quality
of pesticides and the offences and punishment awarded under this Act.
(8) The State Government shall send a report for a period of every six months to the
Central Government containing details of information under sub-section (7) in such form as
may be prescribed.
18. (1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, either on a reference made to him in this
behalf or otherwise, that—
(a) The licence granted under section 17 has been granted because of
misrepresentation as to an essential fact; or
(b) the holder of a licence has failed to comply with the conditions subject to
which the licence was granted or has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder,
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the licence may be liable
under this Act, the licensing officer may, after giving the holder of the licence an opportunity
of showing cause revoke or suspend the licence.
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer may also
vary or amend a licence granted under section 17.
19. A licence to manufacture, sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute a pesticide or to
undertake commercial pest control operations with the use of that pesticide shall be deemed
to be suspended or cancelled, as the case may be, if the certificate of registration of that
pesticide is suspended or cancelled by the Registration Committee.
20. (1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of a licensing officer under section 17 or
section 18 may, within a period of thirty days from the date on which the decision is
communicated to him, appeal to such authority in the manner and on payment of such fees
as may be prescribed:
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing
the appeal in time.
Revocation,
suspension and
amendment of
licences.
Effect of
suspension or
cancellation of
registration on
licence.
Appeal against
decision of a
licensing
officer.

12
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the appellate authority shall, after
giving the appellant an opportunity of showing cause, make an endeavour to dispose of the
appeal within a period of six months and the decision of the appellate authority thereon shall
be final.
21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
Central Pesticides Laboratory under the Control of Director to be appointed by the Central
Government to carry out the functions entrusted to it by or under this Act:
Provided that if the Central Government so directs by a notification in the Official
Gazette, the functions of the Central Pesticides Laboratory shall, to such extent as may be
specified in the notification, be carried out at any such institution as may be specified therein
and thereupon the functions of the Director of the Central Pesticides Laboratory shall to the
extent so specified, be exercised by the head of that Institution:
Provided further that the Central Government  may accredit private laboratories to
carry out any or all functions of the Central Pesticides Laboratory on fulfilment of such
criteria and procedure as may be prescribed and subject to inspection by, and control of, the
Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of India.
(2) No private laboratory, any director or partner or officer of which has any financial
interest in the manufacture, import, export, stocking for distribution or sale of any pesticide
or pest control operation, shall be accredited under sub-section (1).
(3) Any accreditation granted under sub-section (1) may be withdrawn for the reasons
to be recorded in writing and after giving the accredited laboratory an opportunity of being
heard and such withdrawal of accreditation shall be conclusive.
CHAPTER V
P
ROHIBITION OF IMPORT, EXPORT AND MANUFACTURE OF CERTAIN PESTICIDES
22. (1) No person shall, himself or by any person on his behalf, import, export or
manufacture—
(a) any misbranded, sub-standard or spurious pesticide;
(b) any pesticide the sale, distribution or use of which is for the time being
prohibited under section 33;
(c) any pesticide except in accordance with the condition on which it was
registered; and
(d) any pesticide in contravention of any other provision of this Act or of any
rule made thereunder.
(2) No person shall, himself or by any person on his behalf, manufacture any pesticide
except under, and in accordance with the conditions of a licence issued for such purpose
under this Act.
(3) No person shall, himself or by any person on his behalf, import any pesticide from,
or export any pesticide to, any country in contravention of the provisions of the Prior
Informed Consent Procedure specified for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in
international trade.
23. (1) No person shall, himself or by any person on his behalf, sell, stock or exhibit for
sale, distribute, transport, use, or cause to be used by any worker—
(a) any pesticide which is not registered under this Act;
(b) any pesticide, the sale, distribution or use of which is for the time being
prohibited under section 33;
(c) any pesticide in contravention of any other provision of this Act or of any
rule made thereunder;
Central
Pesticides
Laboratory.
Prohibition
of import,
export and
manufacture
of certain
pesticides.
Prohibition of
sale, etc,  of
certain
pesticides.

13
(d) any pesticide in a packing other than its original packing in which it was
primarily packed by the manufacturer;
(e) any pesticide which has outlived its shelf-life as evident from its label; and
(f) any pesticide without disclosing its expected performance as claimed and
usage instructions as suggested by the manufacturer or importer, as the case may be,
while applying for grant of certificate of registration under section 12.
(2) No person shall—
(i) transport, or cause to be transported, any pesticide, which is registered
in India only for the purpose of export, within the country except directly between
the premises of manufacture for which the licence has been obtained and the
port of exit; or
(ii) distribute, sell or exhibit for sale, or use or caused to be used any pesticide
within the country, which is registered in India only for the purpose of export.
(3) No person shall, himself or by any person on his behalf, sell, stock or exhibit for sale
or distribute or use for commercial pest control operations any pesticide except under, and in
accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Act.
CHAPTER VI
A
NALYSIS OF PESTICIDES
24. The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, possessing such technical and other
qualifications as may be prescribed, to be pesticide Analysts for such areas and in respect
of such pesticides or class of pesticides as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that no person who has any financial interest in the manufacture or import
or export or sale of any pesticide, shall be appointed as Pesticide Analysts.
25. The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, possessing such technical and other
qualifications as may be prescribed, to be Pesticide Inspectors for such areas as may be
specified in the notification:
Provided that no person who has any financial interest in the manufacture or import
or export or sale of any pesticide shall be appointed as Pesticide Inspector.
26. (1) A Pesticide Inspector shall have power—
(a) to enter and search, at all reasonable times and with such assistance, if any,
as he considers necessary, any premises in  which he has reason to believe that an
offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder has been or is being or is about to
be committed; or for the purpose of satisfying himself that the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder or the conditions of any certificate of registration or licence
issued thereunder are being complied with;
(b) to require the production of, and to inspect, examine and make copies of, or
take extracts from registers, records or any other documents kept by a manufacturer,
distributor, carrier,  dealer or any other person in pursuance of the provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder and seize the same, if he has reason to believe that all
or any of them, may furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable
under this Act or the rules made thereunder;
(c) to make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain
whether the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder are being complied
with and for that purpose stop any vehicle;
(d) to stop, with the permission of the Executive Magistrate, the distribution,
sale or use of a pesticide which he has reason to believe is being distributed or sold or
Pesticide
analysts.
Pesticides
inspectors.
Power of
Pesticide
Inspectors.

14
used in commercial pest control operations in contravention of the provisions of this
Act, or the rules made thereunder, till the receipt of the report of the Pesticide Analyst
under sub-section (1) of section 30:
Provided that if the Pesticide Inspector has not been able to take prior permission
due to emergent circumstances, he shall, as soon as may be but not later than forty-
eight hours, inform the Executive Magistrate and take his orders to stop the sale of any
pesticide;
(e) to take samples of any pesticide and send such samples within forty-eight
hours for test and analysis to the Pesticide Analyst in such manner as may be prescribed;
and
(f) to exercise such other powers as may be necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be,
apply to any search or seizure under this Act as they apply to any search or seizure made
under the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.
27. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 26, any customs officer, shall on
his own volition or on receiving a written complaint about unlawful import or export of any
pesticide also have the powers of a Pesticide Inspector, specified under section 26 and take
action as per provisions of this Act.
28. (1) Where a Pesticide Inspector seizes any record, register or document under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 26, he shall, as soon as may be, inform a Magistrate
and take his orders as to the custody thereof.
(2) Where a Pesticide Inspector takes any action under clause (d) of sub-section (1)
of section 26—
(a) he shall use all reasoning in ascertaining whether or not the pesticide or its
sale, distribution or use contravenes any of the provisions of section 23 and if it is
ascertained that the pesticide or its sale, distribution or use does not so contravene,
forthwith revoke the order passed under the said clause or, as the case may be, take
such action as may be necessary for the return of the stock seized;
(b) if he seizes the stock of the pesticide he shall, as soon as may be, inform a
Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof;
(c) without prejudice to the institution of any prosecution, if the alleged
contravention be such that the defect may be remedied by the possessor of the pesticide,
he shall, on being satisfied that the defect has been so remedied, forthwith revoke his
order and in case where the Pesticide Inspector has seized the stock of pesticide, he
shall, as soon as may be, inform a Magistrate and obtain his orders as to the release
thereof.
(3) Where a Pesticide Inspector takes any sample of a pesticide, he shall issue a
receipt therefor stating therein that the fair price of such sample shall be tendered by cheque
if the sample, after test or analysis is not found to be misbranded, sub-standard or spurious
and the Pesticide Analyst has reported to that effect and on such price having been tendered
may require a written acknowledgement therefor.
(4) Where a Pesticide Inspector seizes the stock of any pesticide under clause ( d) of
sub-section (1) of section 26, he shall tender a receipt therefor in the prescribed form.
(5) Where a Pesticide Inspector takes a sample of a pesticide for the purpose of test or
analysis, he shall intimate such purpose in writing in the prescribed form to the person from
whom he takes it and, in the presence of such person unless he wilfully absents himself, shall
draw the sample and divide it into three portions, each of  250 millilitre of volume or 250 gram
of weight, in simulated containers or glass bottles, in case of a liquid pesticide or polythene
bags in case of solid pesticide from the containers carrying more than one litre of volume or
one kilogram of weight, and effectively seal and suitably mark the same and permit such
Powers to
Customs.
Procedure to
be followed by
Pesticide
Inspectors.
2 of 1974.

15
person to add his own seal and mark to all or any of the portions so sealed and marked and
also put his seal on the package from which the sample is drawn indicating the quantity of
sample drawn for test or analysis:
Provided further that where the pesticide is made up in containers carrying up to one
litre in volume or one kilogram of weight, instead of dividing a sample as aforesaid, the
Pesticide Inspector shall take three of the said containers after suitably marking the same and
sealing them.
(6) The Pesticide Inspector shall dispose of the sample so divided or containers, as the
case may be, as follows:—
(i) one portion or container, he shall restore to the person from whom he takes it,
who may use it for test or analysis for adducing evidence in controversion of the
report of the Pesticide Analyst under sub-section (3) of section 30;
(ii) one portion or container, he shall send to the Pesticide Analyst within
forty-eight  hours for test or analysis under sub-section (1) of section 30; and
(iii) one portion or container, he shall send within forty-eight hours to be
deposited with the Director (Agriculture) in respect of Pesticide Inspectors notified by
the State Government or the Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of India in
respect of Pesticide Inspectors, notified by the Central Government, for producing to
the court before which proceedings, if any, are instituted in respect of the pesticide for
test or analysis under sub-section (4) of section 30.
(7) The remains of the samples so drawn and tested shall be disposed of  in the manner
prescribed under section 52 after three years or the pendency of the proceedings before the
court, whichever is earlier.
29. Every person for the time being in charge of any premises where any pesticide is
being manufactured or is kept for sale or distribution shall, on being required by a Pesticide
Inspector so to do, disclose the place where the pesticide is being manufactured or is kept,
as the case may be.
30. (1) The Pesticide Analyst to whom a sample of any pesticide has been submitted
for test or analysis under clause (ii) of sub-section (6) of section 28, shall, within a period of
forty-five days, deliver to the Pesticide Inspector a signed report in triplicate in the prescribed
form.
(2) The Pesticide Inspector on receipt thereof shall, within a period of fifteen days,
deliver two copies of the report to the person from whom the sample was taken, who shall
deliver one copy to the manufacturer of that pesticide, and retain one copy for use in any
prosecution in respect of the sample.
(3) Report signed by the Pesticide Analyst shall be the evidence of the fact stated
therein, and such evidence shall be conclusive unless the person from whom the sample was
taken has within a period of twenty-eight days of receipt of the report, notified in writing,  the
Pesticide Inspector or the court before which any proceeding in respect of the sample is
pending that he intends to adduce evidence controverting the report.
(4) Unless the sample has already been tested or analysed in the Central Pesticides
Laboratory, where a person has under sub-section ( 3) notified his intention of adducing
evidence in controversion of the Pesticide Analyst's report, the court may, in its discretion or
on the request, of the complainant or the accused, cause the sample of the pesticide produced
before the magistrate under clause (iii) of sub-section (6) of section 28 to be sent for test or
analysis to the said laboratory.
(5) On receipt of the sample of pesticide under sub-section ( 4), the laboratory shall,
within a period of thirty days, carry out the test or analysis and report in writing signed by,
or under the authority of, the Director of the Central Pesticides Laboratory the result thereof,
and such report shall be conclusive evidence of the fact stated therein.
Persons bound
to disclose
place where
pesticides are
manufactured
or kept.
Report of
Pesticide
Analyst.

16
(6) The cost of a test or analysis made by the Central Pesticides Laboratory under sub-
section (5) shall be paid by the complainant or the accused, as the court may direct.
31. (1) Where any person has been convicted under this Act for contravening any of
the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, the stock of the batch of the
pesticide in respect of which the contravention has been made shall be liable to confiscation.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1) where the court
is satisfied on the application of a Pesticide Inspector or otherwise and after such inquiry as
may be necessary, that the pesticide is misbranded, sub-standard or spurious, such pesticide
shall be liable to confiscation.
32. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, require any
person or class of persons specified therein to report all occurrences of poisoning (through
the use or handling of any pesticide) coming within his or their cognizance to such officer as
may be specified in the said notification.
(2) The State Government shall also submit a copy of the report on occurrences of
poisoning to the Central Government on quarterly basis.
33. (1) If, on receipt of a report under section 32 or otherwise, the Central Government
or the State Government is of the opinion, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the use
of any pesticide specified in clause (j) or clause  (s) of section 3 or any specific batch thereof
is likely to involve such risk to human beings or animals as to render it expedient or necessary
to take immediate action, then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
prohibit the sale, distribution or use of the pesticide or batch in such area, to such extent and
for such period not exceeding one hundred and eighty  days as may be specified in the
notification pending investigation into the matter:
Provided that where the investigation is not completed within the said period, the
Central Government, or as the case may be, the State Government with prior approval of the
Central Government, may extend it by such further period not exceeding sixty days in
aggregate as it may specify in a like manner.
(2) If, as a result of its own investigation or on receipt of the report from the State
Government, and after consultation with the Registration Committee, the Central Government
is satisfied that the use of the said pesticide or batch is likely to cause any risk, it may pass
such order including an order refusing to register the pesticide or canceling the certificate of
registration, if any, granted in respect thereof, as it deems fit, depending on the circumstances
of the case.
34. A  refusal to register any pesticide or a cancellation of a certificate of registration of
any pesticide shall be notified in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PUNISHMENT
35. whoever uses or causes to use a pesticide in contravention of any provision of this
Act or any rule made thereunder shall be punishable with a fine which shall not be less than
twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with both.
36. Whoever obstructs a Pesticide Inspector, or an officer exercising the power of the
Pesticide Inspector, in the exercise of his powers or discharge of his duties under this Act or
the rules made thereunder shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty-five
thousand rupees.
37. Whoever imports, exports, manufactures, sells, stocks, or exhibits for sale or
distributes any misbranded pesticide shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less
than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees or with
imprisonment for a term, which may extend to one year, or with both.
Confiscation.
Notification of
poisoning.
Prohibition of
sale, etc., of
pesticides for
reasons of
public safety.
Notification of
cancellation of
registration,
etc.
Punishment
for use of
pesticide in
contravention
of Act.
Punishment
for
obstruction.
Punishment
for misbranded
pesticide.

17
38. Whoever—
(a) imports, exports, manufactures, sells, stocks, or exhibits for sale or distributes
any sub-standard pesticide; or
(b) imports or exports any pesticide in contravention of sub-section ( 3) of
section 22,
shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or
with both.
39. (1) Whoever—
(a) imports or manufactures any pesticide without a certificate of registration; or
(b) manufactures, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or stocks for pest control
operation or distributes a pesticide without a valid licence; except the retailer for sales,
stocking or exhibiting for sale any household pesticide; or
(c) imports, manufactures, sells stocks or exhibits for sale or distributes any
spurious pesticide; or
(d) imports, manufactures, sells, stocks, or exhibits for sale or distributes any
pesticide which is ineffective on particular crop for which it is intended to be used as
approved by the Registration Committee or is phyto-toxic to that crop, or if it has a
toxicity which is higher than the level specified; or
(e) sells, stocks or distributes a pesticide in contravention of section 33; or
(f) causes a pesticide, the use of which has been prohibited under section 33 to
be used by any worker; or
(g) sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or distributes or stocks for pest control
operation any pesticide which is in contravention of provisions of section 23,
shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may
extend to ten lakh rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or
with both in addition to cancellation of licence, wherever applicable, and sealing of
manufacturing premises.
(2) Whoever contravenes any other provisions of this Act or rule made thereunder or
any condition of a certificate of registration or licence granted thereunder or fails to perform
as per the claims of efficacy and safety, made under sub-section (2) of section 12 at the time
of registration, shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year, or with both.
40. If any person convicted of an offence under this Act commits a like offence
afterwards, it shall be lawful for the court before which a conviction takes place to cause the
offenders name and place of residence, the offence and the penalty imposed, to be published
in such newspapers or in such other manner as the court may direct.
41. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was commited
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
Punishment
for sub-
standard
pesticide.
Punishment in
certain cases.
Publication of
name, etc., of
offender.
Offences by
companies.

18
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
42. (1) Save as hereinafter provided in this section, it shall be no defence in a prosecution
under this Act to prove merely that the accused was ignorant of the nature or quality of the
pesticide in respect of which the offence was committed or of the risk involved in the
manufacture, sale or use of such pesticide or of the circumstances of its manufacture or
import.
(2) For the purposes of section 22, a pesticide shall not be deemed to be misbranded,
sub-standard or spurious only by reason of the fact that there has been added thereto some
innocuous substance or ingredient because the same is required for the manufacture or the
preparation of the pesticide and not to increase the bulk, weight or measure of the pesticide
or to conceal its inferior quality or other defect.
(3) A person not being an importer or a manufacturer of a pesticide or his agent for the
distribution thereof, shall not be liable for a contravention of any provision of this Act, if he
proves—
(a) that he acquired the pesticide from an importer or a duly licenced manufacturer,
distributor or dealer thereof; and
(b) that the pesticide, while in his possession, was properly stored and remained
in the same state in which he acquired it.
43. (1) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted except by, or
with the written consent of the State Government or a person authorised in this behalf by the
State Government.
(2) No court inferior to that of a metropolitan magistrate or a judicial magistrate of first
class shall try any offence under this Act.
44. (1) If the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary for the purpose of
providing for speedy trial of offences under this Act in any district or metropolitan area, it
may, by notification in the Official Gazette and after consultation with the High Court, notify
one or more courts of judicial magistrates of first class, or as the case may be, a metropolitan
magistrate, in such district or metropolitan area to be special courts for the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the High Court, a court notified under sub-section
(1), shall exercise jurisdiction only in respect of cases under this Act.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the jurisdiction and powers of the
presiding officer of the special court notified under sub-section ( 1) in any district or
metropolitan area shall extend throughout the district or the metropolitan area, as the case
may be.
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, a special court notified under
sub-section (1) in any district or metropolitan area shall be deemed to be a court established
under sub-section (1) of section 11, or as the case may be, sub-section (1) of section 16 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of that Code shall apply accordingly in
relation to such courts.
Defences
which may or
may not be
allowed in
prosecution
under this Act.
Cognizance
and trial of
offences.
Special courts.
2 of 1974.

19
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
45. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may deem necessary, to a
State Government or the Board for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act and the
State Government, or as the case may be, the Board, shall comply with such directions.
46. The members and the officers of the Board and the Registration Committee and the
Pesticide Inspector or an officer exercising the power of the Pesticide Inspector shall be
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
47. No prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie against the Government, or any
officer of the Government, or the Board, the Registration Committee or any committee of the
Board, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
48. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Board and subject to
the condition of previous publication, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act:
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central
Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make
rules without such consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within six
months of the making of the rules and the Central Government, shall take into consideration
any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely—
(a) the manner of notifying the registered presticides and specifying the
pesticides having pesticidal properties and its use under clause ( viii) of sub-section
(2) of section 11;
(b) the form and particulars of making application for registration of pesticides
under sub-section (1), fee for its registration under sub-sections (4) and (12) and the
matters of public interest for exemption of non-reliance of data under sub-section (13)
of section 12;
(c) the manner of making appeal and payment of fee thereon to the Central
Government against the decision of the Registration Committee under section 14;
(d) the form of application for the grant of licence and the particulars relating
thereto under sub-section (2); the form of licence, the conditions attached thereto and
the fee payable therefor under sub-section (3); the period for which a licence may be
renewed and the fee for such renewal under sub-section (4); the form of register to be
maintained by the licensing office under sub-section ( 7); the form of report to be
submitted by the State Government under sub-section (8) of section 17;
(e) the circumstances in which a licence may be varied or amended under sub-
section (2) of section 18;
(f) the authority to, and the manner in, and the fee on payment of which, an
appeal may be filed under section 20 and the procedure to be followed by the appellate
authority in disposing of the appeal;
(g) the qualifications, powers and duties of an Pesticide  Analyst and an Pesticide
Inspector;
Power of
Central
Government to
give directions
to State
Governments.
Members and
officers of
Board and
Registration
Committee and
Pesticide
Inspector to be
public servants.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
45 of 1860.
 Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

20
(h) the manner of taking samples of any pesticide testing of such samples and
the fee payable therefor;
(i) the form of tendering receipt under sub-section ( 4) and the form in which
intimation shall be given by an Pesticide Inspector under sub-section (5) of section 28
to a person from whom a sample of a pesticide is taken for test of analysis;
(j) the form in which a Pesticide Analyst shall submit a report of his test or
analysis to the Pesticide Inspector under sub-section (1) of section 30;
(k) the manner in which refusal to registration of a pesticide or cancellation of
certificate of registration thereof may be notified;
(l) the officer or authority to whom the Central Government may delegate any of
the powers and functions conferred on it by this Act;
(m) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all or any of the
provisions or the rules (except relating to registration, manufacture and quality control)
for retailers and stockist in respect of the category of household pesticide;
(n) the manner and time of segregation and disposal of pesticides of a batch
which has outlived its shelf-life or has been declared misbranded, sub-standard or
spurious or has been banned; and
(o) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after  it  is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
49. (1) The State Government may, after consultation with the Board and subject to the
condition of previous publication, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act and not inconsistent with the rules, if
any, made by the Central Government.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for—
(a) the qualifications of the licensing officer under section 16;
(b) the authority to which, the manner in which, and the fee on payment of
which, an appeal may be filed under section 20 and the procedure to be followed by the
appellate authority in disposing of the appeal; and
(c) the delegation of any of the powers and functions conferred by this Act on
the State Government to any officer or authority specified by that Government.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid as soon as
it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or
where such State Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
50. (1) (a) Nothing in this Act shall apply to the use of any pesticide by any person for
his own household purposes or for garden or in respect of any land under his cultivation;
(b) The Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Registration Committee
and subject to such conditions as it may specify therein, exempt from any or all provisions of
this Act any substance having pesticidal properties or any preparation containing any one
or more such substances, if such substance or preparation is intended for the purpose other
than those mentioned under clause (j) or (s) of section 3.
 Exemption in
certain cases.
Power of State
Government to
make rules.

21
(2) The central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to
such conditions, if any, as it may specify therein, exempt from all or any of the provisions of
this Act or the rules made thereunder, any educational, scientific or research organisation
engaged in carrying out experiments with pesticide.
51.  Every pesticide sold to a farmer, producer, stockist, distributor,  retailer or pest
control operator, as the case may be, shall disclose the expected performance, efficacy or
safety of such pesticide under given conditions, and if the pesticide fails to provide the
expected performance or causes any harm to human or animal health or damage to the
environment by use of that pesticide, then, the farmer or the affected person may claim
compensation from the manufacturer or distributor or stockist or retailer or pest control
operator, as the case may be, under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
52. A batch of a pesticide that has outlived its shelf-life; or a batch that has been
declared to be misbranded, sub-standard or spurious or has been banned shall, within a
period of three months, be segregated and disposed of in such manner which is safe for
human beings, animals and environment as may be prescribed:
Provided that the remains of samples of pesticides drawn by the Pesticide Inspector
and tested shall also be disposed of in a similar manner after the period as may be prescribed.
53. (1) The Insecticides Act, 1968, is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Act, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this
Act.
54. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of  this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary, for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Segregation
and disposal of
pesticides.
Repeal and
savings.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
46 of 1968.
Compensation
to farmer or
affected
person.
68 of 1986.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the overall agricultural development of the country, the pesticides play an important
role in sustaining the agricultural production by protecting all kinds of crops from pest attack
and reducing the growth of pest population. Pesticides are also useful in health programmes
for controlling vectors responsible for diseases, like, malaria. As the pesticides have toxic
properties, therefore, they need a well ordered system of management and regulation
encompassing all stages in their life-cycle, from import or production to sale and disposal.
2. The Insecticides Act, 1968 was enacted to regulate the import, manufacture, sale,
transport, distribution and use of insecticides with a view to prevent risk to human beings or
animals, and to ensure use of efficacious insecticides. However, during the years some
deficiencies were noticed in its working which were also observed by different Parliamentary
Committees and stakeholders. The provisions of the Act were found to be insufficient to
cover certain aspects such as the restrictive definition of 'insecticide' which does not regulate
substances being used as pesticides but not included in the Schedule to the Act. Similarly,
other areas requiring immediate consideration are: (i) definition of 'manufacture'; (ii)
qualification for manufactures, sellers, stockists and commercial pest control operators; (iii)
larger representation of experts in the Central Pesticides Board and the Registration Committee;
(iv) fixation of tolerance limits of pesticides as a pre-condition of their registration; (v)
suspension or cancellation of registration of pesticides on account of violations of the Act,
or risk to crops, human beings and environment; and (vi) inadequate penalties and fines for
conravention of the provisions of the Act.
3. The National Policy for Farmers brought out in 2007 states that "the development,
introduction and diffusion of environmentally safe and effective pesticides will be given
priority" while "suitable quality control, safety evaluation and other regulatory system would
be strengthened". The policy highlights the need for "incorporating the use of chemical
pesticides in an Integrated Pest Management System". The policy also states that "the sale
of spurious and sub-standard pesticides would be prevented and bio-pesticides would be
promoted". Various Parliamentary Committees recommended stringent and deterrent
punishment for manufacturers/sellers of spurious insecticides and the necessity of fixing of
maximum residue limits for registration of pesticides.
4. In this background, the need was left for a new legislation to provide for better
management of pesticides to respond to the need for faster agricultural growth. Also, the
manufacture of quality, safe and affordable pesticides need to be encouraged while spurious
and poor quality pesticides be stringently curbed. With this in view, it is proposed to replace
the Insecticides Act, 1968 by a new legislation, the Pesticides Management Bill, 2008. The
proposed legislation shall inter alia  provide for the following, namely:—
(i) to rename it as 'pesticides' which has a broader connotation and includes
insecticides, fungicides, herbicides, rodenticides, molluscicides, acaricides;
(ii) to provide for an elaborate definition of pesticides to cover any substance of
chemical or biological origin intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating
or controlling any pest including unwanted species of plants or animals which will
enable regulation of existing pesticides as well as new discoveries;
(iii) address all aspects of development, regulation and quality monitoring,
production, management, packaging, labeling, distribution, handling, application, use
and control, including post-registration activities and disposal of all types of pesticides;
(iv) define household pesticides, to prohibit their field applications and to enable
delicensing of their retail sale for easy availability to the consumer;
(v) effective and efficient working of the Central Pesticides Board, Registration
Committee;
22

23
(vi) fixation of tolerance limits of pesticides as pre-requisite to registration;
(vii) requirement of minimum qualification of licensees;
(viii) accredit private laboratories to carry out any or all functions of the Central
Pesticides Laboratory;
(ix) prescribe an elaborate procedure for drawal of pesticide samples and inspection
of pesticides;
(x) make punishments more stringent to check production and sale of misbranded,
sub-standard and spurious pesticides;
(xi) the disposal of date expired, misbranded, sub-standard and spurious
pesticides in an environment friendly and safe manner.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
SHARAD PAWAR.
N
EW DELHI;
The 30th September, 2008.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1 provides for short title, extent and commencement of the Bill.
Clause 2 provides that the provisions of the Bill shall be in addition to, and not in
derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 3 provides for the definition of the certain words and expressions used in
various provisions of  the Bill. These expressions inter alia  include the expressions,
environment, household pesticide, label, manufacture, misbranded, pesticide, substandard,
spurious etc.
Clause 4 provides for constitution of the Central Pesticide Board for the purpose of
advising the Government on scientific and technical matters arising out of administration of
the Bill and to carry out the functions assigned to it. It also makes provisions for composition
of the board with the Director General of Health Services as its Chairperson and thirty-seven
members from various Ministries/Departments of the Central Government, Laboratories,
Institutions, etc., and it also provides that the Central Government may appoint an officer
having prescribed qualifications from the Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine and
Storage as a Member Secretary to the Board.
Clause 5 provides that tenure of members nominated under clauses (xii) to (xvii) of sub-
section 2 of section 4 shall be three years from the date of their nomination and they shall be
eligible for re-nomination. It also provides that members nominated under clause (vi to xi)
shall hold office only for the period till they hold the office by virtue of which they have been
nominated.
Clause 6 provides that proceedings of the Board, Registration Committee or any other
Committee shall not be called in question on the ground of existence of any vacancy in, or
any defect in their constitution.
Clause 7 enumerates the matters on which the Board may advise the Government
which include prevention of risk to human beings, animals and environment during the
manufacture, sale, storage, transport, distribution, handling and use of pesticides and
necessary safety measures and practices relating thereto; monitoring performance of
registered pesticides; review of toxicity and safety of pesticides; suggest development and
availability of safer alternatives to existing pesticides and disposal of obsolete pesticides.
Clause 8 makes provisions for making regulations by the Board subject to the previous
approval of the Central Government for the purpose of regulating its procedure and procedure
of any committee thereof and conduct of all business to be transacted by it or such committee.
Clause 9 provides that the Central Government shall provide such technical and other
staff as it consider necessary to the Board and the Registration Committee.
Clause 10 empowers the Board to constitute such committees as it considers necessary
and appoint in such committees persons who are not members of the Board to exercise such
powers and perform such duties as may be delegated to them by the Board. The Board may
also impose certain conditions on such committees. It also makes provision that members of
the Board and Registration Committee shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed.
Clause 11 provides for constitution of Registration Committee consisting of Agriculture
Commissioner in the Ministry of Agriculture as Chairperson and Member Secretary of the
Central Pesticides Board as its Member Secretary and eight other ex officio  members. It also
provides for various functions of the Registration Committee. This clause also empowers the
Registration Committee to co-opt experts for such purpose or period as it may consider
necessary and may constitute one or more sub-commitees consisting of atleast three members
of the Committee and delegate them such powers and functions subject to such conditions,
if any, as it may consider necessary.
24

25
Clause 12 seeks to make provisions relating to registration of pesticides. It provides
that any person may make separate application for registration of each pesticide for its
import, manufacture or export. It also provides that pesticides which are registered under the
provisions of Insecticides Act, 1968 shall be deemed to have been registered under the
corresponding provisions of the Bill. It also imposes the responsibility on the applicant for
registration to provide complete information on all the known inimical effects of the pesticide
on human beings, animals and environment. It also provides that after receipt of application
complete in all respects the Registration Committee within a period of two years after making
such enquiry as it considers necessary and after satisfying itself that the claim made by the
applicant as regard to expected performance and efficacy of the pesticide as well as its safety
to human beings, animals and environment, and availability or provision of requisite minimum
infrastructure to manufacture and stock the pesticide may register such pesticide, and allot
a registration number thereto and issue a certificate of registration.
It also provides that no pesticide shall be registered for import or manufacture unless
its tolerance limits are specified for its residues on crops and commodities under the Food
Safety and Standards Act, 2006. It also makes provisions for non-reliance on data which
means that the data submitted for the purpose of registration of a pesticide which has not
been previously registered shall not be relied upon for registration of the same pesticide by
any other person for the period of three years or if the pesticide has been granted a patent
then for a period of the patent. It also empowers the Central Government to relax or exempt
the said provision of the non-reliance on data in case of national exigency or in case of public
interest or for the use by Government or academic and research purpose.
Clause 13 makes provision for suspension or cancellation of registration of pesticides.
It provides that the Registration Committee either suo motto or otherewise if prima-facie
satisfied of violation of any provision of the Bill or the rules made thereunder or any condition
of the registration may after giving an opportunity of hearing to the registrant and for the
reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend  the registration of a pesticide for a period not
exceeding three months. It futher provides that if registrant fails to submit copy of
manufacturing licence and satisfy the Registration Committee of having set up necessary
manufacturing facilities and starting manufacture the pesticide within a specified period, the
certificate of registration shall be deemed to have been cancelled. It also makes provision
relating to inspection of manufacturing premises or facilities, etc., by the Registration
Committee or through its officers.
Clause 14 provides that any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registration
Committee under clause 12 or 13 may appeal within a period of 30 days to the Central
Government in the prescribed manner and on payment of prescribed fees. The decision of
the Central Government thereon shall be final. It also empowers the Central Government to
entertain an appeal under this clause after the expiry of the said period, if it is satisfied that
the appellant was prevented by the sufficient cause for filing of appeal on time. It also
provides that no order shall be made under this clause without giving an opportunity of
hearing to the applicant.
Clause 15 empowers the Central Government to call for the record relating to any case
where Registration Committee has given any decision under clause 12 or 13 and may pass
any order as it considers necessary. It also provides that any order shall be passed within a
period of one year from the date of decision of Registration Committee and Central Government
shall not pass any order prejudicial to any person unless that person has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 16 empowers the State Government to appoint such persons having prescribed
qualifications as it thinks fit to be licencing officers for the purposes of the Bill and may
define areas in which they shall exercise their jurisdiction.
Clause 17 makes provision for grant of licence. It provides that any person who himself
possesses or employs a person possessing prescribed qualification may make application in

26
such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed for grant of licence to
manufacture, sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute any pesticide or to undertake commercial
pest control operations with the use of any pesticide. It also provides that licensing officer
may grant the licence within a period of three months from the date of receipt of application
complete in all respects in such forms and on such conditions and on payment of such fees
as may be prescribed for such period which may be renewed from time to time on payment of
such fees as may be prescribed. It exempts the retailers from requirement of licence for sell,
stock or exhibit for sale of a household pesticide. This clause also requires the licensing
officer to maintain a register of persons engaged in manufacture, distribution or stocking and
sale of pesticide and of persons engaged in commercial pest control operations; to provide
information to the State Government on infrastructure facility possessed by pesticide
manufacturer and on performance of registered pesticides in improving agricultural production
and on the monitoring of the quality of pesticides and offences and punishment awarded
under the Bill. It also requires the State Government to send a report in prescribed form
containing above referred information to the Central Government for a period of every six
months.
Clause 18 makes provision for revocation, suspension and amendment of licences. It
provides that a licensing officer either on a reference made to him or otherwise may after
giving the licence holder, an opportunity of showing cause revoke or suspend the licence on
the ground that licence was granted because of misrepresentation or the holder of the
licence has failed to comply with the conditions of licence or has contravened the provision
of the Bill or the rules made thereunder. It also empowers the licensing officer to vary or
amend the licence.
Clause 19 provides that if a certificate of registration of a pesticide is suspended or
cancelled by the Registration Committee the licence granted in respect to that pesticide
relating to manufacture, sell or exhibit for sale or distribute a pesticide or undertake commercial
pest operations with the use of that pesticide shall be deemed to be suspended or cancelled,
as the case may be.
Clause 20 provides that any person aggrieved by the decision of a licensing officer
under clause 17 or 18 may appeal within a period of 30 days from the date on which the
decision was communicated to him to the authority in such manner and on payment of such
fees as may be prescribed. It also empowers the appellate authority to entertain such appeal
after the expiry of the said period if it satisfied that appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing of appeal. It also requires the appellate authority to make an endeavour to
dispose of the appeal within a period of six months after giving the appellant an opportunity
of showing cause.
Clause 21 empowers the Central Government to establish a Central Pesticides Laboratory
under the control of Director to be appointed by Central Government to carry out the functions
entrusted to it by or under the Bill. It also empowers the Central Government to entrust the
functions of the laboratory to any other institution or the function of the Director of the
Central Pesticides Laboratory to the head of such institution to the extent as may be specified
in the notification published in the Official Gazette. It also authorises the Central Government
to accredit private laboratories to carry out all or any of the functions of the Central Pesticides
Laboratory on fulfillment of prescribed criteria and procedures subject to inspection by and
control of the Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of India. It also prohibits from
accreditation of any laboratory in which any Director or partner or official has any financial
interest in the manufacture, import, export, stocking, for distribution or sale of any pesticide
or pest control operation. Any accreditation granted under this clause may be withdrawn
after communicating to the accredited laboratory reasons for such withdrawal in writing and
giving it an opportunity of being heard.
Clause 22 prohibits import, export or manufacture of pesticides which are misbranded,
substandard or spurious or of which the sale, distribution or use is for the time being
prohibited or which is not in accordance with the conditions on which it was registered or

27
which contravenes any provision of the Bill or the rule made thereunder. It also provides that
any pesticide shall not be manufactured except under and in accordance with the condition
of licence issued for the purpose. It also provides that any pesticide shall not be imported or
exported to any country in contravention of the provisions of the prior informed consent
procedure specified for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides in international trade.
Clause 23 provides for prohibition of sell, stock or exhibition for sale, distribution,
transportation, use etc., of any pesticide which is not registered, or sale, distribution or use
of which is prohibited, or which contravenes the provisions of the Bill or rules made thereunder,
or is repacked from its original packing which has outlived its shelf-life or which does not
disclose its expected performance as explained while applying for grant of registration. It
also prohibits distribution, sale, use, etc., of pesticide within the country which is registered
only for the purpose of export.
Clause 24 provides that Central Government or State Government may appoint such
persons who possess prescribed technical and other qualifications, to be the pesticide
analyst for the areas and in respect of such pesticide or class of pesticide as may be mentioned
in the notification published in the Official Gazette. It also prohibits appointment of any
person as pesticide analyst who has any financial interest in respect of any pesticide.
Clause 25 provides that Central Government or State Government may appoint such
persons who possess prescribed technical and other qualifications, to be the pesticide
inspector for the areas and in respect of such pesticide or class of pesticides as may be
mentioned in the notification published in the Official Gazette. It also prohibits appointment
of any person as pesticide inspector who has any financial interest in respect of any pesticide.
Clause 26 provides powers of pesticide inspectors. It provides that a pesticide inspector
may enter and search any premises in which he has reason to believe that an offence under
the provisions of the Bill or rules made thereunder has been or is being committed for the
purpose of satisfying himself that the provisions of the Bill or rule made thereunder or
conditions of the registration or licence are being complied with. It also empowers the
inspector to ask for production, inspection, examination and copies of records, registers,
documents from the manufacturer, distributor, carrier, dealer or any person and may seize the
same if he has reasons to believe that all or any of them may furnish evidence of the commission
of any offence under the Bill or the rules made thereunder. It also provides that pesticide
inspectors may stop with the permission of Executive Magistrate the distribution, sale, use
of pesticide which is being distributed or sold or used in commercial pest control operation
in contravention of the provisions of the Bill or the rules. It also empowers the pesticide
inspectors to take samples of any pesticide and send them within a period of 48 hours for test
and analysis to the pesticide analyst in prescribed manner. This clause provides that the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating to search and seizure shall apply
to any search and seizure under the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 27 provides that any customs officer shall have the powers of pesticide
inspectors in relation to import or export of pesticides.
Clause 28 enumerates the procedure to be followed by the pesticide inspector while
exercising powers under the Bill. It provides that where any pesticide inspector seizes any
record, register or document, he shall as soon as may be inform the Magistrate and take his
orders for custody thereon. It provides that when a pesticide inspector takes any sample of
pesticide he shall issue a receipt thereof and mention therein if sample on test or analysis is
not found misbranded, substandard or spurious, the price of the same shall be tendered and
incase he seizes stock of a pesticide he shall tender receipt in prescribed form. It also provides
that where pesticide inspector takes a sample of any pesticide he shall intimate such purpose
in writing to the person from which sample is taken and shall draw the sample and divide it in
three portions and seal effectively and mark the same and permit the person to add his own
seal and mark. It requires pesticide inspector to send one portion of the sample to the
pesticide analyst within a period of 48 hours for test and analysis and deposit one portion

28
with the Director, Agriculture or as the case may be the Plant Protection Adviser to the
Government of India and give one portion to the person from whom sample was taken.
Clause 29 provides that every person in charge of premises where any pesticide is
being manufactured or is kept for sale or distribution, etc., shall disclose to a pesticide
inspector on being required by him the place where pesticide is being manufactured or kept.
Clause 30 deals with the manner of report by pesticide analyst. It provides that pesticide
analyst within a period of forty-five days deliver his report in triplicate in prescribed form to
pesticide inspector, thereafter pesticide inspector within a period of  fifteen days deliver two
copies of report to the person from whom sample was taken who shall forward one copy to
the manufacturer of the pesticide. It provides that the signed report of the pesticide analyst
shall be evidence of the fact stated therein and such evidence shall be conclusive unless the
person from whom sample was taken notifies, in writing within a period of  twenty-eight days
to pesticide inspector or the court, his intention to adduce evidence contrary to the report
and in such cases court may send the sample to the Central Pesticides Laboratory for test
and analysis. On receipt of such samples the Central Pesticides Laboratory shall within a
period of  thirty days carry out the test and analysis and submit the report in writing signed
by the Director of Central Pesticide Laboratory which shall be conclusive evidence for the
fact stated therein.
Clause 31 provides that where any person has been convicted for contravening any
provision of the Bill or the rules made thereunder, the stock of the batch of pesticide in
respect of which contravention was made, shall be liable to confiscation. It also provides
that if court is satisfied on application of pesticide inspector or otherwise and after making
such enquiry as may be necessary that pesticide is misbranded, substandard or spurious,
such pesticide is also liable to confiscation.
Clause 32 provides that the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette
require any person or class of persons to submit a report of all occurrences of poisoning
(through the use or handling of any pesticide) to such officer as may be mentioned in the
notification. It also requires the State Government to submit a report in this regard to the
Central Government on quarterly basis.
Clause 33 provides that if on receipt of report under clause 32 or otherwise the State
Government or Central Government is of the opinion to be recorded in writing that use of any
pesticide or any batch thereof is likely to involve such risk to human beings or animals which
require immediate action then the Government may by notification prohibit the sale, distribution
or use of said pesticide or batch in such area to such extent and for such period not exceeding one
hundred and eighty days during the pending investigation and if such investigation is not
completed within the said period the Central Government or State Government with prior approval
of the Central Government may extend such prohibition for a further period not exceeding sixty
days in aggregate, and on the result of investigation or receipt of report from the State Government,
if the Central Government after consulting the Registration Committee is satisifed that the use of
said pesticide or batch is likely to cause any risk, it may pass any order as it deems fit including an
order refusing to register the pesticide or cancellation of registration of the pesticide.
Clause 34 requires that any order of refusal to register any pesticide or cancellation of
registration of a pesticide shall be notified in the Official Gazette in prescribed manner.
Clause 35 provides for punishment of the fine which shall not be less than Rs. 25,000/-
which may extend to Rs. 50,000/- or imprisonment for a term upto six months or with both for
contravention of any provision of the Bill or the rules made thereunder.
Clause 36 provides for a penalty upto Rs. 25,000/- for obstructing a pesticide inspector
or an officer exercising the power of pesticide inspector in exercise of his powers or discharge
of his duties under the Bill or the rules made thereunder.
Clause 37 provides for punishment of the fine which shall not be less than Rs. 25,000/-
which may extend to Rs. 1,00,000/- or imprisonment for a term upto one year or with both for

29
import, export, manufacture, sell, stock or exhibit for sale or distribution of any misbranded
pesticide.
Clause 38 provides for punishment of fine which shall not be less than Rs. 1,00,000/-
which may extend to Rs. 5,00,000/- or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years or with both for import, export, manufacture, sell, etc., of substandard pesticide or
import, export of any pesticide in contravention of sub-clause (3) of clause 22.
Clause 39 provides for punishment of fine which shall not be less than Rs. 5,00,000/-
which may extend Rs. 10,00,000/- or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years or with both in addition to cancellation of licence and sealing of manufacturing premises
for import or manufacture any pesticide without a certificate of registration or manufacture,
sell, stock, etc. without a valid licence or import, manufacture, sell, etc., any spurious pesticide
or any pesticide which is ineffective on a particular crop for which it is intended to be used
as approved by the Registration Committee or is phytotoxic  to that crop or it has a toxicity
higher than the specified label or sells, stocks or distributes a pesticide in contravention of
clause 33 or clause 23. It also provides for punishment of a fine which shall not be less than
Rs. 25,000/- which may extend to Rs. 1,00,000/- or with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one  year or with both for contravention of any other provision of the Bill or the
rules made  thereunder or conditions of certificate of registration or licence.
Clause 40 empowers the court to publish name of offender, their place of residence, the
offence and penalty imposed on him if any  person convicted of any offence under the Bill
commits a like offence afterwards.
Clause 41 contains provisions relating to offences by companies. It seeks to provide
that where a person committing offence is a company, every person responsible in the
company for the conduct of its business will be liable to be proceeded against and where a
person accused,  proves that offence was committed without his knowledge he will not be
liable. However, where it is proved that an offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance or is attributable  to the neglect of any Director, Manager, Secretary or any
officer of the company, he shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against.
Clause 42 provides that it shall not be a defence in a prosecution under the Bill that the
accused was ignorant of the nature or quality of the pesticide in respect of which offence
was commited or the risk involved in any manufacture, sale or use of such pesticide or the
circumstances of its manufacture or import. It also provides for the purpose of clause 22, a
pesticide shall not be deemed to be misbranded, substandard or spurious only by reason of
the  fact that there has been added thereto some innocuous substances or ingredient because
the same is required  for the manufacture or the preparation of the pesticide and not to
increase the bulk, weight or measure of the pesticide or to conceal its inferior quality or other
defect.
Clause 43 provides that any prosecution under the Bill shall not be instituted without
the written consent of the State Government or a person authorised by it in this  behalf. It
also provides that any court inferior to that of  metropolitan magistrate or a judicial magistrate
of first class shall not try any offence under the Bill.
Clause 44  provides that if the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary for the
purpose of providing for speedy trial of offence under the Bill in any district or metropolitan
area it may after consultation with the High Court notify one or more courts of judicial
magistrate of  first class, or as the case may be, a metropolitan magistrate in such district or
metropolitan area  to be special court for the purpose of the Bill. It also provides that unless
otherwise directed by the High Court, a court notified under this clause shall exercise
jurisdiction only in respect of cases under the Bill and the jurisdiction and powers of its
presiding officer shall extend through out the district or the metropolitan area. It also provides
that a special court notified under this clause shall be deemed to be a court established under
sub-section (1) of section 11 or sub-section (1) of section 16 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 and the provision of that Code shall apply to such courts.

30
Clause 45 empowers the Central Government to give directions to a State Government
or the Board for carrying out all or any of the provisions of the Bill and the State Government
or the Board shall comply with such directions.
Clause 46 provides that members and officers of the Board, the Registration Committee
and the pesticide inspector or an officer exercising the powers of pesticide inspector, when
acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any provision of the Bill or the rules made
thereunder, shall be deemed to be public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
Clause 47 provides immunity to Government or any officer of the Government or the
Board, Registration Committee or any committee of the Board from suits, prosecution or
other proceedings in respect of anything done or intended to be done in good faith under the
Bill.
Clause 48 empowers the Central Government to make rules by notification in the
official Gazette after consultation with the Board and subject to condition of previous
publication. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various mattters in respect of which such rules
may be made. It also requires that every rule made under this clause shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
Clause 49 empowers the State Government to make rules by notification in the official
Gazette after consultation with the Board and subject to condition of previous publication.
Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various matters in respect of which such rules may be made.
It also requires that every rule made under this clause  shall be laid before each House of
State Legislature where it consists of two Houses or where such State Legislature consists
of one House, before that House.
Clause 50 provides for exemption from the application of the provisions of the Bill in
respect to the use of any pesticide by any person for his own household purposes or for
garden or in respect of land under his cultivation. It also empowers the Central Government
to exempt, on the recommendation of Registration Committee, from any or all provisions of
the Bill, any substance having pesticidal properties or any preparation containing one or
more substances if such substances or preparation is intended for the purpose other than
those mentioned under sub-clause (j) or sub-clause(s) of clause 3. It also empowers the
Central Government to exempt from all or any of the provisions of the Bills or rules made
thereunder, any educational, scientific or research organization engaged in carrying out
experiments with pesticides.
Clause 51 provides for compensation to the farmers in case any pesticide fails to
provide the expected performance under given conditions. The compensation may be claimed
from the  manufacturer or distributor or stockist or retailer or pest control operator as per the
provisions of  the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
Clause 52 provides that a batch of pesticide that has outlived its shelf-life or it has
been declared to be misbranded, substandard or spurious or it has been banned shall be
segregated and disposed of with a period of three months in such manner which is safe for
human beings, animals and environment, as may be prescribed.
Clause 53 provides for repeal of the Insecticides Act, 1968 and also provides  that all
action done under the repealed Act shall be deemed to have been done under the
corresponding provisions of the Bill.
Clause 54 empowers the central Government to issue an order, published in the Official
Gazette and not inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill, for removing any difficulty
which may have arisen in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill within a period of two
years from the date of commencement of the Act. Every such order is also required to be laid
before each House of Parliament.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide for constitution of the Central Pesticides Board to
advise the Government on scientific and technical matters arising out of the administration
of the Bill. Clause 11 provides for constitution of a Registration Committee for the purpose of
registration of pesticides. Sub-clause (4) of clause 11 enables the Registration Committee to
constitute one or more sub-committees to exercise such powers and perform functions as
may be delegated to them. Sub-clause (2) of clause 10 makes provision for allowances of the
Members of the Board, the Registration Committee and other Committees.
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to establish a Central Pesticides Laboratory to carry out the
functions entrusted to it. Clause 24 provides for appointment of the pesticide analyst for
analysis of pesticides. Clause 25  provides for appointment of pesticide inspector to exercise
the powers entrusted to him by or under the Bill.
2. Presently, a Central Insecticides Board and the Registration Committee constituted
under the provisions of the Insecticides Act, 1968 (which is being repealed by the present
Bill), or in operation. An amount of Rs. 8.81 crore have been allocated for the financial year
2008-09 to the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation to be utilised for the purposes of
the administration of the Insecticides Act,1968. The constitution of Central Pesticides Board
and all other expenditure arising out of the administration of the proposed Pesticides Bill,
2008 shall be met out of this budgetary provision and no other additional expenditure is
envisaged in the Bill. Apart  from converting the insecticide analyst and the insecticide
inspector as the pesticides analyst  and the pesticide inspector, additional officials, if any,
shall be appointed from amongst the  officers of the Government. Therefore, the Bill does not
entail any other additional expenditure.
3.  The Bill does not involve any other expenditure recurring or non-recurring in nature.
31

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules, after consultation
with the Board and subject to the condition of previous publication for carrying out the
provisions of the Bill. Such rules may, inter alia,  provide for:
(i) the manner of notifying the registered pesticides and specifying the pesticides
having pesticidal properties under sub-clause (3) of clause 11;
(ii) the form and particulars of making application for registration of pesticides,
fees for registration under clauses (4) and (12) of clause 12;
(iii) the manner of making appeal and payment of fee thereon under clause 14;
(iv) the form of application for the grant of licence for manufacture, sell, etc., the
fee payable therefore the form of register to be maintained by the licensing officer, the
form of report  to be submitted by the State Government to the Central Government
under clause 17;
(v) the circumstances in which the license may be varied or amended under sub-
clause (2) of clause 18;
(vi) the manner in, and the fee of payment of which, an appeal may be filed to the
Central Government under clause 14;
(vii) the form in which the pesticide analyst shall submit a report of tests or
analysis to the pesticide inspector under sub-clause (1) of clause 30;
(vii) the manner and time of segregation and disposal of pesticides on a batch
which has outlived its shelf-life or has been declared miss-branded, sub-standard or
spurious or has been banned under clause 52  of the Bill.
All the rules made under clause 48 of the Bill are required to be laid before each House
of Parliament.
2. Clause 49 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules to provide for:
(i) the qualifications of the licensing officer under clause 16; (ii) the authority to which, the
manner in which, and the fees on payment of which, an appeal may be filed under clause 20.
Every rule made by the State Government are required to be laid before each House of
the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses or where such State Legislature consist
of one House, before that House.
3. That matter in respect of which rules may be made under the aforesaid provisions are
matter of procedure and administrative details and it is not  practical to provide for them in
the Bill. The delegation of legislative powers, is therefore, of a normal character.
32

RAJYA SABHA
————
(Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs, Food &
Public Distribution)
A
BILL
to regulate the import, manufacture, export, sale, transport, distribution, quality and
use of pesticides with a view to—
(i) control pests;
(ii) ensure availability of quality pesticides;
(iii) allow its use only after assessing its efficacy and safety;
(iv) minimize the contamination of agricultural commodities by pesticide residues;
(v) create awareness among users regarding safe and judicious use of pesticides,
and to take necessary measures to continue, restrict or prohibit the use of pesticides
on reassessment with a view to prevent its risk on human beings, animals or environment,
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.————
GMGIPMRND—3438RS—17.10.2008.