AS INTRODUCED IN THE RATYA SABHA

Bill No. XLVI of 2001

THE MARRIAGE LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL

further to amend the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, the Parsi Marriage and Divorce
Act, 1936, the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
CHAPTERI
PRELIMINARY
5 1, This Act may be called the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 2001. Short title.
CHAPTER IL
“AMENDMENTS T0 THE INDIAN Divorce AcT, 1869
4 of 1869 2. Insection 36 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 (hereafter in this Chapter referredto Amendment of
as the Divorce Act), — section 36
10 (@ for the words “the wife may present a petition for alimony pending the suit”,

the words “the wife may present a petition for expenses of the proceedings and
alimony pending the suit” shall be substituted;

(b) for the words “for payment to the wife of alimony pending the suit”, the
words “for payment to the wife of the expenses of the proceedings and alimony
15 pending the suit” shall be substituted;


Amendment of
section 41,

Amendment of
section 39,

Amendment of
section 49.

Amendment of
section 36.

Amendment of
section 38.

Amendment of
section 24,

Amendment of
section 26.

2

(c) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that the petition for the expenses of the proceedings
and alimony pending the suit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within
sixty days of service of such petition on the husband.”.
3. In section 41 of the Divorce Act, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—

“Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education
of the minor children pending the suit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within
sixty days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.”,

CHAPTER गा
AMENDMENTS TO THE PARSI MARRIAGE AND Divorce Act, 1936
4. In section 39 of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 (hereafter in this Chapter
referred to as the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—

“Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the suit and
such weekly or monthly sum during the suit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of
within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the wife or the husband, as the
case may be.”.

5. In section 49 of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, the following proviso shail be
inserted, namely:—

“Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education
of such children during the suit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty
days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.”.

CHAPTERIV
AMENDMENTS TO THE SPECIAL MarriaGE Act, 1954
6. In section 36 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (hereafter in this Chapter referred
to as the Special Marriage Act), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding
and such weekly or monthly sum during the proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter
VI, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service
of notice on the husband.”

7. In section 38 of the Special Marriage Act, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—

“Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education
of the minor children, during the proceeding, under Chapter V or Chapter VI, shall, as
far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service of notice on
the respondent.”.

CHAPTER V
AMENDMENTS TO THE Hinpu Marriage Act, 1955
8. In section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (heteafter in this Chapter referred to
as the Hindu Marriage Act), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding
and such monthly sum during the proceeding, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of
within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the wife or the husband, as the
case may be.”

9, In section 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—

‘Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of
the minor children, pending the proceeding for obtaining such decree, shall, as far as
possible, be’ disposed of within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the
‘tespondent.

10

3 of 1936.

15

20

25
43 of 1954.

30

35

40 25 of 195:

45

50


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

_ The Law Commission of India in its 27th, 54th and 129th Reports and the
Committee on Subordinate Legislation (11th Lok Sabha) had recommended that the ten-
dency to obtain the adjournments on frivolous grounds in the cases pending in coutts
should be curbed, The Malimath Committee also recommended that remedial measures should
be taken immediately for speedy disposal of the cases pending in courts.

2. Sections 36 and 41 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, sections 39 and 49 of the Parsi
Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936, sections 36 and 38 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and.
sections 24 and 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 do not contain any time-limit for
disposal of applications for alimony pendente lite or the maintenance and education of
minor children. More than 670 cases are understood to be pending in various High Courts
under section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

3. As part of the judicial reforms process, it is proposed to make necessary amend-
ments in the enactments mentioned in paragraph 2 with a view to making provisions that an
application for alimony pendente lite or the maintenance and education of minor children

" shall be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New DELHT; ARUN JAITLEY.
The 5th July, 2001.


Alimony
pendente lite,

Power to make
orders as to
custody of
children in suit
for separation.

Alimony
pendente lite,

Custody of
children.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN Divorce Act, 1869
(40F 1869)

* * * * *

36. In any suit under this Act, whether it be instituted by a husband or a wife, and
whether or not she has obtained an order of protection, the wife may present a petition for
alimony pending the suit.

Such petition shall be served on the husband; and.the Court, on being satisfied of the
truth of the statements therein contained, may make such order on the husband for payment
to the wife of alimony pending the suit as it may deem just:

Provided that alimony pending the suit shall in no case exceed one-fifth of the
husband’s average net income for the three years next preceding the date of the order, and
shall continue, in case of a decree for dissolution of marriage or of nullity of marriage, until
the decree is made absolute or is confirmed, as the case may be.

* * * * *

X1.—Custopy oF CHILDREN

41. In any suit for obtaining a judicial separation the Court may from time to time,
before making its decree, make such interim orders, and may make such provision in the
decree, as it deems proper with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of the
minor children, the marriage of whose parents is the subject of such suit, and may, if it think
fit, direct proceedings to be taken for placing such children under the protection of the said
Court.

* * * * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE Pars] MARRIAGE AND Divorce Act, 1936
(3 oF 1936)

* * * * *

39, Where in any suit under this Act, it appears to the Court that either the wife or the
husband, as the case may be, has no independent income sufficient for her or his support
and the necessary expenses of the suit, it may, on the application of the wife or the husband,
order the defendant to pay to the plaintiff, the expenses of the suit, and such weekly or
monthly sum, during the suit, as, having regard to the plaintiff's own income and the
income of the defendant, it may seem to the Court to be reasonable.

* * * * *

\V.—CHILDREN OF THE PARTIES

49, In any suit under this Act, the Court may from time to time pass such interim orders
and make such provisions in the final decree as it may deem just and proper with respect to
the custody maintenance and education of the children under the age of eighteen years, the
marriage of whose parents is the subject of such suit, and may, after the final decree upon
application, by petition for this purpose, make, revoke, suspend or vary from time to time all
such orders and provisions with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of such
children as might have been made by such final decree or by interim orders in case the suit for
obtaining such decree were still pending.

* * * * *


5

EXTRACTS FROM THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE AcT, 1954
(43 oF 1954)

* * * * *

36. Where in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter V1 it appears to the district
court that the wife has no independent income sufficient for her support and the necessary
expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife, order the husband to pay
to her the expenses of the proceeding, and weekly or monthly during the proceeding such
sum as having regard to the husband’s income, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.

* * * * *

38. In any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI the district court may, from time
to time, pass such interim orders and make such provisions in the decree as it may seem to it
to be just and proper with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of minor
children, consistently with their wishes wherever possible, and may, after the decree, upon
application by petition for the purpose, make, revoke, suspend or vary, from time to time, all
such orders and provisions with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of such
children as might have been made by such decree or interim orders in case the proceeding for
obtaining such decree were still pending.

* * * * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE Hinpu Makrriace Act, 1955
(25 or 1955)

* * * * *

24. Where in any proceeding under this Act it appears to the court that either the wife
or the husband, as the case may be, has no independent income sufficient for her or his
support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife
or the husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of the proceeding,
and monthly during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner’s own
income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.

* * * * *

26. In any proceeding under this Act, the court may, from time to time, pass such
interim orders and make such provisions in the decree as it may deem just and proper with
respect to the custody, maintenance and education of minor children, consistently with
their wishes, wherever possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by petition for
the purpose, make from time to time, all such orders and provisions with respect to the
custody, maintenance and education of such children as might have been made by such
decree or interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree were still pending,
and the court may also from time to time revoke, suspend or vary any such orders and
provisions previously make.

* * * * *

Alimony
pendente lite.

Custody of
children,

Maintenance
Pendente lite and
expenses of
proceedings.

Custody of
children.


RAJYA SABHA.

A
Bill

further to amend the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936,
the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—-961RS—13-07-2001.