AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
 
Bill No. XLVII of 2024 
THE NATIONAL TRIBAL HERITAGE COUNCIL BILL, 2024
A 
BILL 
to establish a National Tribal Heritage Council for the protection, preservation 
and promotion of the rich cultural heritage of tribal communities in the 
country  and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the National Tribal Heritage Council 
Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "Council" means the National Tribal Heritage Council
constituted under section 3 of this Act;
(b) “pr escribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) “State Committees” mean the State Tribal Heritage Committees
established under section 7 of this Act.
( d ) "tribal communities" refers to the Scheduled Tribes as
recognized under the Constitution of India;
(e) "tribal heritage" includes the cultural, histo rical, linguistic, and
artistic expressions and practices of tribal communities including
any act or practice, representation, expression, knowledge, skill, as
well as the instrument, object and artefact associated therewith, that 
tribal communities recognize as part of their heritage.
 
5 
1
0 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL TRIBAL HERITAGE COUNCIL 
 
15 
Constitution of 
the National 
Tribal Heritage  
Council.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year from the
date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the National
Tribal Heritage  Council for the protection, preservation and
promotion of tribal heritage of the country and to perform such 
functions as assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The head office of the Council shall be at New Delhi.
(3) T
he Council shall consist of the following -
(i) a
 Chairperson,  who shall be an eminent person wit h
ex
tensive knowledge and experience in tribal culture and
heritage;
(ii) five representatives from recognized tribal
communities in the country - Members;
(iii) two experts in the field of anthropology or cultural
studies - Members;
(iv) o
ne representative from the Union Ministry of Tribal
Affairs – Member ex-officio;
(v) o
ne representative from the Union Ministry of Culture
– Member ex-officio;
(
vi) t
wo representatives from civil society organizations
working in the field of tribal heritage -  Members; and
(vii) one legal expert with experience in heritage
conservation laws - Member.
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
4
0 

3 
5 
1
0 
(4) The Central Government shall provide the Council wit h
such number of officers and employees as may be necessary for
the efficient performance of the functions of the Council under
this Act.
(5) The salary and allowances or remuneration payable to, the
term of office, the mode of filling of vacancies and other terms
and conditions of service etc. of the Chairperson, Members,
officers and employees of the Council  shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(6) The Council shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure.
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
3
0 
4. The Council shall perform any or all of the following functions,
namely, to: —
(a) formulate and implement policies for the protection,
preservation, and promotion of tribal heritage;
(b) identify and document the tangible and intangible cultural
h
eritage of tribal communities of the country;
(c)
establish and maintain cultural centers, museums, and
libraries dedicated to tribal heritage;
(d) p romote research, education, and awareness abou t triba l
heritage;
(e) provide financial and technical assistance to tribal
communities and organizations engaged in the protection of
tribal heritage;
(f) c ollaborate with national and international organizations for
the exchange of knowledge and best pr actices in tribal heritage
conservation;
(g) advise the Central Government on legislative and
administrative measures necessary for the protection of tribal
heritage; and
(h) undertake such other measures as the Council may deem
appropriate for the implementation of the provisions of this Act
and perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the
Central Government.
Functions of the 
Council. 
35 CHAPTER III 
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS 
4
0 
5. The tribal communities shall have the right to: -
(a) protect, preserve, and promote their cultural heritage;
(b) participate in the decision -making processes regarding
their cultural heritage; and
(c) access financial and technical assistance provided by the
Council for the protection of their cultural heritage.
Rights of tribal 
communities. 

4 
Obligations of 
the Central 
Government.
6. (1) The Central Government shall,-
(a) ensure the protection, preservation, and promotion of
tribal heritage; and
(b) take necessary measures to prevent the exploitation and 
commercialization of tribal heritage without the consent of 
the respective tribal communities.
5 
CHAPTER IV 
ROLE OF STATE GOVERNMENTS AND DISTRICT 
 ADMINISTRATION 
Role of State 
Governments.  
7. (1)  Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute,
State Tribal Heritage Committees to support the activities of
the Council at the State level.
(2) The State  Committees shall consist of representatives from
tribal communities, experts in tribal culture, and government
officials, to be appointed by the respective State Government,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The State  Committees shall coordinate with the Council to
implement policies and programs for the protection of tribal
heritage.
10 
 
15 
Role of district 
administration. 
8. (1) The District Collector or an officer designated by the Distric t
Collector shall be responsible for the implementation of the 
provisions of this Act at the district level. 
(2) The District Administration shall ensure that,-
(i) tribal heritage sites and practices are identified and
documented;
(ii) financial and technical assistance is provided to tribal
communities for heritage protection;
(iii) complaints related to the violation of the provisions of
this Act are addressed swiftly; and
(iv) regular inspections are conducted to ensu re
compliance with heritage protection guidelines.
20 
 
25 
3
0 
CHAPTER V 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
Establishment 
of grievance 
redressal 
mechanism. 
9. (1) The Council shall, in such manner as may be prescribed,
establish a grievance redressal mechanism to address 
complaints regarding the violation of the provisions of this Act, 
received in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
 
35 

5 
5 
(2) The Council shall ensu re that the grievance redressal
mechanism includes, -
(i) a toll-free helpline number for lodging complaints;
(ii) a web portal for filing and tracking complaints; and
(iii) designated officers at the State and district levels to
address and resolve complaints within a stipulate d
timeframe.
CHAPTER VI 
DATABASE MANAGEMENT 
10 
 
15 
10. (1) The Council shall establish and maintain a centralize d
database at the district, state, and national levels for recording
rea
l-time data on tribal heritage.
(2) The database shall include, but not be limited to,-
(i) details of tribal heritage sites and practices;
(
ii) details of tribal communities;
(
iii) documentation of tangible and intangible tribal heritage;
(iv) status of protection and preservation efforts; and
(v) details of financial and technical assistance provided.
Establishment 
of a database on 
tribal heritage. 
 
20 
11. (1) The District Collector or an officer designated by the Distric t
Collector shall be responsible for ensuring the timely and accurate
entry of data into the database at the district level.
(2) The District Administration shall coordinate with tribal
communities and other stakeholders to ensure real -time data entry
and accuracy.
Role of District 
Administration 
in database 
management. 
25 
 
30 
12. (1) The State Governments, in coordination with the respective
State Committees, shall oversee the integration and management
of the district-level databases to form a comprehensive state- level
database.
(2) The Central Government, in coordination with the Co uncil,
shall ensure the integration of state -level databases into a national
database.
State and 
National Level 
coordination. 
 
35 
13. (1) The database shall be accessible to designated authorities
established under this Act, for monitoring and enforcement
purposes.
(2) The tribal communities shall have the right to access relevant
data pertaining to their tribal heritage.
Accessibility 
and 
transparency. 

6 
Data security 
and privacy. 
14. (1) The Central Government shall ensure that the database is secure
and that the privacy of tribal communities is protected.
(2) Any unauthorized access to or misuse of the database shall b e
puni
shable under relevant laws.
CHAPTER VII 
PENALTIES 
5 
Penalty  15. (1) Any individual or entity found to be acting in violation of the
provisions of this Act shall be liable to be punished  for the firs t
of
fence, with imprisonment for two years or with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees, or both and for any second or subsequent
offence with imprisonment for five years or with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees, or both:
         Provided that the penalty under this section shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of imposition of any penalty under 
any other law for the time being in force. 
1
0 
 
15 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
16. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, as
i
t may deem fit, to the Council and the State Committees, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 
20 
Furnishing of 
Annual Reports 
etc.
17. (1) The Council shall prepare once in every year, in such form,
manner and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report
giving a full account of its activities during the previous year as
well as such other reports and returns, as may be directed from time 
to time, and copies of such report and returns shall be forwarded to
the Central Government.
(2) A copy of the annual report and returns received under sub-
section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
2
5 
3
0 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties
18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Government may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as
m
ay be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
3
5 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
19. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force.

7 
 
5 
 
10 
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Officia l
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the sessi on
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
rules. 

8 
S
TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India is home to a vast and diverse tribal heritage that encompasses a 
wide array of cultural, linguistic, historical, and artistic expressions and 
practices. The tribal communities of India, spread across various regions 
and States, have rich traditions that include unique languages, folklore, 
dance, music, crafts, rituals, and ways of life. This heritage is not only a 
testament to India's cultural diversity but also contributes significantly to 
the country's cultural mosaic. 
However, this invaluable triba l heritage faces several challenges that 
threaten its preservation and continuation. Among these challenges are: 
(i) Urbanization and Industrialization:  The rapid pace of urbanization 
and industrialization has led to the displacement of tribal communitie s 
from their ancestral lands, disrupting their traditional way of life and 
leading to the erosion of their cultural practices. 
(ii) Globalization: The influence of global cultural trends and the
spread of mass media have contributed to the homogenization of cultures, 
putting traditional tribal practices at risk of being forgotten or replaced by 
more dominant cultural norms. 
( iii) Economic Marginalization: Many tribal communities f ace
economic challenges that limit their ability to sustain and promote their 
cultural practices. Lack of resources and opportunities often forces these 
communities to prioritize immediate economic needs over the 
preservation of their heritage. 
(i v ) E nvironmental Degradation: The degradation of natural habitats
due to deforestation, mining, and other activities not only affects the 
livelihoods of tribal communities but also impacts their cultural practices, 
which are often closely tied to their natural surroundings. 
(v) Legal and p olicy gaps: There are gaps in the legal and polic
y
f
rameworks for the protection of tribal heritage, leading to insufficient 
safeguarding of their cultural rights and heritage. 
(vi) Lack of Documentation and Research: Much of the tribal heritage 
remains undocumented, and there is a lack of comprehensive research and 
academic focus on the diverse cultural practices of tribal communities. 
This makes it difficult to develop informed policies and initiatives for their 
preservation. 
        Given these challenges, there is an urgent need for a comprehensive 
framework dedicated to the protection, preservation, and promotion of 
tribal heritage. The establishment of the National Tribal Heritage  Council 
aims to address the multifaceted challenges being faced in the preservation 
of tribal heritage and providing a robust framework for its protection, 
preservation, and promotion . This Bill aims to ensure that the rich and 

9 
diverse cultural heritage of India's tribal communities continues to thrive 
and contribute to the nation's cultural legacy. This Bill also confers the 
right to tribal communities to protect, preserve, and promote their cultural 
heritage, participate in the decision -making processes regarding their 
cultural heritage, and access financial and technical assistance provided 
by the Council for the protection of their heritage. It also lays down the 
role of the State Governments and District Administration in  supporting 
the functioning of the Council. Further it provides for establishment of a 
centralized database at the district, state, and national levels for recording 
real-time data on tribal heritage, its access etc. 
 This Bill seeks to achieve the above-said objectives. 
SUMITRA BALMIK 

10 
F
INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National 
Tribal Heritage Council, appointment of the Chairperson, Members, 
officers and employees therein and the salary and allowances or 
remuneration payable to them and other terms and conditions  of their 
service. Clause 4 inter alia  provides that the Council shall establish and 
maintain cultural centers, museums, and libraries dedicated to tribal 
heritage; provide financial and technical assistance to tribal communities 
and organizations engaged in the protection of tribal heritage e tc. Clause 
5 inter alia confers the right to tribal communities to protect, preserve, and 
promote their cultural heritage and access financial and technical 
assistance provided by the Council for the protection of their heritage. 
Clause 6 lays down the obligations of the Central Government. Clause 7 
provides for establishment of State Tribal Heritage Committees. Clause 8 
lays down the role of the District Administration.  Clause 9 provides for 
the establishment of a grievance redressal mechanism including t oll-free 
helpline number, web portal and designated officers at the State and 
District levels to address and resolve complaints within a stipulated 
timeframe.  Clause 10 provides for the establishment of a centralized 
database at the district, State and Na tional level for recording real -time 
data on tribal heritage. Clause 16 provides that the Central Government 
shall grant funds to the Council and the State Committees for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 
The Bill, if enacted, would involve both non-r ecurring and recurring 
expenditure from the C onsolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be 
involved.  

11 
M
EMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 1 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
provisions through an order to remove any difficulties likely to arise in giving 
effect to the provisions of the Bill, if enacted. Clause 20    empowers the Central 
Government to make rules for carrying out in the purposes of the Bill. As the 
rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power is 
of normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to establish a National Tribal Heritage Council for the protection, preservation, 
 and promotion of the rich cultural heritage of tribal communities  
in the country and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shrimati Sumitra Balmik, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)–035–10.02.2025 