1
THE PREVENTION OF INSULT TO THE FATHER OF THE NATION
AND OTHER ICONS OF FREEDOM MOVEMENT BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to prevent insult to the Father of Nation and other icons of Freedom Movement or
showing of respect to assassins of the Father of the Nation.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Insult to the Father of the Nation and
other Icons of Freedom Movement Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) 'Father of the Nation' means Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi alias Mahatma
Gandhi.
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. XLVI of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019

2
(b) 'insult' means exhibiting contempt or disrespect to the Father of the Nation
and other incons of Freedom Movement by words, either spoken or written, or by acts
and includes showing respect to the assassins of the Father of the Nation; and
(c) 'other incons of Freedom Movement' means persons who fought for freedom
of the country and monuments related to freedom movement.
3. Whoever in any public place or in any other place within the public view insults the
Father of the Nation or other incons of Freedom Movement, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or with fine or with both.
4. Whoever, having already been convicted of an offence under section 3, is again
convicted of any such offence, shall be punishable for the second and every subsequent
offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years.
5
Enhanced
penalty on
second and
subsequent
convictions.
10
Penalty on
Insult to the
Father of
Nation and
other of
Freedom icons
movement.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
During the recent years, instances of insult to the Father of the Nation and other icons
of Freedom Movement have increased. The existing laws have failed to check repeated
insults to the Father of the Nation and other icons of Freedom Movement, miserably. In such
scenario it is necessary to undertake measures to ensure respect owed to Freedom Struggle
and its heroes, by providing and legislating harsh punishment to those who are trying to
malign the image of the Father of the Nation and other icons of Freedom Movement.
Hence, this Bill.
JA VED  ALI  KHAN
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent insult to the Father of the Nation and other icons of Freedom Movement or
showing of respect to assassins of the Father of the Nation.
————
(Shri Javed Ali Khan, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4328RS(S3)—11-12-2019.