AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XLVIII of 2025 
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
 to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (Amendment) Act,
2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Insertion of new 
section 72A. 
Prohibition of 
victim shaming. 
2. After Section 72 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the following new
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“72A. ( 1) Whoever insults, ridicules, blames, shames or 
intimidates a woman or child against whom a sexual offence has been 
committed, as defined under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the 
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, or any other 
law for the time being in force, and makes, publishes, circulates, or 
transmits any statement, whether written, oral, or visual in any place 
within public view including digital or electronic platforms, which is 
intended to, or is likely to, lower the reputation of such victim or 
discredit them, shall be liable to punishment as provided under sub-
section (3). 
(2) Whoever makes, publishes, circulates, or transmits any
statement, whether written, oral, or visual in any place including 
digital or electronic platforms, with or without reference to any 
specific incident or individual, attributes the commission of sexua l 
offences to the behaviour, clothing, manner of speech, lifestyle, or 
conduct of women or children in a manner that promotes, justifies, 
trivialises, or normalises such offences, shall be liable to punishment 
as provided under sub-section (3). 
(3) Whoever commits an offence under sub- sections (1) or (2)
shall be punished— 
(a) on first conviction, with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, and with 
fine which may extend to two lakh rupees; and 
(b) on second or subseque nt conviction, with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to five years, and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees. 
(4) Where the offence under sub-sections (1) or (2) is committed
by a public servant or public figure, such person shall be punished— 
(a) on first conviction, with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and with 
fine, which may extend to five lakh rupees; and 
(b) on second or subsequent conviction, with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to seven years, and with fine which may extend to fifteen lakh 
rupees. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub- section, “public 
figure” means any person who, by virtue of  his profession, public role, 
or media visibility, commands significant public attention or influence 
in matters of public interest. 
(5) Any intermediary, publisher, or broadcaster, including but
not limited to a social media platform, messaging  service,  digital 
news  website,  over-the-top  content  provider, television channel, or 
print publication, shall be liable for the publication, dissemination, or 
continued availability of any content in violation of the provisions of 
this section in the following circumstances: — 
(a) where such  intermediary, publisher, or broadcaster,
having actual knowledge of any content in violation of the 
provisions of this section, fails to remove or disable access to 
such content within twenty -four hours of obtaining such actual 
knowledge, shall be punished with  fine which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees;  
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
45 of 2023. 
45
 of 2023. 
32 of 2012. 

3 
21 of 2000. 
7 of 1995. 
37 of 1978. 
 
37 of 1952. 
25 of 1990. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(b) where such intermediary, publisher, or broadcaster,
despite prior complaint, notice, lawful orders, or takedown 
directions issued in accordance with law, repeatedly permits the 
publication, dissemination, or continued availability of content 
prohibited un
der this section, shall be  punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine which may extend to twenty lakh rupees, or with both; and 
(c) The liability under this sub -section shall apply
notwithstanding any protections or e xemptions available 
under— 
(i) section 79 of the Information Technology Act,
2000 and the rules made thereunder; 
(ii) the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act,
1995; 
(iii) the Press Council Act, 1978;
(iv) the Cinematograph Act, 1952;
(v) the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of
India) Act, 1990;   or 
(vi) any other law for the time being in force.
Explanation .—  For the purposes of this sub-section,— 
(i) intermediary or publisher or broadcaster
includes any entity as defined under clause (w) of sub-
section (1) 
of Section 2 of the Information 
Technology  Act,  2000,  and  includes  entities 
regulated  under  the  Cable  Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995; the Press Council Act, 1978; 
the Cinematograph Act, 1952;  the  Prasar  Bharati 
(Broadcasting  Corporation  of  India)  Act,  1990; 
and  the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 
2021. 
(ii) “actual knowledge” shall mean knowledge
obtained through a direction from a court of 
competent jurisdiction, a lawful order issued by the 
appropriate Government or its authorised agency, or 
a written complaint from the victim or their 
authorised representative. 
(6) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not
i
n derogation of, the provisions of section 72 of this Sanhita. 
35

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The proposed amendment seeks to insert a new section 72A in the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, to explicitly criminalise the shaming, blaming, or public 
targeting of victims of sexual offences. It introduces graded punishments for 
individuals and enhanced penalties for public figures or public servants misusing 
their positions. It further ensures accountability of intermediaries and media 
platforms in promptly removing harmful content, thereby reinforcing a survivor -
centric approach within the legal framework. 
This legislative intervention is intended to create a safer and more dignified 
ecosystem for survivors, deter acts that contribute to their re -victimisation, and 
strengthen India's commitment to justice, gender sensitivity, and human rights.  
Hence, this Bill. 
SWATI MALIWAL. 

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Bharatiya Nyay a Sanhita 2023. 
___________ 
(Ms. Swati Maliwal, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS―PMB(E)―353―08.12.2025. 