1
Bill No. XLVIII of  2022
THE BHAGAT SINGH NATIONAL URBAN EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in urban areas
of the country by formulation of the Bhagat Singh National Urban Employment
Guarantee Scheme aimed at providing at least two hundred days of
guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled,
semi-skilled and skilled work and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Bhagat Singh National Urban Employment Guarantee
Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "adult" means a person who has completed eighteenth year of age;
(b) "applicant" means the head of a household or any of its other adult members
who has applied for employment under the scheme;
(c) "appropriate Government" means—
(i) in the case of a State, the Government of that State;
(ii) in the case of an Union Territory having its own legislature, the
Government of that Union Territory; and
(iii) in other cases, the Central Government;
(d) "household" means the members of a family related to each other by blood ,
marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals or holding a
common ration card;
(e) "minimum wage" means the minimum wage fixed by the appropriate
Government under section 6 of the Code on Wages, 2019 for categories of unskilled/
semi-skilled/skilled labourers as applicable in that area;
(f) "municipality" means an institution of self-Government constituted under
article 243Q of the Constitution;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(h) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(i) "scheme" means The Bhagat Singh Urban Employment Guarantee Scheme
notified by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of Section 4;
(j) "semi skilled work" means work declared to be semi-skilled work by the
appropriate Government;
(k) "skilled work" means any work which any adult person is capable of doing
only with any skill or special training;
(l) "unskilled work" means any work which any adult person is capable of doing
without any skill or special training;
(m) "urban area" means such area as provided under article 243Q of the
Constitution regarding Constitution of Municipalities;
(n) "urban local body" means the principal authority responsible for
administering this programme;
(o) "wage rate" means the wage rate referred to in section 6;
(p) "ward" means territorial constituencies in the municipal area; and
(q) "ward sabha" means a demarcated territorial constituency of all persons
registered as voters in the electoral rolls.
CHAPTER II
G
UARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT IN URBAN AREAS
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the appropriate Government shall, in such urban
area as may be notified by it, provide to every household whose adult members volunteer to
do unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled work not less than two hundred days of such work in
a financial year in accordance with the scheme made under this Act.
Definitions.
Guarantee of
urban
employment
to households.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
29 of 2019.

3
(2) The Existing schemes of the appropriate Government in this respect shall be
modified to be in consonance with the provisions laid down by or under this Act and in the
scheme.
(3) Every person who has done the work given to him under the scheme shall be
entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work commensurate to their skills,
qualifications and nature of work undertaken.
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages shall be
made directly to the beneficiary on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight
after the date on which such work was done.
CHAPTER III
E
MPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOW ANCE
4. (1) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, The Central
Government shall, within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification,
formulate a scheme, namely the Bhagat Singh Urban Employment Guarantee Scheme, for
providing not less than two hundred days of guaranteed employment in a financial year to
every household in the urban areas covered under the scheme and whose adult members, by
application, volunteer to do unskilled, semi- skilled and skilled work subject to the conditions
laid down by or under this Act and in the Scheme.
(2) The appropriate Government shall publish a summary of the scheme in at least two
local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular language circulating in the area or
areas to which such scheme shall apply.
(3) The scheme made under sub-section ( 1) shall provide for the minimum features
specified in the Schedule I.
(4) The appropriate Government may, within the limits of its economic capacity and
development, make provisions for securing work to every adult member of a household
under a scheme for any period beyond the period guaranteed, as may be expedited.
5. (1) The appropriate Government may, without prejudice to the conditions specified
in the Schedule II, specify in the scheme the conditions for providing guaranteed employment
under this Act.
(2) The persons employed under any scheme made under this Act shall be entitled to
such facilities not less than the minimum facilities specified in the Schedule II.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code on Wages, 2019, the appropriate
Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that different rates of wages may be specified for different areas:
Provided further that the wage rate specified from time to time under any such
notification shall not be less than rupees three hundred per day.
7. (1) If an eligible applicant for employment under the scheme is not provided such
employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking employment or from
the date on which the employment has been sought in the case of an advance application,
whichever is later, he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance in accordance
with this section.
(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government and subject to the provisions of this Act and the Scheme and the
economic capacity of the appropriate Government, the unemployment allowance payable
under sub-section (1) shall be paid to the applicants of a household subject to the entitlement
of the household at such rate as may be specified by the appropriate Government.
Employment
Guarantee
Schemes for
urban areas.
Conditions for
providing
guaranteed
employment.
Wage rate.
Payment of
unemployment
allowance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
29 of 2019.

4
(3) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (1) shall be made or
offered not later than fifteen days from the date on which it became due for payment.
(4) The appropriate Government may prescribe the procedure for payment of
unemployment allowance under this Act.
8. An applicant who—
(a) does not accept the employment provided to his household under a scheme;
(b) does not report for work, or communicate the reason thereof, within fifteen
days of being notified by the implementing agency to report for the work; or
(c) continuously remains absent from work, without obtaining a permission from
the concerned implementing agency for a period of more than one week or remains
absent for a total period of more than one week in any month,
shall not be eligible to claim the unemployment allowance payable under this Act for a
period of three months but shall be eligible to seek employment under the scheme at
any time.
CHAPTER IV
I
MPLEMENTING AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES
9. (1) The relevant Urban Local Body, such as the Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council,
or Municipal Corporation, shall prepare an Annual Action Plan for a financial year in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) While preparing the Annual Action Plan, the Urban Local Body shall ensure that it
includes the following:
(a) the list of works that are relevant to the development of the area with
break-up of labour and material component;
(b) the assessment of labour demand and details of individual works; and
(c) the detailed plan of action to provide employment in accordance with the
labour demand including training.
10. (1) There shall be a Urban Local Body Level Committee to discuss and finalise the
Annual Action Plan received from each Ward:
Provided that while finalising the Annual Action Plan, the concerned field level official
of the respective body may be consulted by the committee.
(2) The respective Urban Local Body Level Committee shall undertake the following:
(a) planning of activities;
(b) receiving, verifying and registering the application for employment
registration;
(c) receipt of job application and receipt of date;
(d) disposing of application within fifteen days of receipt;
(e) ensuring timely administrative and technical clearance of projects;
(f) work execution;
(g) maintaining of records;
(h) organising ward councils for social audit;
(i) planning, direction control and evaluation; and
Non-
entitlement to
receive
unemployment
allowance in
certain
circumstances.
Annual Action
Plan by Urban
Local Body.
Urban Local
Body Level
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(j) grievance redressal.
(3) The Urban Local Body Level Committee shall be constituted with the following
members:
(a) The respective Additional Secretary in each Corporation or the Secretary in
the Municipality as the Executing Officer of the Scheme;
(b) An officer as an assistant to assist the Executing Officer, appointed by the
municipality;
(c) City Engineer or Municipal Engineer as the case may be;
(d) Health Officer;
(e) Child Development Project Officer;
(f) Nodal Community Organiser;
(g) City Mission Management Unit Manager; and
(h) such other officials as may be decided by the Executing Officer.
11. (1) The Annual Action Plans of the Urban Local Bodies as well as an Annual Report
of all activities undertaken in each Urban Local Body shall be further submitted to the
respective District Level Review and Monitoring Committee for vetting and approval.
(2) A District Level Review and Monitoring Committee under the chairmanship of the
Assistant Collector shall be constituted, consisting of such other officers as may be
prescribed, which shall perform following functions:—
(a) approve the Annual Report on the implementation of the scheme;
(b) ensure that all Urban Local Bodies in the district are implementing
transparently and socially the scheme;
(c) distribute necessary funds for the implementation of the scheme to the Urban
Local Bodies; and
(d) ensure complete functioning of the project.
12. (1) The Annual Action Plans of the Urban Local Bodies as well as the Annual
Report of all activities undertaken in the respective district shall be further submitted to the
respective State Level Review and Monitoring Committee by the District Level Review and
Monitoring Committee for review, design and inspection.
(2) A State Level Review and Monitoring Committee under the chairmanship of the
Additional Chief Secretary of the concerned State Government shall be constituted,
consisting of such other officers, as may be prescribed, which shall perform following
functions:—
(a) quarterly review of the scheme implementation for appropriate interventions
to improve the implementation of the scheme and make policy decisions;
(b) decide on new types of activities that can be taken up under the scheme;
(c) provide necessary funds for the implementation of the project to the Urban
Local Bodies;
(d) establish a network of professional agencies to provide technical assistance
and ensure project execution quality; and
(e) ensure complete functioning of the scheme.
District Level
Review and
Monitoring
Committee.
State Level
Review and
Monitoring
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(3) The State Level Review Committee shall submit the reports to the appropriate
Government for audit.
CHAPTER V
WORK EXECUTION
13. (1) Muster Roll shall be assisgend for the work before each action is initiated which
shall be signed by the Scheme Executing Officer.
(2) Each Muster Roll shall have a uniquie identification number.
(3) Separate Muster Rolls shall be used for each week which includes six days.
(4) Muster Rolls shall be available on the workplace and attendance shall be recorded
in real time.
(5) The Muster Rolls shall be kept by the Executing Officer as part of the municipal
expenditure records and work file.
(6) The details of the Muster Rolls to be issued shall be kept in the register of the
Urban Local Body.
(7) It shall be the responsibility of the concerned engineer or the person who oversees
the work that only the work card holder shall be entitled to perform the work:
Provided that no person below the age of eighteen and any other person without Work
Card shall be allowed to work.
14. (1) A Mate shall be designated from among the workers who shall be trained and
assisgend by each Urban Local body to oversee the activites, record the attendance and
organise the work.
(2) Each Urban Local Body shall ensure that adequate Mates are identified and trained
in each municipality so that they may be assigned work in rotation and the supervision of the
training shall be done by the respective Executing Officers of the scheme in each Urban
Local Body.
(3) No Mate shall be allowed to work for more than a month continuously to avoid any
issue at a later stage.
(4) The ratio of Mate and workers of the work place shall be 1:40:
Provided that if a work place has fewer than forty workers, one worker from them shall
be assigned to perform the duty of Mate.
(5) The records of the Muster Roll, without any corrections, shall be maintained by the
Mate.
(6) The minimum educational qualification for the Mate shall be eighth standard passed:
Provided that persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
widows,  abandoned women and disabled women shall be given priority for designation as
Mate.
(7) The general duties of the Mate shall be, but not limited to, the following:—
(a) divide the workers into cohesive groups of 5-10 people for easy execution of
work and proper calculation of wages;
(b) prepare and maintain the Muster Roll, ensuring  the integrity of the information
of the Muster Roll and the quality of the work;
(c) ensure workplace amenities; and
Muster Roll.
Mate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(d) public supervision of work.
(8) The Mates are entitled to receive the full wages at the daily wage rate notified for
the purpose of the scheme.
(9) If it is found that there has been any mismanagement on the part of the Mate, the
Executing Officer shall immediately take action to remove such person after giving reasonable
opportunity of being heard and if required, to appoint another Mate.
15.  The following activities shall be undertaken before each work under the Scheme is
commenced:
(a) every work shall consist of an estimate report to be prepared by the
Executing Officer or the person who oversees the work in the vernacular language
including each work item, cost of preparation for the workplace, primary care kit, health
and hygiene facilities, etc.
(b) The esimate report shall include the following:
(i) human labour days and wages created for Unskilled workers;
(ii) human labour days and wages for semi-skilled workers;
(iii) human labour days and wages created for skilled workers; and
(iv) quantity and cost of goods and its storage.
(c) A project initiation meeting shall be held with all the workers on the site to
explain about the details of the work, the quantum of work to be carried out, notified
wage rate, the system of payment of wages, etc.
(d) It shall be ensured that all workers have a bank or post office account.
(e) The Executing Officer or the person who oversees the work shall make the
required tools available and calculate the rental cost of the equipment and record it in
the bill.
16. (1) Each Urban Local Body shall be responsible for the provision of work and
facilities which may include first-aid kit, clean drinking water, shade and creche, if more than
five children under six years of age arrive at the workplace.
(2) In the case of a creche facility, a registered woman may be charged to look after the
children and receive the same wage as the unskilled labourer and such costs may be calculated
separately and made into part of the work expenditure.
(3) A redressal mechanism to expedite the grievances shall be set up in each Urban
Local Body, in such manner as may be prescribed.
17. (1) The details of each work shall be recorded in a work register.
(2) Upon completion of the work, the work completion report shall be prepared and
kept in the work register and verified.
(3) The Executing Officer or the person who oversees the work shall be responsible for
preparing and completing the work report:
Provided that photographs of each activity at the beginning, middle of the work and
after completion shall be recorded in the work completion report.
(4) The Central Government may, in consultation  with the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, prescribe appropriate arrangements for audits of the accounts of the schemes
at all levels.
Work
Commencement.
Work place
Facilities.
Project
Completion
Report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
CHAPTER VI
FUNDS
18. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law on this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
CHAPTER VII
POWER TO MAKE RULES
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Each State and Union Territory Government may, by notification, and subject to the
conditions of previous publication, and consistent with this Act and the rules made by the
Central Government, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(4) Every rule made by the State or Union Terriroty Government under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Rule making
Powers of
Central
Government
and State
Governments.
5
10
15
20

THE SCHEDULE  I
[See section 4(3)]
MINIMUM FEATURES OF AN URBAN EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME
1. It is scheme of the Central Government to provide employment opportunities to
vulnerable families in urban areas where there is no employment or otherwise.
2. Ensure the social rights of urban poor.
3. Every family member registered in the Urban Local Body shall be given a job card
within fifteen days.
4. After receiving the job card, each member whose name in the card may apply for
employment in the municipality.
5. Women shall be given priority in providing employment as part of the scheme and
fifty per cent. of the total employment opportunities will be for women.
6. Women and men are entitled to equal work and equal pay for homogeneous work in
the scheme.
7. If the worker is injured or falls ill on the work place, such worker shall get free medical
treatment.
8. In the case of hospitalisation  due to a work accident, the worker shall be entitled to
get a daily wage of not less than half the allowable wages under the scheme.
9. If a worker is permanently disabled or dies as part of this empoyment at the workplace,
his or her legal heir shall be paid as ex gratia of rupees two lakh for accidental death or total
disability and rupees one lakh for partial disability.
10. The children accompanied with workers shall be provided with a creche facility.
11. A grievance redressal mechanism shall be established to ensure accountability.
12. All documents and figures that are part of the project shall be public records.
13. Efficient implementation of the project shall be carried out with the help of Online
Management information System.
9

THE SCHEDULE  II
(See section 5)
CONDITIONS FOR GUARANTEED URBAN EMPLOYMENT UNDER THE SCHEME AND MINIMUM
ENTITLEMENT OF LABOURERS
1. The adult members of every household who—
(a) reside in any urban areas; and
(b) are willing to do unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled work,
may submit their names, age and the address of the household to the Ward in the
jurisdiction of which they reside for registration of their household for issuance of a
job card.
2. It shall be the duty of the Ward to register the household, after making such enquiry
as it deems fit and issue a job card containing such details of adult members of the household
affixing their photographs, as may be specified by the State Government in the scheme.
3. The registration made under paragraph 2 shall be for such a period as may be laid in
the Scheme, but in any case not less than five years, and may be renewed from time to time.
4. The adult members of a registered household whose name appears in the job card
shall be entitled to apply for skilled/semi-skilled/unskilled work under the Scheme.
5. The registered persons belonging to a household shall be entitled to employment
in accordance with the Scheme made under the provisions of this Act, for as many days as
each applicant may request, subject to a maximum of two hundred and fifty days per household
in a given financial year.
6. The Executing Officer shall ensure that every applicant shall be provided work in
accordance with the provisions of the Scheme within fifteen days of receipt of an application
or from the date he seeks work in case of advance application, whichever is later:
Provided that priority shall be given to women in such a way that at least one-half of
the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and requested for work under this Act.
7.  Applications for work shall be for at least fourteen days of continuous work.
8. There shall be a limit of two hundred and fifty days of employment for which a
person may apply, or on the number of days of employment actually provided to him subject
to the aggregate entitlement of the household.
9.  Applications for work may be submitted in writing either to the Executing Officer, as
may be specified in the Scheme.
10.  The Executing Officer, as the case may be, shall be bound to accept valid applications
and to issue a dated receipt to the applicant. Group applications may also be submitted.
11.  Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated in writing, by means
of a letter sent to him at the address given in the job card and by a public notice displayed at
the office of the respective Urban Local Bodies.
12.  As far as possible, employment shall be provided within a radius of five kilometers
of the Urban Local Body where the applicant resides at the time of applying.
13.  A new work under the Scheme shall be commenced, only if at least ten labourers
become available for such work.
14. In cases the employment is provided outside such radius, it must be provided
within the Ward, and the labourers shall be paid ten per cent. of the wage rate as extra wages
to meet additional transportation and living expenses.
10

11
15.  A period of employment shall ordinarily be at least fourteen days continuously
with not more than six days in a week.
16.  In all cases where unemployment allowance is paid, or due to be paid, the
Executing Officer shall inform the District Level Committee in writing the reasons why it was
not possible for him to provide employment or cause to provide employment to the applicants.
17. The District Committee shall, in its Annual Report to the State Level Committee,
explain as to why employment could not be provided in cases where payment of unemployment
allowance is involved.
18.  Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance applications, that is, applications
which may be submitted in advance of the date from which employment is sought.
19. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for submission of multiple applications by
the same person provided that the corresponding periods for which employment is sought
do not overlap.
20.  Each Ward shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and maintained
such registers, vouchers and other documents in such form and in such manner as may be
specified in the Scheme containing particulars of job cards and passbooks issued, name, age
and address of the head of the household and the adult members of the household registered
with the Ward.
21.  Each Ward shall send such a list or lists of the names and addresses of households
and their adult members registered with it and supply such other information to the concerned
Executing Officer at such periods and in such form as may be specified in the Scheme.
22.  A list of persons who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the notice
board of the Ward and at the office of the Executing Officer and at such other places as the
Executing Officer may deem necessary and the list shall be open for inspection by the State
Government and any person interested.
23. If the Ward is satisfied at any time that a person has registered with it by furnishing
false information, it may direct the Programme Officer to direct his name to be struck off from
the register and direct the applicant to return the job card:
Provided that no such action under this paragraph shall be directed unless the applicant
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the presence of two independent persons.
24. If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under the Scheme by
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shall be entitled to, free of
charge, such medical treatment as is admissible under the Scheme.
25. Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State Government
shall arrange for such hospitalisation including accommodation, treatment, medicines and
payment of daily allowance not less than half of the wage rate required to be paid had the
injured been engaged in the work.
26. If a person employed under a Scheme dies or becomes permanently disabled by
accident arising out of and in the course of employment, he shall be paid by the implementing
agency an ex gratia payment at the rate of rupees two lakh for accidental death or total
disability and rupees one lakh for partial disability or such amount as may be notified by the
Central Government, and the amount shall be paid to the legal heirs of the deceased or the
disabled, as the case may be.
27. The facilities of safe drinking water, shade for children and periods of rest, first-aid
box with adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries and other health
hazards connected with the work being performed shall be provided at the work site.

12
28. In case the number of children below the age of six years accompanying the women
working at any site are five or more, provisions shall be made to depute one of such women
workers to look after such children.
29. The person deputed under paragraph 28 shall be paid wage rate.
30. In case the payment of wages is not made within the period specified under the
Scheme, the labourers shall be entitled to receive payment of compensation as per the
provisions of the Code on Wages, 2019 (29 of 2019).
31. The wages under a Scheme may be paid either wholly in cash or in cash and kind
provided that at least one-fourth of the wages shall be paid in cash only.
32. The State Government may prescribe that a portion of the wages in cash may be
paid to the labourers on a daily basis during the period of employment.
33. If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying any person
who is employed under a Scheme, such person shall be entitled to, free of charge, such
medical treatment for the child as may be specified in the Scheme and in case of death or
disablement, through an ex gratia payment as may be determined by the State Government.
34. In case of every employment under the Scheme, there shall be no discrimination
solely on the ground of gender and the provisions of the Code on Wages, 2019 (29 of 2019),
shall be complied with.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There is a growing distress among India's urban poor which has remained largely
unaddressed. The statistics show that the rate of unemployment has steadily risen over the
past few years, which has been exacerbated due to COVID-19 pandemic. The Government's
Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) released by the National Statistical Office (NSO) released
on March 14, 2022, reveals that India's urban unemployment rate jumped to 12.6 per cent. in
the April-June quarter of 2021 from 9.3 per cent in January-March quarter. The number was
much higher (20.8 per cent.) during the first wave of COV1D-19 pandemic. Urban females
suffered more than urban males- unemployment rate among females stood at 14.3 per cent.
compared with 12.2 per cent. for males in April-June quarter 2021. In addition to this, urban
poor continue to be affected by India's persistently high inflation, prevalence of low-wage,
poor quality and informal work.
India has paved the way in the implementation of employment guarantee programmes
with the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) that
guarantees one hundred days of work to rural households every financial year. And yet,
there is no equivalent of MGNREGA for urban areas despite India having a history of urban
employment schemes. One of the most prominent central programmes in this regard was the
Swarna Jayanti Shahri Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) launched in 1997 which provided employment
to the unemployed and underemployed urban poor through self-employment and wage
employment. The Urban Wage Employment Programme component of SJSRY covered those
living below the poverty line in Urban Local Bodies with less than five lakh population. The
SJSRY was replaced by the National Urban Livelihoods Mission (NULM) in 2013. However,
this programme and its subsequent version, laid more emphasis on self-employment and
entrepreneurship, and were not employment "guarantee" schemes.
Recently, the demand for an urban job guarantee has been gaining prominence in
political and policy debates in India. With each passing year, more and more State
Governments have been introducing new urban employment schemes reinforcing the
necessity of one of such in the national level. States such as Madhya Pradesh (Mukhyamantri
Yuva Swabhiman Yojana), Kerala (Ayyankali Urban Employment Guarantee Scheme), Odisha
(Unnati or Urban Wage Employment Initiative), Jharkhand (Mukhyamantri Shramik Yojana),
Himachal Pradesh (Mukhya Mantri Shahri Ajeevika Guarantee Yojna), Rajasthan (Indira
Gandhi Shahri Rozgar Guarantee Yojana) and Tamil Nadu (Tamil Nadu Urban Employment
Scheme) have been running various schemes which guarantee specific number of days of
wage-employment to urban households.
Further, the scheme envisages the 'Right to Life' enshrined under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. The Supreme Court of India has held in multiple cases that the 'Right
to Life' also includes the 'right to livelihood' and the 'right to live with human dignity.' A
national urban employment guarantee scheme has the potential to transform the structure of
the economy as well as contribute significantly to an improved quality of life of millions of
people.
Hence, this Bill.
BINOY  VISWAM
13

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides guarantee of employment to every household whose
adult members volunteer to do unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled work not less than one
hundred days of such work in a financial year. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for payment of
unemployment allowance to eligible applicant for employment under the scheme if he has
not been provided within fifteen days of receipt of application seeking employment. Clause 18
provides that Central Government shall provide funds for carrying out the purposes of the
Bill. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India and
it is very difficult to estimate the expenditure at this juncture. A non-recurring expenditure is
also likely to be involved.
14

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
15

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in urban areas
of the country by formulation of the Bhagat Singh National Urban Employment
Guarantee Scheme aimed at providing at least two hundred days of
guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled,
semi-skilled and skilled work and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Binoy Viswam, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—857RS(S3)—08-08-2022.