AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAYA SABHA.

Bill No. XLVI of 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTY-SEVENTH AMENDMENT)
. BILL, 1999

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1999.
2. In article 243C of the Constitution, —
(# after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2A) Notwithstanding anything in clause (2), the Legislature of a State
may, by law, provide that all the seats in a Panchayat—

(a) at the intermediate level shall be filled by persons elected as
Chairpersons of the Panchayats at village level in the Panchayat area of
such intermediate level;

10 (9) at the district level,in the case of a State not having Panchayats
at the intermediate level, shall be filled by persons elected as Chairpersons
of the Panchayats at the village level in the Panchayat area of such district
level; and

Short title.

Amendment of
article 243C.


2

(c) at the district level, in the case of a State having Panchayats
at the intermediate level, shall be filled by persons elected as Chaispersons
of Panchayats at the intermediate level in the Panchayat area of such
district level”;

(ii) for clause (5), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(5) The Chairperson of a Panchayat at the village level,
intermediate level or district level shall be elected in such manner as
the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.”. .


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 was brought into force with
effect from the 24th April, 1993 in view of the imperative need to enshrine in the
Constitution certain basic and essential features of Panchayati Raj Institutions and to
impart certainty, continuity and strength to them. In the working of this Part, it has been
found by certain States that while on the one liand the elected members of the territorial
constituencies of the Panchayats at the intermediate level and the district level have no
substantive functions to perform, on the other, the other representatives of the village
and intermediate level Panchayats are denied any role in the election of Chairpersons at
the higher level.

2, The Panchayats at the village level, intermediate level and district level as
institutions of self-government for the rural areas are found to be inconvenienced by the
absence of any strong organic linkage between the three levels of the Panchayats and the
members of the territorial constituencies at the intermediate level and the district level. The
Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the village level and the intermediate level are feeling
deprived of any effective role in the Panchayats at the intermediate level and the district
level respectively. The situation has led to the different functionaries working at cross
purposes leading to contradictions and controversies in the functioning of the Panchayats
at different levels. Further, the State Legislatures have been provided with the discretion
to determine by law, the manner of election of the Chairpersons at village level but no
such discretion to make law has been endowed on them in respect of elections to
Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate and the district level.

3. It is, therefore, considered necessary to confer upon the Legislatures of the
States, the discretion to fill all the seats in the Panchayats at intermediate level and district
level by persons elected as Chairpersons at the village level Panchayats and intermediate
level Panchayats and also to provide discretion ‘in the manner in which the Chairpersons of
the Panchayats at the intermediate level or the district level have to be elected as has been

* allowed in the case of Panchayats at the village level.

4, Consequently it has been proposed to make appropriate provisions for providing
such an alternative to the legislatures of the States to make such law accordingly, by
amending article 243C of the Constitution suitably.

5. This Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objective.
SUNDER LAL PATWA.

New DELHI,
The 16th December, 1999.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
2430, (1)* * * * * Composition of

Panchayats.
(5) The Chairperson of—

(@) a Panchayat at the village level shall be elected in such manner as the Leg-
islature of a State may, by law, provide; and

(8) a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level shall be elected by, and
from,amongst, the elected members thereof.

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Sunder Lal Patwa, Minister of Rural Development)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2833RS—16.12.1999