1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In clause (1) of article 275 of the  Constitution, before the existing first  proviso, the
following proviso shall be added, namely:—
“Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as
grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may
be necessary to enable that State to meet the costs of implementation of various
welfare schemes in particular which are directed towards employment generation
for the unemployed youth, pension for senior citizens including farmers, widows,
physically challenged  persons, education and vocational training for the
Bill No. XLVII  of  2014
Amendment
of article
275.
5
10
Short title
and
Commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

2
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward classes, minorities or
development works undertaken by the State in the larger public interest and if
that State is unable to implement or execute such schemes or works, as the case
may be, due to severe financial crunch being experienced by the State:
Provided further that a sum of rupees ninty thousand crore shall be allocated
as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of West Bengal as one time grant
and rupee thirty thousand crore per annum as recurring expenditure and such
amount shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India to the State.”
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of West Bengal has of late started making progress under the present State
Government but still it is one of the economically, industrially, educationally and socially
backward and underdeveloped State of the Republic of India mainly due to consistent
neglect and apathy of successive Governments at the Centre towards the State. The State is
inhabitated by poor people, tribals, labourers, farmers, fishermen, etc. and it is facing gigantic
problems such as severe unemployment amongst the youth of the State, lack of industrial
development due to poor infrastructure and high handedness of trade unions of a front
ruling the State in the past, lack of healthcare facilities resulting in spread of various diseases
mainly the vector borne diseases like malaria, filaria, dengue, encephalitis, chickengunea,
various waterborne diseases, T.B., cancer and other diseases. The road network including
the highways passing through the State is in bad shape. There is lack of educational facilities
particularly its infrastructure such as buildings, play grounds, drinking water facilities, toilets
for girls and boys, desks and tables, hostels, libraries, etc. etc. There are millions of senior
citizens, widows, physically challenged people who are to be given pension for their living,
millions of SC, ST and OBC students who are to be given scholarship etc. Apart from apathy
of the Centre agitations in the hilly parts of the State also affects the economy of the State.
The present State Government is doing its level best to turn around the economy of
the State so as to bring prosperity and overall development of the State but it has its own
limitations. The State Government needs huge Central assistance to accomplish its
developmental tasks. The Chief Minister of West Bengal consistently demanding for an
economic package for the implementation of various development projects and welfare
schemes for the youth, poor people, senior citizens, widows, physically challenged, SCs,
STs, OBCs, minorities, students, farmers and workers and labourers etc. but so far has not
succeeded.
Article 275 of the Constitution provides for payments of grants-in- aid of the revenues
of various States who are in need of financial assistance for various purposes. In order to
enable the Central Government to release funds for the economic package to West Bengal
amendment of this article has become necessary.
Hence this Bill.
KANWAR DEEP SINGH

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for Grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State facing severe
financial crunch. It also provides for one time Grant-in-aid of rupee ninety thousand crore
and rupee thirty thousand crore as recurring annual expenditure. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve this expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * * * *
275. (1) Such sums as Parliament may by law provide shall be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as
Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance, and different sums may be fixed for
different States:
Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid
of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be necessary to enable that
State to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the State
with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the
Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas
therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State:
Provided further that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as
grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and recurring, equivalent
to—
(a) the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the two years
immediately preceding the commencement of this Constitution in respect of the
administration of the tribal areas specified in Part I of the table appended to paragraph
20 of the Sixth Schedule; and
(b) the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by that
State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of raising the level
of administration of the said areas to that of the administration of the rest of the areas
of that State.
* * * * * * * * *
Grants from
the Union to
certain States.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3784RS(S3)—18-12-2014.