RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to give effect to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction and to provide
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Suresh P. Prabhu, Minister for Chemicals and Fertilizers.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4361LAW—04-05-2000.


AS INTRODUCED IN THE Ravya SABHA

Bill No. XLVII of 2000
THE WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2000
A
BILL

further to amend the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923.
Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Workmen's Compensation (Amendment) Act, 2000. _—_Shorttitle.
8 of 1923. 2. In the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Amendment of

5 Act), in section 2, in sub-section (1), in clause (n), the following brackets and words shall section 2.
be omitted, namely:—

“(other than a person whose employment is of a casual nature and who is
employed otherwise than for the purposes of the employer's trade or business)”.

3. In section 4 of the principal Act Amendment of
section 4,
10 (a) in sub-section (1),—

@ in clause (a), for the words "fifty thousand rupees", the words
“eighty thousand rupees” shall be substituted;

(ii) in clause (6), for the words "sixty thousand rupees", the words
“ninety thousand rupees" shall be substituted;


2

(iii) in Explanation I, occurring after clause (6) and before clause
(c), for the words "two thousand rupees” occurring at both the places, the
words "four thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted;

(9) in sub-section (4), for the words "one thousand rupees", the words
"two thousand and five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
Amendment of 4. In section 4A of the principal Act, for sub-section (3A), the following sub-section
section 4A. shall be substituted, namely:—

"(3A) The interest and the penalty payable under sub-section (3) shall be paid
to the workman or his dependant, as the case may be.".


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 provides for payment of compensation to
workmen or their dependants in case of personal injury caused by accident or certain
occupational diseases arising out of and in the course of employment and resulting in
disablement or death. The Act, at present, applies to railway servants and persons employed
in certain hazardous employments specified in Schedule I of the Act.

2. Based on the recommendations of the Standing Committee of Parliament on
Labour and Welfare, the Act is being made applicable to all casual workers by deleting
the brackets and words "(other than a person whose employment is of casual nature and
who is employed otherwise than forthe purposes ofthe employer's trade or business)"
from section 2(1)(n) of the Act.

3. The Act was last amended in 1995. Since then, there has been general increase
in prices of goods and commodities. The Standing Committee of Parliament on
Labour and Welfare has also made certain recommendations for enhancement in the
amount of compensation payable under the Workmen's Compensation Act, These
recommendations were examined in consultation with State Governments and Union
territory Administrations. Keeping in view the recommendations of the Standing
Committee of Parliament and suggestions received from the State Governments, it is
proposed to carry out the following amendments in the Act, namely:—

(i) minimum amount of compensation for death is being enhanced from
Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 80,000 and that for permanent total disablement from
Rs, 60,000 to Rs. 90,000;

(ii) the ceiling on monthly wage prescribed in Explanation II below
section 4(1)(b) for determining the maximum amount of compensation is being
enhanced from Rs. 2,000 10 Rs. 4,000.

(iii) the amount of funeral expenses payable under section 4(4) is being
enhanced from Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 2,500.

4, In the case of undue delay in payment of compensation, the employer under
section 4A(3) of the Act is also liable for payment of interest and penalty up to fifty per
cent. of the amount of compensation. At present interest is payable to the workman or
dependants and the penalty is being credited to State Government, There have been
representations for making the penalty also payable to the workman or dependants.
Accordingly, it is proposed to amend section 4A(3A) so as to make the penalty also
payable to the workman dependants.

5, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI, SATYA NARAYAN JATIYA.
The 20th July, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 covers a large number of persons em-
ployed by the Central Government in railways and in other departments such as Central
Public Works Department, Ordnance factories, telecommunications, telegraph, etc.

2. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to enhance the minimum amount of compensation for
death from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 80,000 and that for permanent total disablement from
Rs. 60,000 to Rs. 90,000. It also seeks to enhance the ceiling on monthly wage for calcu-
lation of maximum amount of compensation from Rs. 2,000 to Rs. 4,000. Finally, it also
seeks to enhance the amount of funeral expenses from Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 2,500. The
proposed provisions will ensure payment of compensation on comparatively higher rates
than existing rates.

3, The above-mentioned proposals in their application to the workmen employed by
the Central Government will involve increased expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India by way of payment of compensation. However, as compensation becomes pay-
able only in the event of employment injury resulting in disablement or death, it is not
possible to estimate in advance the amount of additional expenditure involved.

4. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether recurring or non-recur-
ring nature.


24 of 1989.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION Act, 1923

(8 oF 1923)
2.(1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,
* * * * *

हे (0) “workman” means any person (other than a person whose employment
is of a casual nature and who is employed otherwise than for the purposes of the
employer's trade or business) who is—

(i arailway servant as defined in clause (34) of section 2 of the Railways
Act, 1989, not permanently employed in any administrative, district or sub-
divisional office of a railway and not employed in any such capacity as is
specified in Schedule II, or

(ia) (4) a master, seaman or other member of the crew of a ship,

(b) a captain or other member of the crew of an aircraft,

(c) a person recruited as driver, helper, mechanic, cleaner or in any other
capacity in connection with a motor vehicle,

(@ a person recruited for work abroad by a company,
and who is employed outside India in any such capacity as is specified
in Schedule II and the ship, aircraft or motor vehicle, or company, as the
case may be, is registered in India, or
(ii) employed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II,
whether the contract of employment was made before or after the passing of this Act
and whether such contract is expressed or implied, oral or in writing; but does not
include any person working in the capacity of a member of the Armed Forces of

Union; and any reference to a workman who has been injured shall, where the
workman is dead, include a reference to his dependants or any of them.

* * * * *

4, (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of compensation shall be as

follows, namely:—

(a) Where death results from ah amount equal to fifty per cent. of the
injury monthly wages of the deceased
workman multiplied by the relevant
factor;
or
an amount of fifty thousand rupees, whichever
is more;
(b) Where permanent total an amount equal to fifty per cent. of the
disablement results monthly wages of the injured workman
from the injury multiplied by the relevant factor;

or

an amount of sixty thousand rupees,
whichever is more;

Definitions.

Amount of
compensation,


6

Explanation 1,—For the purposes of clause (a) and clause (७), "relevant factor", in
relation to a workman means the factor specified in the second column of Schedule IV
against the entry in the first column of that Schedule specifying the number of years
which are the same as the completed years of the age of the workman on his last birthday
immediately preceding the date on which the compensation fell due;

Explanation 1.—Where the monthly wages of a workman exceed two thousand
tupees, his monthly wages for the purposes of clause (a) and clause (9) shall be deemed to
be two thousand rupees only,

(c) Where permanent partial (i) in the case of an injury specified in Part IT
disablement results of Schedule I, such percentage of the
from the injury compensation which would have been

payable in the case of permanent total
disablement as is specified therein as
being the percentage of the loss of
earning capacity caused by that injury,
and

(i) in the case of an injury not specified in
Schedule I, such percentage of the
compensation payable in the case of
permanent total disablement as is
proportionate to the loss of earning
capacity (as assessed by the qualified
medical practitioner) permanently
caused by the injury;

Explanation I—Where more injuries than one are caused by the same accident, the
amount of compensation payable under this head shall be aggregated but not so in any case
as to exceed the amount which would have been payable if permanent total disablement
had resulted from the injuries;

Explanation II.—In assessing the loss of earning capacity for the purposes of sub-
clause (ii), the qualified medical practitioner shall have due regard to the percentages of
loss of earning capacity in relation to different injuries specified in Schedule I;

(@ Where temporary disablement, —_ ahalf-monthly payment of the sum equivalent

whether total or partial results to twenty-five per cent. of the monthly
from the injury wages of the workman, to be paid in
accordance with the provisions of sub-

section (2).
* * * * *

(4) If the injury of the workman results in his death, the employer shall, in addition
to the compensation under sub-section (J), deposit with the Commissioner a sum of one
thousand rupees for payment of the same to the eldest surviving dependant of the workman
towards the expenditure of the funeral of such workman or where the workman did not
have a dependant or was not living with his dependant at the time of his death to the
person who actually incurred such expenditure.

* * * * *

4A. (1) * * * * *

(3A) The interest payable under sub-section (3) shall be paid to the workman or his
dependant, as the case may be, and the penalty shall be credited to the State Government.

Compensation
to be paid
when due and

penalty for
default,