Bin N

THE INDIAN TELEGRAPH
BILL, 19 1 (AMENDMENT)

(AS PASSED BY THE Housks oF PARLIAMENT—
RaJYA SABHA ON 31ST JULY, 1972
Lox SABHA ON 9TH AucusT, 1972)

Son 21#!1६ Ay’ )

| ac 1०...3 » \
PSP INP PW 3 दर POON



Bill No. XV-F of 1972
a बल मनिीन

THE INDIAN TELEGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1972

(As PASSED BY THE Houses oF PARLIAMENT)
A

BILL
further to amend the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. This Act may be called the Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act,
1972.

2. For section 5 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the following sec-
tion shall be substituted, namely: —

“5. (1) On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the
interest of the public safety, the Central Government or a State Gov-
ernment or any officer specially authorised in this behalf by the Cen-
tral Government or a State Government may, if satisfied that it is
necessary or expedient so to do, take temporary possession (for so
Jong as the public emergency exists or the interest of the public
safety requires the taking of such action) of any telegraph established,
maintained or worked by any person licensed under this Act.

(2) On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the interest
of the public safety, the Central Government or a State Government
or any officer specially authorised in this behalf by the Central Gov-
ernment or a State Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary
or expedient so to do in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign
States or public order or for preventing incitement to the commission
of ar, offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct

Short
title.

Substitu
tion of
new sec-
tion for
Section 5.
Power for
Govern-
ment to
take pos-
session of
licensed
telegraphs
and to
order in-
terception
of mes-
sages,



that any message or class of messages to or from any person or. class
‘of persons, or relating to any particular subject, brought for trans-
mission by or transmitted or received by any telegraph, shall not be

_ transmitted, or shall be intercepted or detained, or shall be disclosed
‘to the Government making the order or an officer thereof mentioned
in the order:

Provided that press messages intended to be published in India
of correspondents accredited to the Central Government or a State
Government shall not be intercepted or detained, unless their trans-
mission has been prohibited under this sub-section.”.


A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Telegraph Act, 188s.

(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)