Bill No. XV of  2022
Short title and
commencement.
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 77 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), in sub-clause (1), for the words "on which he has been nominated", the
words "of notification of such election" shall be substituted.
3. In the principal Act, after section 127A, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST APRIL, 2022
Amendment
of section 77.
Insertion of
new sections
127B, 127C
and 127D.
43 of 1951.
5
10

2
"127B. (1) Any person who is found paying or receiving payment for news to further
the prospect of the election of a candidate shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, and with fine, which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to payments made by a registered
political party for the management of official publications, including print, radio, television
and all other electronic transmission medium owned or controlled by that political party.
(3) To avail of the exemption under sub-section (2) all registered political parties shall
disclose their interests in any publication in such form and manner, as may be notified by the
Election Commission of India in this regard.
(4) An attempt to commit an act punishable under sub-section (1) shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to two years, or with fine, which may extend
to ten lakh rupees, or with both.
(5) No court shall take cognisance of any offence punishable under this section unless
there is a complaint made by the order of, or under authority from, the Election Commission
of India or the Chief Electoral Officer of the State concerned.
127C. (1) Any political advertisement in any media shall carry a disclosure to this effect
in such form and manner, as may be notified by the Election Commission of India in this
regard.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provision of sub-section (1) shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees, or with both.
127D. (1) Where an offence under sub-section (1) of section 127B has been committed
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of,
and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(2) Nothwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means anybody corporate, and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm."
Paying for
news to
further the
prospect of
election of a
candidate.
Non-disclosure
of interest in
political
advertising.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Section 77(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, imposes a ceiling on the
election expenses of a candidate from the date of nomination to the date of declaration of
results. This provision does not cover the pre-nomination period, though it constitutes a
major part of candidates' expenses. Usually, compaigning commences before or after the
announcement of the date of elections, however, to evade the application of section 77(1),
the nomination is filed on the last filing days. This concern has been highlighted in the 255th
Law Commission Report on Electoral Reforms as well.
2. In PUCL v. Union of India (2003) 4 SCC 399, while endorsing the recommendations of
the National Commission to review the working of Constitution (NCRW) for stronger
disclosure and auditing norms, the Supreme Court observed that "...the political parties as
well as individual candidates be made subject to a proper statutory audit of the amounts
they spend.... EC should devise specific formats for filing such statements so that fudging of
accounts becomes difficult. Also, the audit should not only be mandatory but it should be
enforced by the Election Commission."
3. Many countries such as the United Kingdon follow a two-way approach, the laws
regulate election expenditure for both the pre-candidacy long campaing period, i.e., a year
before the date of nomination and short-campaign period, i.e., from the date of nomination to
the date of declaration of result. Although considering the huge diversity, it may not be
feasible in the Indian context but, extending the scope of section 77 from "date of nomination"
to "date of notification" would be a better mid-way and practical alternative.
4. Further, the influence which money exerts in corrupting the democratic process is
undeniable and sadly this is true now, more than ever. In our increasingly connected, media
heavy world, political advertisements are omnipresent and an essential part of any campaign.
Unregulated, they provide a platform for candidates to propagate patent untruths. This
severely undermines the right to accurate information based on which a voter can make his/
her decision. The seriousness of these issues is amplified by the extent to which it has
become a systematic part of promoting one's election. The money spent on unethical paid
news and disguised political advertisements in rising at an exponential rate in both national
as well as regional media.
5. In PUCL v. Union of India (2003) 4 SCC 399, the Supreme Court also held that
availability of impartial, proper and relevant information about the election candidates fosters
and promotes freedom of speech and expression. Paid news distorts this right. As per the
2010 Press Council Sub-committee report on Paid News, it was suggested that the act of
publishing news items in exchange for consideration should be construed as electoral
malpractice with a punishment of minimum two years imprisonment. The Election Commission
of India in its 2012 circular which was later incorporated in the Handbook for Media for
Lok Sabha General Elections, proposed that the Representation of the People Act, 1951,
should be amended to prevent the publishing and abetment to publish any paid news for
furthering the prospects of a candidate's election. In 2014, TRAI in its recommendations on
media ownership also recommended that the term 'paid news' should be comprehensively
defined and a proper framework for scrutinizing complaints and taking punitive actions
should be established.
6. In the United Kingdom, there is a blanket ban on telecasting paid political
advertisements on television and radios. This prohibition also extends to any advertisement
which tends to influence public opinion on a matter of general controversy. As per the
Commonwealth Electoral Act, 1918 of Australia, it is mandatory for unfolding the details of
any electoral advertisement, handbill, pamphlet, poster or notice that contains electoral
3

4
matter. Similarly in Canada, the Canada Election Act, 2000, set provisions for adequately
disclosing the details of any electoral advertising.
7. Currently, the guidelines for disclosing political paid advertisements are not
adequately framed and uniform. To check disguised paid political advertisements, the
disclosure provisions have to be made compulsory for all media firms to assist the public in
identifying the nature of content (whether sponsored or editorial content) and keep a vigilant
track of transactions between the media and election candidates.
8. It is, therefore, imperative to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to
regulate the election expenditure and to check the menace of 'paid news'.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. SASMIT PATRA

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
* * * * * * * *
77. (1) Every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by his election agent,
keep a separate and correct account of all expenditure in connection with the election incurred
or authorized by him or by his election agent between the date on which he has been
nominated and the date of declaration of the result thereof, both dates inclusive.
* * * * * * * *
5
Account of
election
expenses and
maximum
thereof.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—38RS(S3)—04-04-2022.