Bill No. XV of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JULY, 2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE WATER SCARCE REGIONS OF MARATHWADA, VIDHARBHA,
BUNDELKHAND AND IN EASTERN AND SOUTHERN PARTS
(PROHIBITION OF GROWING WATER INTENSIVE CROPS
AND SETTING UP OF THERMAL POWER PLANTS
AND OTHER LARGE SCALE WATER INTENSIVE
INDUSTRIES) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to provide for the prohibition of growing water intensive  crops and setting up of thermal
power plants and other large scale water intensive industries in water scarce regions
of Marathwada, Vidharbha, Bundelkhand and such other regions in eastern and
southern parts of the country and for the promotion of growing less water consuming
crops particularly those developed by Indian Council of Agricultural Research and
such other bodies and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India, as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Water Scarce Regions of Marathwada, Vidharbha,
Bundelkhand and in Eastern and Southern Parts (Prohibition of Growing Water intensive
Crops and Setting up of Thermal Power Plants and other large scale water intensive Industries)
Act, 2017.
(2)  It extends to the whole of  India.
5

2
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In the Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Council" means Indian Council Agricultural Research set up by the
Government of India;
(c) "Water intensive crops" means those crops which require large quantities of
water for growing them and declared as water intensive by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette, of its own or as recommended by the Council.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
or any decree of any Court of Memorandum of Understanding between the appropriate
Government and any company or firm or any permission accorded by any authority or
agency of the Government, growing of water intensive crops and setting up of thermal power
plants and other large scale water intensive industries in water scarce regions in Marathwada,
Vidharbha, Bundelkhand and such other regions, is hereby prohibited.
(2) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure the compliance of the
provisions of this Act.
(3) It shall be the duty of the appropriate government and council to develop less
water consuming cereals for water scarce regions and promote adoption of diversifying
cropping patterns and modern agronomic practices in such regions.
4. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act shall be punishable with
simple imprisonment of six months and with fine not less than two lakh rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
5. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty and
any such order shall be final.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Prohibition of
growing water
intensive
crops and
setting up of
thermal
power plants
and other
large scale
water
consuming
industries in
water scarce
regions.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Marathwada, Vidharbha and Madhya Maharashtra regions in the State of Maharashtra,
Bundelkhand in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh and certain other regions in Karnataka,
Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh etc. are water scarce and
drought prone regions. Of late these regions are getting scanty rainfall and levels of
groundwater are depleting very fast. In these regions even drinking water is a luxury.
Consistent drought conditions have brought hunger, starvation, suicide by farmers, economic
backwardness and other miseries in these areas.
As per study conducted by Indian Institute of Tropical Meterology, Pune and the
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, the large impact of Marathwada drought in the year
2015 is a reflection of poor management of water resources and agriculture. It is also a fact
that in these regions, for earning more money, farmers are lured to sow water intensive crops
such as sugarcane, paddy etc. Mostly the groundwater is used in raising these crops leading
to severe drought and water scarcity.
Similarly, large quantities of water is required in thermal power plants for cooling and
various other purposes. Various Industries particularly producing mineral water, colas etc.
also use large quantities of water. Such power plants and industries need to be discouraged
in water scarce regions. The study which has been referred to above has advocated adoption
of sustainable strategies consistent with the nature variability for rainfed agriculture such as
diversification with pulses and water resource management. Farmers may be given advisories
for diversifying cropping pattern from water intensive crops to pulses, oilseeds, maize and
agro forestry and adoption of modern agronomic practices like raised bed sowing, alternate
furrow irrigation, sprinkler irrigation, drip irrigation, mulching etc.
Several drought tolerant varieties of paddy have been developed in the country. Farmers
may be advised to go for sowing these varieties. It is learnt that in Indonesia drought tolerant
sugarcane is grown in a big way. This may be tested in our country so that we do not have
to face the shortage of sugar. However, in water scarce regions growing of water intensive
crops and setting up of thermal power plants and other large scale water intensive industries
have to be banned.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR  DHOOT
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prohibition of growing water intensive  crops and setting up of thermal
power plants and other large scale water intensive industries in water scarce
regions of Marathwada, Vidharbha, Bundelkhand and such other regions in eastern
and southern parts of the country and for the promotion of growing less water
consuming crops particularly those developed by Indian Council of Agricultural
Research and such other bodies and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1322RS(S3)—21-07-2017.