THE INDIAN PENAL CODE ( AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code 1860.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called The Indian Penal Code ( Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After section 326 of the Indian Penal Code 1860, (hereinafter referred to as the code)
the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"326A. Whoever, except in case provided for by Section 335, voluntarily causes
injuries to the body of a person by means of an acid, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term of ten years or for imprisonment for life and with fine of fifty
thousand rupees which may extend to two lakh rupees.".
A
S INTRODUCED IN  RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2009
Bill No.  XV of  2009
Short title
and commen-
cement.
Insertion of
new section
326A.
V oluntarily
Causing
injuries by
acid.
5
10

2
3. After Chapter XIII of the Code, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
CHAPTER XIIIA
OFFENCES RELATING TO MANUFACTURING,
DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OF ACID
“267A. Whoever manufactures, distributes or sells any acid without a licence
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years or with fine of one lakh rupees or with both.”
“267B. Whoever sells any acid to any unauthorized person shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine of one lakh rupees or with both.”
"267C. Whoever found in unauthorized possession of any acid in specified
quality, as may be notified shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine of one lakh rupees or with both."
Explanation.—  For the purposes of this Chapter the Central or the State
Government within their respective jurisdiction shall issue licences for manufacturing,
distribution, sale and possession of specified acids.
Insertion of
new Chapter
XIII A.
Punishment
for
manufacturing,
distributing or
selling acids
without
licence.
Punishment
for selling
acid to
unauthorized
person.
Punishment
for
unauthorized
possession of
any acid.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Each year a number of women are killed, maimed, blinded or scared for life in acid
attacks across the country. But so far this heinous crime has not attracted attention of the
Government or the National Crime Records Bureau. Although the acid attack is a crime
which can be committed against any person but the crime has a specific gender dimension
in our country. In most of the reported cases, the acid attack have been committed on
women particularly young women by husbands, lovers, employers, jealous colleagues and
even landlords. The acid attack leaves a strong scar on the body of the person which does
not go even after the repeated plastic surgeries and the victim carries this stigma of the
attack throughout the life. Linked with this acid attack is the relaxed law on the sale of
concentrated acid. Today, anybody can walk down and buy litres of highly concentrated
acid over the counter just by paying a paltry amount. Many countries have specific law on
the offences by acid and law relating to distribution and sale of acids. Unfortunately, in
India, the sale of acid is carelessly allowed as a deadly weapon. The offences relating to acid
attack are generally tried under Section 326 of the IPC which deals with grievous hurt. It has
been opined by many organizations including the Law Commission that the provisions
relating to grievous hurt are not broad enough to cover the kind of injuries inflicted through
acid attack and the Section 326 gives a wide discretion to the courts as far as the punishment
is concerned. The Law Commission, in view of increasing instances of acid attacks especially
on women, has suggested sentencing up to life term for the offence. The Law Commission
while recommending the life imprisonment for offence relating to acid attack has also
highlighted the need for regulating the distribution and sale of the acid and has recommended
that it should be banned except for commercial and scientific purposes. It is, therefore,
necessary that a separate provision for punishment related to acid attack and manufacturing,
distribution, sale and possession of acid should be incorporated in the Indian Penal Code.
Hence, this Bill.
O.T.  LEPCHA
3

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri O.T. Lepcha, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5129RS(S-5)—4.12.2009.