AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA  SABHA 
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No. XV of 2024 
THE INDIAN MEDIA SERVICES (REGULATION AND LICENSING) 
BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation and licensing of media services and facilitate development of free and 
independent media services in the country by establishing an independent authority to  
be known as the Indian Board of Media Services and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Indian Media Services (Regulation and
Licensing) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means Indian Board of Media Services established under
section 4 of this Act.
Definitions. 

2 
(b) “citizen” means any citizen of India;
(c) “media services” means the services provided by any person(s) or
entity professionally or otherwise engaged in the collection, processing
and dissemination of information, news or entertainment to the general
public as well as collection of and dissemination of public opinion through
print, electronic or digital media such as newspaper, magazine, other
publication, radio, cable or satellite television, internet, Over-The-Top
(OTT) platforms or other medium of mass communication;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules and regulations made under
this Act; and
(e) “service provider” means any person(s) or public or private sector
entity, who are providing media services.
5 
10 
Licensing of 
Media 
Services. 
3. No service provider shall operate after one year from the commencement of this
Act, unless a license therefor has been obtained or intimation provided, in such
form and manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, in
accordance with the provisions of this Act:
      Provided that the licenses issued to media services by the Central 
Government, from time to time in accordance with guidelines issued in this 
regard prior to the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be licenses 
obtained under the provisions of this Act from the respective date of issue of 
such license, and shall be valid till the date of expiry of the original license 
agreement. 
      Provided further that service provider(s), who have obtained licenses prior 
to the commencement of this Act, shall submit an intimation in this regard, 
within such time and containing such details in such form and manner, as may 
be prescribed by the Board. 
15 
20 
25 
Establishment 
of the Indian 
Board for 
Media 
Services. 
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the 
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
for the purposes of this Act, an autonomous body to be known as the 
Indian Board for Media Services, to regulate the functioning of media 
services and foster free and independent media services in the country. 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act,
to contract and shall, by the said name, sued and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at such place as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify and the Board
may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at
such other places in India.
(4) The Board shall consist of the following, to be appointed by the President of
India by warrant under his hand and seal, on the recommendation of a Selection
Committee, as specified under section 5 of the Act:—
(a) an eminent journalist with an illustrious career record of 15 years or
more -Chairperson;
(b) an eminent academician from the field of media studies and research
Member;
(c) a member of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India –Member, ex
officio;
(d) a member of the Press Council of India-Member, ex-officio;
(e) a member of the News Broadcasting and Digital Standards Authority-
30 
35 
40 
45 

3 
5 
Member, ex-officio. 
(f) an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary in the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting–Member, ex-officio; and
(g) an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary in the Ministry of
Home Affairs –Member, ex-officio.
(5) The Board shall have the power to regulate its own procedure for transaction
of its business and frame regulations, as deemed necessary, for carrying out the
duties and functions as assigned to it under this Act.
10 
15 
20 
5. (1)  The Selection Committee shall consist of the following, namely:–
(a) the Prime Minister — Chairperson;
(b) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the Peopleor where there
is no such Leader of Opposition, then, the Leader of single largest
Opposition Party in the House of the People —Member;
(c) the Union Minister of Information and Broadcasting —Member; and
(d) one judge of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice
of India—Member.
(2) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure in a transparent
manner for selecting the Chairperson and Members of the Board.
(3) No appointment of the Chairperson or any Member of the Board shall be
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
Selection 
Committee. 
25 
30 
6. (1)  The Chairperson and the Members shall function as full-time Members
of the Board, irrespective of their status in their parent organization(s) and
shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which they enter
upon their offices.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Board shall be such as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
 Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms 
and conditions of service of the Chairperson or any Member, as the case 
may be, shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
Term of office 
and other 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson 
and Members. 
35 
7. (1)  The Chairperson or any other member may, at any time, by writing under
his hand addressed to the President, resign from his office and on such
resignation being accepted by the President, the Chairperson or Member shall
be deemed to have vacated his office with effect from the date of acceptance of
such resignation.
(2) The Chairperson and Members shall not be removed from their office except
by an order of the President and in such manner and on such grounds as
provided in clause (4) of article 124 of the Constitution for the removal of a
Judge of the Supreme Court.
Removal and 
Resignation. 
40 
45 
8. (1)  The Board may appoint such number of officers and staff, as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The methods of recruitment and qualifications for service, salary and
allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the
officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be determined by
regulations.
Officers and 
employees of 
the Board. 

4 
Powers of the 
Board. 
9. The Board shall exercise the following powers, namely:––
(a) grant the licenses required for the functioning of media services in the
country, in accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(b) refuse to grant licenses under the provisions of this Act or terminate the
functioning of any media service by revoking licenses issued prior to the
commencement of this Act under the existing guidelines at that time, if it
is of the considered opinion that the content of the channel is likely to
threaten the security and integrity of the State or disturb the peace and
harmony or public order in the whole or a part of the country, or on
violation of other conditions as may be prescribed by the regulations
framed under the Act:
    Provided that no such order for refusal or revocation of license shall 
be issued without giving a reasonable opportunity to the media service 
concerned of being heard; 
      Provided further that any urgent request to terminate the functioning 
of any media service received from the Central or State Governments shall 
be examined by the Board within forty-eight hours of the receipt of such 
request and a decision given thereon, which shall be binding and 
enforceable.  
(c) formulate rules and regulations for the monitoring, regulation and
licensing of media services and service providers in the country while
ensuing their independence, within the framework of the existing
legislation in this regard and in accordance with the policy guidelines
prescribed by the Central Government;
(d) formulate and notify the terms and conditions for grant of licenses and
other permissions required for the functioning of media services and
various categories of service providers in the country; and
(e) receive grievances and complaints regarding the functioning of media
services and service providers and after due examination redress such
grievances or take appropriate punitive action, wherever deemed
necessary.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Functions of 
the  Board. 
10. The Board shall perform the following functions, namely:––
(a) monitor whether service providers are offering media services
transparently upholding the democratic and pluralist values, as prescribed
by the rules and regulations formulated by the Board in this regard;
(b) take necessary steps to bring together and convene structured dialogues
amongst media service providers, policy makers, citizens and social
activists for improving media services;
(c) lay down the Content Code, encompassing guidelines and standards
for the creation and dissemination of media content and procedures to be
followed for content certification by the service providers, as may be
specified in the regulations and effectively monitor its implementation;
(d) recommend appropriate penalties for media services, service providers
and any person(s), who act in contravention of any of the provisions of this
Act; and
(e) perform such other functions including administrative and financial
functions, as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government or as may
be necessary to implement the provisions of this Act.
35 
40 
45 

5 
5 
11. Service providers shall –––
(a) ensure that their content or programmes uphold pluralism and diversity in
the country;
(b) disclose information about individuals or entities with financial stakes in
their operations, including investors, and disclose to the general public any
potential conflict of interest while reporting or disseminating information on
issues related thereto.
(c) abide by the Content Code specified in the clause (c) of section 10.
Responsibilities 
of service 
providers. 
10 
12. The Board shall prepare every year, in such form and within such time as may
be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report giving a true and full
account of its activities during the previous year and copies thereof shall be
forwarded to the Central Government, who in turn shall cause it to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Annual Report. 
15 
20 
25 
13. (1)  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Board grants of such sums of
money as the Central Government may think fit for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed and
the accounts shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India at
such intervals as may be specified by him.
(3) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any person appointed by him in this behalf, together with
the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government
and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
14. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of  the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
30 
15. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for
the time being in force.
Act to have an 
overriding 
effect. 
35 
16. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or
expedient for removing such difficulty.
(2) Every order and direction made under this section shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Power to make 
rules. 

6 
(2) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in, the rule or regulation, or both
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule or regulation.
5 
10 

7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The freedom of the media is crucial for the functioning of a healthy 
democracy. The media should be independent and should play an impartial role in 
the dissemination of news and information to the public at large, so as to facilitate 
free and fair assessment of issues and independent decision making amongst the 
citizens, which is crucial to the healthy functioning of a democracy. The licensing 
powers being a monopoly in the hands of the Executive often results in a pliant 
media as Journalists will hesitate to criticize the ruling dispensation for fear of 
legal hazards. The licensing should not be left to the whims and fancies of the 
bureaucracy and the ruling party. The Bill aims to correct this by proposing an 
autonomous body for issuing licenses and revoking them, thus ensuring free and 
fair functioning of media.  
Hence, this Bill. 
V. SIVADASAN

8 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Indian Board for 
Media Services consisting of a chairperson and six other Members, whereas, 
clause 6 provides for the salary and allowances payable to them.  Clause 8 of the 
Bill provides for the salary and allowances of the officers and staff appointed to 
the Board.  Clause 13 of the Bill provides that the Central Government, shall after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of 
money to the Board, as it may think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not 
possible at present to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 

9 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and 
regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 16 of the Bill 
empowers the Central Government to make an order or give such direction to 
remove any difficulty which might arise in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Act. As the rules, regulations, orders or directions will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation and licensing of media services and facilitate development of free and 
independent media services in the country by establishing an independent authority to  
be known as the Indian Board of Media Services and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–055–05.02.2024. 