AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026 
Bill No. XV of 2026 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
n
otification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment 
of article15. 
2. In article 15 of the Constitution, for clause (4), the following new clause
shall be substituted:—
“(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent
the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens proportionate to their
population in the caste census or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes.”
5 
Amendment 
of article 16. 
3. In article 16 of the Constitution, for clauses (4) & (4A), the following new
clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any 
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any  
backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of State, is not adequately 
represented in the services under the State proportionate to their population 
in the caste census. 
(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any 
provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential 
seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in 
favour of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward 
Classes which, in the opinion of the State, a re not adequately represented in 
the services under the State.” 
10 
15 
20 
Amendment 
of article 124. 
4. In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (2A), the following new
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2B) Notwithstanding anything in  this Constitution, the appointment 
of Judges to the Supreme Court shall be made by giving  due representation 
to members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward 
Classes, religious minorities and women, in proportion to their population in 
the country: 
Provided th at the p rovisions of this clause shall not apply to such 
categories which are already represented in the total strength of Judges of the 
Supreme Court in proportion to their population in the country. 
(2C) Subject to the provisions of clause (2B), the Central Government 
shall frame a Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judg es of the 
Supreme Court in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, setting out the 
timelines and procedure including identifying, assessing, recommending, and 
appointing suitable candidates as Judges of the Supreme Court. 
 (2D) If the Ch ief Justice or Judge of any  High Court is being 
considered for appoin tment as a  Judge of th e Supreme Court, th e Cen tral 
Government shall consult the Government of that State before making such 
appointment. 
(2E) The Central Government shall either return or notify any 
recommendation of the collegium of the Supreme Court for appointment of 
Judges of the Supreme Court within sixty days of receipt of the 
recommendation: 
  Provided that if any recommendation is returned by the Central 
Government and the same is re -iterated by the collegium of the Supreme 
Court, the Central Government shall notify the same within a period of thirty 
days of receipt of the reiteration. 
Explanation— For the purpose of this clause, ‘collegium of the 
Supreme Court’ shall mean a Committee comprising of five senior -most 
Judges of the Supreme Court including the Chief Justice of India.” 
25 
30 
35 
 
40 
45 
50 

3 
5. For article 130 of the Constitution, the following article shall be
substituted, namely:—
Substitution of 
article 130. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
“130. (1) The Supreme Court established under Clause (1) of article 124
shall comprise of a Constitution Bench sitting at New Delhi and four
Permanent Regional Benches for the northern, southern, eastern and
western regions, which shall sit at New Delhi, Chennai, K olkata a
nd
M
umbai respectively.
(2) The Constitution Bench at New Delhi shall hear only cases which a re
of
 constitutional importance.
Explanation— The Chief Justice of India shall have exclusive 
power to determine which case is to be classified as a case o f 
constitutional importance. 
(3) The four Permanent Regional Benches of the Supreme Court shall
exercise the full jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India, except over
cases to be heard by the Constitution Bench.
(4) The territorial jurisdiction of the Permanent Regional Benches of the
Supreme Court shall be as follows:—
(a) the northern Regional Bench of the Supreme Court at
New Delhi shall deal with all cases, except cases to be heard by the 
Constitution Bench, arising out of the States of Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and 
the Union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Delhi and 
Chandigarh; 
(b) the southern Regional Bench of the Supreme Court at
Chennai shall deal with all cases, except cases to be h eard by the 
Constitution Bench, arising out of the States of Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and the Union 
territories of Puducherry and Lakshadweep; 
(c) the eastern Regional Bench of the Supreme Court at
Kolkata shall deal with al l cases, except cases to be heard by the 
Constitution Bench, arising out of the States of West Bengal, Bihar, 
Odisha, Jharkhand, Assam, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Union 
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands; and 
(d) the western Regional Bench of the Supreme Court at
Mumbai shall deal with all cases, except cases to be heard by the 
Constitution Bench, arising out of the States of Maharashtra, 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa and Union territory 
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu: 
Provided that the Chief Justice of India may, if in the 
interest of administration of justice, transfer any case 
pending before any Permanent Regional Bench to any other 
Permanent Regional Bench or the Constitution Bench: 
Provided further that when cases involving the same 
substantial question of law or the same subject matter are 
pending before two or more Regional Benches, the Chief 
Justice of India may direct that all such cases be heard by any 
one of the Regional Benches. 
(5) The Chief Justice of India shall nominate Judges of the Supreme
Court to sit at the Constitution Bench and the Permanent Regional
Benches:
Provided that Chief Justice of India shall nominate not less 
than six Judges of Supreme Court in e ach of the Permanent 
Regional Benches: 
Constitution 
Bench and 
Permanent 
Regional 
Benches of the 
Supreme Court. 

4 
Provided further that while nominating Judges to the 
Permanent Regional Benches, the Chief Justice shall give 
preference to Judges whose parent High Court or erstwhile place 
of practice or residence prior to appointment as Judge, is within 
the territorial jurisdiction of that Permanent Regional Bench: 
Provided also that nothing contained herein shall prevent the 
Chief Justice from nominating any Judge of the Supreme Court to 
the Constitution Bench or any of the Permane nt Regional Benches 
on the basis of seniority, or if it is otherwise necessary to do so in 
the interest of administration of justice.” 
5 
10 
Amendment 
of article 217. 
6. In article 217 of the Constitution—
(1) in clause (1), for the words “sixty -two years”, the words
“sixty-five years” shall be substituted. 
(2) after clause (2), th e following new clauses shall be in serted, 
namely :— 
“(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, 
the appointment of Jud ges to the High Court of a State shall be made 
by g iving due representation to  members of the Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, religious minorities and 
women, in proportion to their population within that State: 
Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to such 
categories which are already represented in the total strength of Jud ges 
of a High Court in proportion to their population within that State. 
(2B) In all cases of appointments to a High Court of a State, the 
Central Governmen t, the collegium o f the Supreme Court and the 
collegium of that High Court shall take into con sideration the opin ion 
of the Government of that State before making the appointment. 
Explanation— For the purpose of this clause, ‘State’ includes all 
States and Union Territories that share a common High Court. 
(2C) Subject to th e provisions of clause (2 A), the Central 
Government shall frame a Memorandum of Procedure for app ointment 
of Judges of High Courts in consultation with all the State 
Governments, Governments of Union Territories, the Chief Justice of 
India and Chief Justices 
of all High Courts, setting out the timelines 
and procedure including identifying, assessing, recommending, an d 
appointing suitable candidates as Judges of High Courts.  
(2D) Th e Central Government shall either return or notify any 
recommendation of the collegiu m of the Supreme  Court for 
appointment of Judges of the High Court within sixty days of receipt of 
the recommendation: 
Provided that if any recommendation is returned by the Central 
Government and the same is reiterated by the Supreme Court, the 
Central Government shall notify the same within a period of thirty days 
of receipt of the reiteration. 
Explanation— For the pu
rpose of article 217, ‘collegiu m of 
Supreme Court’ shall mean a Committee comprising the five senior 
most Judges of the Supreme Court including the Chief Justice of India 
and ‘collegium of High Court’ shall mean a Committee comprising the 
three senior most Judges of that High Court including the Chief Justice 
of that High Court.” 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

5 
5 
10 
15 
7. In article 224 of the Constitution—
(1) after clause (1) , the following new clause shall be inserted,
namely :— 
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, 
the appointment of additional Judges to the High Court of a State shall 
be made, by giving due representation to members of the Schedu led 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, religious 
minorities and women, in proportion to their population within that 
State: 
Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to such 
categories which are already represented in the total strength of Judges 
and additional Judges of a High Court in proportion to their population 
within that State.” 
(2) in clause (3), fo r the words “ sixty-two y ears”, the words 
“sixty-five years” shall be substituted. 
Amendment of 
article 224. 
20 
8. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution: —
(a) In List I – Union List, Entry 69 shall be omitted;
(b) In List III – Concurrent List, after Entry 47, the following
entry shall be inserted, namely: — 
“48. Census” 
Amendment of 
the Seventh 
Schedule. 

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Constitution is the supreme law of this country which guarantees 
equality of status and opportunity. However, unequal cannot be treated equally and 
therefore the Indian Constitution allows for positive discrimination to foster 
equality. The origins of the reservation system may be traced back to India's old 
discriminatory caste system. With the object of making Indian society a democratic 
and egalitarian society, the framers of our Constitution framed the policy of 
reservation so that the oppress ed and depressed classes can be joined in the 
mainstream. The reservations, therefore, were the exception to the general rule. 
Reservations in education and public employment are granted to elevate those 
regarded socially and educationally backward in the State's perspective or when a 
class of citizens is not properly represented in the services supplied by the State. 
Reservation is being offered to the citizens of India belonging to Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Other Backward Classes (SCs/STs/OBCs) cate gories, who 
have been disadvantaged and exploited socially and educationally for generations.  
The Mandal Commission Report published in the year 1980 was the first to 
define reservation for Other Backward Classes of citizens in India.  The living 
standards of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Backward Class families 
were deemed much poorer than the mainstream population, including Hindu 
forward castes and other religious groups. Therefore, the Mandal Commission 
recommended to grant 27% reservations to Other Backward Class citizens. 
Over the years, there has been unrest amongst the citizens belonging to the 
socially and educationally backward classes for not being treated fairly and equally 
and that there is no level playing field when compared to 
the socially and 
educationally forward citizens. The concept of reservations introduced to uplift the 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens for the injustice being done 
to them generation after generation did not achieve any greater resul ts due to 
disparity in the quantum of reservations compared to their population. The fact 
remains that the reservation at 27% offered to the Other Backward Classes of 
citizens on the basis of the 1931 census over a period of time is not sufficient that 
too 
for a community, which is the largest in population in this country. The 
accumulation of the deficit in honouring their due representations and reservations 
for socially and educationally backward classes of citizens each year, again brings 
out inequality in the society. 
Constitution being an organic document should stretch itself to take care of 
the demand and needs of the society. The founding fathers of our Constitution have 
designedly couched Articles 14, 15 and 16 in comprehensive phraseology so that 
the frail and emaciated section of the people living in poverty, rearing in obscurity, 
possessing no wealth or influence, having no education, much less higher 
education and suffering from social repression and oppression should not be denied 
of equality before law and equal protection of the laws and equal opportunity in the 
matters of public employment or subjected to any prohibition or discrimination on 
grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. For achieving these objects, 
provisions were inserted under Articles 15 and 16 for providing reservations to the 
SC, ST and Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of citizens. 
The Mandal Commission while determining the criteria for defining the 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens identified that the OBCs  
constituted nearly 52% of the Indian population on the basis of the 1931 census. 
That after considering all facts and circumstances, the Commission initially 
recommended for reserving 52% of all posts under the Central Government and in 
educational institutions both under the Central and State Governments, for the 
backward classes of citizens. It was due to the legal constraint of 50% cap on all 
reservations that initially the quantum of Other Backward Class reservation was 
fixed at 27%, in order to arrive at a figure which when added to the 22.5% 
reservation for SCs and STs remains below 50%. The reservation of 27% in 
education was introduced after the 93rd Constitutional amendment with effect from 
20.1.2006. The twenty years of implementation of reservation in education has not 

7 
enabled the entire socially and educationally backward classes of citizens to realize 
the benefits of the reservation and disparity still prevails in the society and there is 
no achievement of level playing field. Moreover, the reservation in appointments 
introduced in the year 1981 also did not enable the Other Backward Classes of 
citizens to get their rightful share in employment and still there is inadequate 
representation in employment including in the promotional posts. Considering the 
fact that there exists no mathematical limit of 50% in aggregate for reservations, 
therefore it is essential that reservations for the backward classes of citizens be 
increased in proportion to the increase in th eir population over the years and shall 
be made proportionate to their population in the Caste Census.  
Further, to achieve substantive equality, it is imperative that Articles 15 and 
16 of the Constitution should be amended to increase the quantum of reservations 
of Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of citizens proportionate to their 
Caste Census. 
The Constitution (Seventy -seventh Amendment) Act, 1995 inserted clause 
(4A) to Article 16 to extend the benefit of reservations in promotions as clause (4) 
is confined only to reservation in initial appointments. Parliament felt that it was 
necessary to continue providing reservations in promotion posts as well in the case 
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. However, the said amendment did 
not consider the case of OBCs. 
The discrimination faced by the OBCs is comparable and a similar level to 
the discrimination faced by the SCs and the STs. The abhorrent and inhuman 
system of classification of human beings merely based on their birth, over which  
they obviously had no control, led to systemic oppression and discrimination. The 
effect of this systemic discrimination was not just economic, it was social and 
psychological which was the primary reason for insertion of article 16(4) in the 
Constitution. 
OBCs are constitutionally recognized to be socially backward but still there 
are no enabling provisions to provide reservations for them in promotional posts. 
Due to such non -inclusion, the OBCs are vastly unrepresented at the higher posts 
of the administration as they were never considered for promotions due to social 
status. 
Recently, Parliament has extended the benefit of reservations to forward 
castes also in the category of economically weaker sections. Due to absence of the 
aforesaid Constitu
tional mandate in promotions, the real oppressed and 
downtrodden are not brought into the mainstream till today. Mere entry into 
service is not sufficient. Only when the OBCs are duly represented in promotional 
posts, a truly representative administration could be achieved, and real substantive 
equality is enabled. 
Therefore, Article 16 of the Constitution of India must be further amended to 
grant reservations in promotional posts with consequential seniority for the 
backward classes of citizens and this wo uld result in true social justice as it would 
ensure adequate representation of the backward class of citizens in higher offices 
of the administration. 
India is a diverse nation with a rich tapestry of cultures, communities, 
genders, and religions. The pre amble of our Constitution envisions securing social 
justice for all. However, the current composition of the higher judiciary does not 
adequately reflect this diversity. The current trend in judicial appointments shows a 
low representation of socially marg inalized groups and there is significant over -
representation of certain sections. 
A representative judiciary is pivotal for fostering public confidence in the 
judiciary's ability to make sound and responsive decisions. When the judiciary 
includes Judges from all sections of society, it instills greater confidence amongst 
the public. Further, a diverse judiciary is imperative to enhance the quality of 
judicial decisions. Judges bring their personal experiences and perspectives to the 
bench, influencing how they interpret and apply the law.  

8 
A diverse judiciary is also less likely to violate the rights of underrepresented 
classes and more likely to prevent discrimination. The lack of Judges from 
historically oppressed and minority communities indicates systemic barriers that 
must be addressed.  Increasing diversity ensures that the judiciary protects the 
rights of all citizens and reflects the nation's pluralistic society. A constitutional 
mandate in this regard would ensure that the superior courts are never 
underrepresented. It is of utmost importance that equitable representation and fair 
play in the higher judiciary are secured through constitutional channels.  
The Collegium of the Justice(s) of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and Hon’ble 
High Courts is an aspect of judicial appointments which is a closed -door 
phenomenon. Having a transparent procedure for judicial appointments would 
reflect a greater faith in the Constitution and the Judiciary. An established 
Memorandum of Procedure by the Central Government in co nsultation with the 
Chief Justice of India for appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and in 
consultation with all the State Governments, Governments of Union Territories, 
the Chief Justice of India and Chief Justices of all State High Courts for 
appointment of Judges of High Courts, would ensure that there are no deviations in 
conventions and would also ensure that the judicial appointments are fair and 
transparent. Furthermore, to enhance transparency, the Collegium should also 
consider the opinion of  their respective State Governments while recommending 
names for appointment as Judges of the High Courts to the Central Government. 
Despite judicial pronouncements on the appointment of Judges calling for a 
Memorandum of Procedure, no such memorandum has been finalized till date by 
the Central Government.  
Further, when the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts have the 
power of judicial review to test the policies and laws made or enacted by the 
lawfully and democratically elected State Governments,  
it is sequitur that the 
views and opinions of the concerned State Governments be heard before making 
such appointments. After all, the State and the Central Governments are equal and 
function in the spirit of co-operative federalism. 
Therefore, this Bill seeks to amend the Constitution of India to provide for 
social diversity in the appointment of Judges to the Supreme Court and High 
Courts, proportional to the population of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and 
Other Backward Classes and to bring transparency in judicial appointments in 
higher judiciary.  Providing for reservation in judicial appointments, with an aim to 
promote social diversity, will definitely help in improving the quality of judicial 
decisions, enhancing public confidence, bringing tr
ansparency to judicial 
appointments and upholding the constitutional values of equality and inclusivity. 
Presently, the Supreme Court of India currently hears all appeals from the 
High Courts and Tribunals across India, apart from exercising original juris diction 
and writ jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. When the 
framers of our Constitution drafted Article 108A of the Draft Constitution, which 
was enacted and renumbered as Article 130, their intention was that in case the 
capital is shifted to any place other than Delhi, or if it became necessary to have 
"circuit Courts or regional Benches" of the Supreme Court, there should be a 
provision in the Constitution to enable such a need. Article 130 therefore 
empowers the Chief Justice o f India to establish regional benches of Supreme 
Court in consultation with the President for the purpose of effective delivery of 
justice.  
The framers of the Constitution, particularly Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, while 
debating Article 108-A of the Draft Constitution, which ultimately was enacted as 
Article 130, considered it appropriate to entrust the powers of establishment of 
Regional Benches to the Chief Justice of India. Since the enactment of our 
Constitution, the population of the country has grown over four times, and the 
docket of the Supreme Court has grown about 10,000 times. This is also because of 
the rapid economic and social growth of our nation.  

9 
For decades now, there has been a widespread demand from various quarters 
for the establishment of Permanent Regional Benches of the Supreme Court. Many 
representations have been made from various Bar Associations and litigants from 
across the country. The people's representatives in Parliament have also often 
raised this issue of Permanent Regional Benches of Supreme Court. The Standing 
Committees of Parliament recommended the setting up of Regional benches of the 
Supreme Court in 2004, 2005, and 2006. The Law Commission in its Report No. 
229 dated 05.08.2009 to the Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of  India has 
also emphasized the need for the establishment of "Cassation Benches" of the 
Supreme Court at New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata. 
The advantages of setting up Regional Benches are many fold: Presently, 
access to the Supreme Court is restricted to only those with the economic means to 
travel to Delhi and afford a lawyer in Delhi. This effectively rules out a large 
percentage of the population who do not have the economic means, and therefore 
can litigate only up to the High Court. In some case s, such as some categories of 
Writ Petitions, the case is heard at the first instance itself by a Division Bench of 
the High Court, and appeal against the same is only to the Supreme Court. 
Therefore, a person, who cannot afford to go to Delhi, or afford t he fees of the 
lawyers at Delhi, which is invariably higher due to demand, is left without an 
appellate remedy. Therefore, litigation at the Supreme Court is increasingly 
becoming available only to the affluent class, and the economically weaker 
sections of society are deprived of access to the Apex Court.  
Further, setting up of regional Benches of the Supreme Court would also 
increase the strength of the Bench of the Supreme Court. Presently, the ratio of 
number of Supreme Court Judges to the population o f the country and the docket 
of the Court is miniscule. There are only 34 Judges for a country with a population 
of 133 crores. Having Regional Benches would necessarily increase the Bench 
strength of the Supreme Court as well. This would need a separate a mendment to 
the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956.  
The proposed amendment divides the Supreme Court into one Constitution 
Bench at the capital, and four regional Benches. The Constitution Bench would 
hear important constitutional cases only. The discretion to classify a case as a 
constitutional case has been conferred on the Chief Justice of India. Generally, 
constitutional cases are heard and decided by a Bench of five Judges or more. 
Regional Benches have been empowered under this amendment to exercise the full 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in all matters other than Constitution cases.  
The persistent problem of backlog of cases in the higher judiciary - the High 
Courts and Supreme Court - is a matter of grave public concern. It is a well- known 
adage that justice delayed is justice denied. There are several factors which 
contribute to the inability of our higher judiciary to effectively tackle the backlog 
of cases. One of the chief causes of delay in disposing cases is the large number of 
vacancies in High Courts across the country. However, due to various reasons, this 
process is not completed on time leading to large number of vacancies as stated 
above.  
One of the ways in which this situation can be ameliorated is by increasing 
the age of re tirement of High Court Judges from 62 to 65 years. When the 
Constitution was originally enacted, article 217 (1)  fixed the age of retirement of 
High Court Judges as 60 years. Subsequently, within 13 years, it was realized that 
the human body and mind does not become so incapacitate at the age of 60 that 
Judge must retire at that age. Hence, by virtue of the Constitution (Fifteenth 
Amendment) Act, 1963, the age of retirement was increased to 62 years. From 
1963 onwards, the age of retirement has remained at 62. Over the past five 
decades, advancement in science and technology, medicine, better infrastructure 
and lifestyle has allowed Indians in other walks of life to be efficient, functional 
and work well up to the age of about 75 years.  
In these circumstances, the time has come to increase the age of retirement of 
Judges of the High Court from 62 to 65 years. This would not only help the 

10 
judicial system but also the public at large, specifically the litigants before the 
Courts. The judicial system would be greatly benefited because a person who has a 
wealth of experience under his or her belt by virtue of a long tenure in the High 
Court would continue to serve the High Court for a further period of 3 years. 
Undoubtedly, the experience of the Judge would mean that he or she is better 
suited to perform the functions of a Judge than a newly elevated Judge of the High 
Court. The wealth of judicial experience gained over a decade or so in the High 
Court cannot be replaced by a newly elevated Judge. Longer tenures a lso ensure 
impartiality of Judges - an oft -raised criticism is that Judges begin looking for 
post-retirement jobs in the last year of their service. This can be removed by 
extending their tenure by a further three years. Similarly, the litigant public is a lso 
benefited, since the occurrence of vacancies would be less frequent and 
consequently, there would be Judges to hear and dispose of cases. Such a move 
would also benefit the Government of the day, since the Government would not be 
frequently embroiled with the process of appointment of new Judges.  
In 2000, the National Commission to Review the Working of the 
Constitution (NCRWC), also known as Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah Commission, 
was set up by the then NDA Government. The said Commission submitted its 
report in the year 2002. One of the recommendations of this Commission was to 
increase age of retirement of Judges of the High Court to 65 years. In 2010, the 
Constitution (114
th Amendment) Bill was tabled to increase the retirement age of 
High Court Judges to 65 years. However, this Bill could not be passed.  
Internationally, the age of retirement of Judges is well above the current age 
of 62 years in India. The age of retirement of Judges in developed countries with 
good medical facilities and infrastru cture is around 70. The USA, Austria and 
Greece have lifetime tenure for Judges of its Supreme Court and Federal Courts. In 
the U.K., the age of retirement is presently 70, though there have been calls to 
increase it to 75. In Belgium, Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway and 
Australia, the retirement age for judges is 70 years. Judges in Canada and Germany 
retire at 75 and 68, respectively. Although India is a developing country, the 
Government provides Judges of the High Court with staff car, housing  and 
sufficient facilities like office assistants, domestic assistants, etc. Therefore, our 
Judges are definitely in a position to continue serving as Judges of the High court 
till the age of 65 years. Therefore, the Bill proposes to increase the age of 
retirement of High Court Judges by amending the Constitution Articles 217 (1) and 
224 (3).  
An objective and thorough census across the country will give a correct 
picture of the representation of castes and communities in mainstream education 
and employment. Only based on such a scientific and empirical data can we make 
targeted, effective, affirmative action policies to uplift the really backward 
communities. 
The States are not in a position to grant any reservation to any class or 
communities for want of e mpirical data and any reservation laws enacted by the 
states are being struck down by Constitutional Courts on the ground of lack of 
empirical data. Thus, the mandate of reservation by the Constitution is being 
defeated. 
The States are in need of an accurate caste census data to enact targeted 
welfare measures on the basis of caste and community. Ultimately, this leads to 
perpetuating the status quo  and social injustice. The data collected 92 years back 
cannot determine the entitlement and share of communities in this country. 
The 73 rd and 74 th constitutional amendments advocated the need of 
strengthening the local bodies and parts IX and IXA of the Constitution provided 
for a robust framework for conducting local body elections. The prime objective 
was democratic decentralization of power and participation of the oppressed and 
backward classes in governance. The amendments provided for mandatory 
reservation for Scheduled Caste and Schedule Tribe communities and women 
belonging to these communities. On the ot her hand, for backward classes, the 

11 
Articles 243-D(6) and 243-T(6) were only enabling in nature. When States have 
attempted to apply these provisions, there were legal obstacles due to which 
reservations granted to OBC communities in local bodies have been struck down 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The impediment to the States to grant OBC 
reservations was due to want of ‘empirical data’. With the advent of 105 th 
constitutional amendment and insertion of Article 342A (3), a State or a Union 
Territory can gather information for ascertaining political backwardness of the 
backward classes and can specify the proportion of the reservation required local 
body-wise and can prepare and maintain for its own purposes, a list of socially and 
educationally backward classes.  
However, the entry 69 in List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution 
empowers only the Union to conduct census. Since, a State or a Union Territory is 
not empowered to conduct their own census, the 
population of each class or 
community on the basis of local units cannot be ascertained by the States and 
consequentially, maintaining an accurate head count based upon the list of 
backward classes contemplated under Article 342A(3) would not be possible. 
The objectives of democratic decentralization are not only to bring 
governance closer to the people, but also to make it more participatory, inclusive 
and accountable to the weaker sections of the society. Reservations in local self -
government are intended to directly benefit the community as a whole rather than 
just the elected representatives. Despite the fact that Parts IX and IXA were 
introduced in the Constitution 30 years ago, reservation in politics and sharing of 
political power is still a distant dream, leaving the OBCs unrepresented in the local 
self-governments.  
Therefore, placing the entry “census” in the Concurrent List would enable 
both the Union and the States to conduct their own census. The power to conduct a 
headcount by the States themsel ves will not only be useful for maintaining an 
accurate list of all classes including backward classes under A rticle 342A(3), and 
collect empirical data of communities on the basis of the local units and to grant 
reservations in local bodies, but also for other targeted welfare measures. This will 
enable the States to implement appropriate affirmative and welfare measures for all 
castes and communities based upon their due entitlement and share. The States can 
then grant reservations in accordance with this  
data, which would be 
constitutionally and legally tenable and therefore avoid judicial intervention in the 
grant of reservations. 
Hence, this Bill. 
P. WILSON.

12 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of four Permanent Regional 
Benches of the Supreme Court at New Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata and Mumbai. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India for creation of Regional  Benches of Supreme Court at Chennai, Kolkata and 
Mumbai which includes land cost, construction,  infrastructure, staff and other 
expenditure. It is likely to involve an initial expenditure of  rupees six hundred 
crores for establishment of Benches including infrastructure and annual  recurring 
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crores from the Consolidated Fund of  
India. 

13 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
* *  * *  * 
15. * *  * *  * 
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State
from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes. 
* *  * *  * 
Prohibition of 
discrimination 
on grounds of 
religion, race, 
caste, sex or 
place of birth.
16. * *  * *  * 
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of 
citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the 
services under the State.  
(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision 
for reservation 3 [in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any 
class] or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled 
Ca
stes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not 
adequately represented in the services under the State 
* *  * *  * 
Equality of 
opportunity in 
matters of 
public 
employment.
130. * *  * *  * 
The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the 
Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, 
appoint. 
* *  * *  * 
Seat of 
Supreme 
Court.
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(Article 246)  
List I—Union List 
* *  * *  * 
69. Census
* *  * *  * 
Li
st III—Concurrent List 
* *  * *  * 
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees
taken in any court. 
* *  * *  *

RAJYA SABHA 
____
___ 
A
BIL
L 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
____
___ 
(Shri P. Wilson , M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—081—10.02.2026.