THE  SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES
(COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION AND FILLING UP
OF RESERVED V ACANCIES) BILL,  2015
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory notification and filling up of vacancies reserved for persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in services and posts
under the Central Government and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Compulsory Notification and Filling up of Reserved Vacancies) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointing authority" means the authority empowered to make appointment
in relation to a service or a post in the offices under the Central Government and
includes all establishments which are wholly owned or managed by the Central
Government or in which fifty-one per cent shares are held by the Central Government.
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. XV of 2015
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH APRIL, 2015

2
Compulsory
notification of
vacancies
reserved for
the Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes.
(c) "vacancy" means vacancy in a service or a post reserved for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the offices under the Central Government or in
establishments which are wholly owned or managed by the Central Government or in
which fifty-one per cent. shares are held by the Central Government.
3. (1) Every appointing authority shall, within one month of the existence of a vacancy,
compulsorily notify that vacancy.
(2) The vacancies referred to in sub-section (1),—
(a) besides being notified by the Employment Exchange, shall also be notified in such
newspapers, including vernacular newspapers, as may be prescribed; and
(b) shall be given wide publicity on State run and other media channels.
4. (1) Every vacancy notified under section 3 shall be filled within six months from the
date of notification.
(2) Every unfilled vacancy shall be carried forward till such vacancy is filled by the
candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be and in
no case shall be deserved.
5. Where any person responsible for implementing the provisions of the Act,
intentionally contravenes any of the provisions thereof, he shall be subject to such
disciplinary action as may be prescribed and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less
than fifty thouand rupees.
6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by  order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Penalty.
Compulsory
filling of
vacancies
reserved for
the Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In spite of various measures taken by the Government including special drive launched
to fill the vacancies reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, it has been observed that the vacancies meant for these persons remain
unfilled and after some attempts, vacancies are deserved on the ground that eligible candidates
are not available to fill the vacancies. It has, therefore, become necessary that legislation
should be brought forward to fix the responsibility of the appointing authority and the
officer concerned to take steps from time to time to compulsorily notify and fill the vacant
posts meant for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. In
case, the officer responsible fails to take steps to fill the vacancy within a reasonable time,
disciplinary action may be initiated against such officer in addition to a fine of rupees fifty
thousand.
Hence this Bill.
P. L. PUNIA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for compulsory notification and publicity of vacancies
reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Hence, the Bill, if enacted, will involve
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to
quantify the exact amount.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory notification and filling up of vacancies reserved for persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in services and posts
under the Central Government and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri P.L. Punia, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—555RS(S3)—27-04-2015.