1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), in sub-section (7), after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that no association or body shall be registered as a political party
under this sub-section, if the association or body by its conducts propagates or preaches,
directly or indirectly any communal hatred or sectarian views against the people in violation
of spirit of Constitution; or
Bill No. XV  of  2014
Short title and
Commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section
29A.
43 of 1951. 5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 25TH JULY, 2014

2
Amendment
of section 30.
3. In section 30 of the principal Act, after clause (e), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that Election Commission shall not make model code of conduct, applicable
or enforceable, before the first day fixed for filing of nomination for elections conducted by
the Commission."
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The recognition to an association or body of citizen as political party is given by
Election Commission under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. An
association or body which propagates communal hatred or sectarian views may apply for
grant of recognition under section 29A. The copy of rules and regulations and memorandum
of association, they file in the office of Election Commission do not necessarily represent
their true intent. During elections, their true agenda comes in open and their language and
actions tend to be in total violation of principles enunciated in the Constitution of India and
in total disregard to the oath the candidates of these parties take before the respective
returning officers. Election Commission lays stress on the code of conduct instead of
provisions of Indian Penal Code and the provisions of the Representation of the People Act.
Withdrawal of recognition has been made a part of the Election Symbols (Reservation and
Allotment) Order, 1968 rather making a statutory provision with respect to the same. As of
now, there is no clear provision in the law for such association of citizen. In order to bring
purity and respectability to the election campaign and to ensure that the provisions of the
Constitution of India are obeyed in letter and spirit, amendments to section 29A of the parent
Act is proposed to stop the entry of such association or body into parties.
Further as per the practice, the Election Commission makes the model code of conduct
applicable by holding a press conference on the same day on which the entire schedule of
dates of filing of nomination, scrutiny of nomination and withdrawal of candidature, etc. Last
General Elections were held in nine phases and the model code of conduct was made
applicable quite ahead of the first date fixed for filing of nomination in the first phase and had
been in force till the final phase was completed and announcement of results. Many
development works undertaken by the appropriate Governments suffer immensely on account
of long and unjustified duration of enforcement of code of conduct. The legality of code of
conduct is a grey area as there is no law to deal with this subject. Election Commission is of
the view that code of conduct was voluntarily arrived at by political parties and thereby the
authorities cannot act, if it is violated. In fact it is not voluntary but every para of code of
conduct is covered under the sections of Indian Penal Code and Representation of the
People Act, 1951 and other related laws. As a result to restrict the total period during which
the Commission can make the code applicable amendment is proposed to section 30 of the
parent Act.
Hence, this Bill.
SHANTARAM  NAIK
3

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
—————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1760RS(S3)—25.07.2014.