1
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 2019.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. For section 89 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"89. Any manufacturer, service provider, advertiser, advertising agency or
endorser who causes a false or misleading or surrogate advertisement to be made
which is prejudicial to the interest of consumers shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh
rupees; and for every subsequent offence, be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees."
Bill No. XV of  2023
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution
of section 89.
Punishment
for false or
misleading
advertisement.
5
10
35 of 2019

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The medium of surrogate advertising and brand extensions have often been resorted
to for promoting products whose advertising is otherwise prohibited or restricted by law.
The practice of roping in influential celebrities holding mass appeal to further expand the
reach of such products through this medium has now become common. With the growing
reach of social media, surrogate advertising has seen a considerable rise in India. Even
public events such as festivals and sports matches are now being leveraged to promote such
products via surrogate advertising.
2. More often than not, brands use celebrities for the purpose of surrogate advertising,
who due to their mass popularity have the ability to influence the buying decisions of the
public in a negative manner. Studies show that surrogate advertisements wherein products
are endorsed by celebrities can act as a catalyst for people to purchase such products. This
impact is more severe among children and youth, who may get swayed by the mass appeal of
the endorser without having an appropriate understanding of the risks associated with the
product.
3. In this regard, Guidelines for Prevention of Misleading Advertisements and
Endorsement for Misleading Advertisements, 2022, have been brought into force recently to
prohibit surrogate advertising, among other things. They also prescribe duties of
manufacturer, service provider, advertiser and advertising agency as well as  standards of
due diligence to be followed by endorsers. While the guidelines are a step in the right
direction, they do not impose any strict penalty on the manufacturer, service provider,
advertiser, advertising agency and endorsers. The lack of an effective deterrent has resulted
in surrogate advertising continuing unabated.
4. The parent Act, i.e., the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 does prescribe a penalty for
false and misleading advertisements under section 89, which may be extended to surrogate
advertisements as well. However, this penalty is restricted to the manufacturer or service
provider and hence, does not extend to the advertiser, advertising agency or endorser of the
surrogate advertisement. It is imperative that an equal penalty be placed on the advertiser,
advertising agency and endorser of the surrogate advertisement, which will serve as a
significant deterrent for such individuals/entities and ensure the welfare of the consumers at
large.
5. Therefore, this Bill proposes to amend Section 89 of the Consumer Protection Act,
2019 by extending the punishment for false and misleading advertisements to advertisers,
advertising agencies and endorsers.
Hence, this Bill.
V. VIJAYASAI   REDDY
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019
(NO. 35 OF 2019)
* * * * *
89. Any manufacturer or service provider who causes a false or misleading advertisement
to be made which is prejudicial to the interest of consumers shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to ten
lakh rupees; and for every subsequent offence, be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
* * * * *
Punishment
for false or
misleading
advertisement.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 2019.
————
( Shri V . Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—055 —08-12-2023.