AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XV of 2025 
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:—  
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It sh all  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in t he Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment 
of section 53. 
2. In the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, in the Explanation to section
53, after clause (ii), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(iii) the Central or the State Government shall not be classified as a 
secured creditor unless a security interest has been created pursuant to a 
transaction of the Central Government or a State Government with the 
corporate debtor”.   
5 
31 of 2016. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, was enacted to 
consolidate and amend the laws relating to reorganisation and insolvency 
resolution of corporate persons, partnership firms, individuals and to 
achieve the desired objectives under it. The Code was amended in the past 
to deal with the emerging market realities and to achieve certainty to the 
various processes under the law.  
2. Section 53 of the Code establishes the waterfall mechanism for the
distribution of liquidation proceeds, prioritizing secured creditors while
ensuring equitable treatment of all claimants. This mechanism is
foundational to the liquidation process and the sale of assets of a corporate
debtor.
3. The Code was designed to grant favorable treatment to financial
creditors, recognizing their critical role in funding and supporting
businesses. By definition, government dues are not categorized as financial
debt under the Code. However, ambiguities in the interpretation of the term
“secured creditor” has led to the classification of statutory dues, including
those owed to the State and Central Governments, as secured debts. This
broad interpretation distorts the equitable distribution intended by the Code,
effectively elevating statutory creditors over operational creditors and other
stakeholders. Such an outcome undermines the certainty and fairness of the
insolvency resolution framework, creating disincentives for investments
and delaying resolutions.
4. Th e inclusion of government dues as secured debts contradicts the
principles underlying the waterfall mechanism by allowing statutory
creditors to circumvent their designated priority under Section 53. This not
only skews the intended balance but also risks the rejection of resolution
plans that do not account for inflated statutory claims, thereby frustrating
the Code’s objectives of timely and effective resolution.
5. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs seems to have recognised this issue
as far back as 2023. As per the contents of a discussion paper, only where
the security interest is created pursuant to a transaction of the Central
Government or a State Government with corporate debtor, the Government
in question will continue to be treated as a secured creditor in the order of
priority.
6. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill, 2025 which
seeks to amend the Code, provides for the following, namely: —
I. Clarify that the State or Central Government shall not be classified
as secured creditors for the purposes of Section 53 unless a security
interest has been created pursuant to a transaction of the Central
Government or a State Government with the corporate debtor. This
amendment aims to restore the intent of the legislature by ensuring
that statutory dues are treated in accordance with their designated
priority, thereby upholding the principles of equity and
predictability essential for an efficient insolvency regime.

4 
II. Eliminate ambiguity, foster trust among stakeholders, and
strengthen the insolvency resolution process by reaffirming the
equitable distribution of liquidation proceeds in alignment with the
Code’s objectives. By providing this clarity, the proposed change
will enhance India’s insolvency framework, making it more
efficient and conducive to economic growth.
The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives. 
 SASMIT PATRA. 

5 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSOLVENCY AND 
BANKRUPTCY CODE, 2016 
 (31 OF 2016) 
* *   * *  * 
CHAPTER III 
LIQUIDATION PROCESS
 * *   * *  * 
53. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law enacted
by the Parliament or any State Legislature for the time being in force, the
proceeds from the sale of the liquidation assets shall be distributed in the
following order of priority and within such period and in such manner as may
be specified, namely:—
(a) the insolvency resolution process costs and the liquidation costs
paid in full; 
(b) the following debts which shall rank equally between and among
the following:— 
(i) workmen’s dues for the period of twenty -four months
preceding the liquidation commencement date; and 
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor in the event such secured
creditor has relinquished security in the manner set out in section 
52; 
(c) wages and any unpaid dues owed to employees other than
workmen for the period of twelve months preceding the liquidation 
commencement date; 
(d) financial debts owed to unsecured creditors;
(e) the following dues shall rank equally between and among the
following:— 
(i) any amount due to the Central Government and the State
Government including the amount to be received on account of 
the Consolidated Fund of India and the Consolidated Fund of a 
State, if any, in respect of the whole or any part of the period of 
two years preceding the liquidation commencement date; 
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor for any amount unpaid
following the enforcement of security interest; 
(f) any remaining debts and dues;
(g) preference shareholders, if any; and
(h) equity shareholders or partners, as the case may be.
(2) Any contractual arrangements between recipients under sub -
section (1) with equal ranking, if disrupting the order of priority under that
sub-section shall be disregarded by the liquidator.
(3) The fees payable to the liquidator shall be deducted proportionately from
the proceeds payable to each class of recipients under sub-section (1), and the
proceeds to the relevant recipient shall be distributed after such deduction.
Distribution 
of Assets.

6 
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section— 
(i) it is hereby clarified that at each stage of the distribution of
proceeds in respect of a class of recipients that rank equally, each of the 
 debts will either be paid in full, or will be paid in equal proportion within 
the same class of recipients, if the proceeds are insufficient to meet the 
debts in full; and 
(ii) the term “workmen’s dues” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 326 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) 
* *         *        * *

RAJYA SABHA 
____
___ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 
_______ 
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS―PMB(E)―279―08.12.2025 