THE MINIMUM WAGES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth year of the Republic of India as follows:
1. (1) This Act may be called the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the prinicpal
Act),—
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:
"(b) "appropriate Government" means—
Bill No. XV of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 12TH JULY, 2019
11 of 1948. 5 Amendment   of
section 2.
Short title and
commencement.

2
(i) in relation to any scheduled or unscheduled employment carried
on by or under the authority of the Central Government or a railway
administration, or in relation to a mine, oilfield or major port, or any
corporation established by a Central Act, the Central Government, and
(ii) in relation to any other scheduled or unscheduled employment,
the State Government."
(ii) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely,—
"(e) "employer" means any person who employs, whether directly or
through another person, or whether on behalf of himself or any other person,
one or more employees in any scheduled or unscheduled employment in respect
of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, and includes,
except in sub-section (3) of section 26,—
(i) in a factory where there is carried on any scheduled or
unscheduled employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages
have been fixed under this Act, any person named under clause (f) of sub-
section (1) of section 7 of the Factories Act, 1948 as manager of the factory;
(ii) in any scheduled or unscheduled employment under the control
of any Government in India in respect of which minimum rates of wages
have been fixed under this Act, the person or authority appointed by such
Government for the supervision and control of employees or where no
person or authority is so appointed, the head of the department;
(iii) in any scheduled or unscheduled employment under any local
authority in respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed
under this Act, the person appointed by such authority for the supervision
and control of employees or where no person is so appointed, the chief
executive officer of the local authority;
(iv) in any other case where there is carried on any scheduled or
unscheduled employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages
have been fixed under this Act, any person responsible to the owner for
the supervision and control of the employees or for the payment of wages;"
(iii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely,—
"unscheduled employment" means an employment which is not listed in
the Schedule, including all types of causal and contract labour."
(iv) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely,—
"(i) "employee" means any person who is employed for hire or reward to
do any work, skilled or unskilled, manual or clerical, in a scheduled or
unscheduled employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages have
been fixed; and includes an out-worker to whom any articles or materials are
given out by another person to be made up, cleaned, washed, altered, ornamented,
finished, repaired, adapted or otherwise processed for sale for the purposes of
the trade or business of that other person where the process is to be carried out
either in the home of the out-worker or in some other premises not being premises
under the control and management of that other person; and also includes an
employee declared to be an employee by the appropriate Government; but does
not include any member of the Armed Forces of the Union."
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, (i) in sub-section (i), in clause (a) after the proviso
the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that the minumum rates of wages fixed in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, shall not less than eighteen thousand rupees per month.”:
Amendment   of
section 3.
63 of 1948.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Provided also that, for any employment not specified in Part I or Part II of the Schedule,
the minimum wage shall not be less than eighteen thousand rupees per month."
(ii) in sub-section (1A) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that, where the appropriate Government has refrained from fixing the minimum
rates of wages as aforesaid, the minimum wage that is paid by the employer shall not be less
than eighteen thousand rupees per month."
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(3) The procedures referred to in sub-section (1) shall be undertaken at least
once every five years, from the date of the coming into force of this provision."
5. In section 8 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(2) The Central Advisory Board shall consist of persons to be nominated by the
Central Government representing employers and employees in the scheduled and unscheduled
employments, who shall be equal in number, and independent persons not exceeding
one-third of its total number of members, including at least one economist of repute; one of
such independent persons shall be appointed the Chairman of the Board by the Central
Government."
6. In section 12 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2) the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 12 shall apply mutatis mutandis
to unscheduled employment, for which no notification under section 5 is in force."
7. In section 18 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) Every employer shall keep exhibited, in such manner as may be prescribed,
in the factory, workshop or place where the employees in the scheduled or unscheduled
employment may be employed, or in the case of out-workers, in such factory, workshop
or place as may be used for giving out-work to them, notices in the prescribed form
containing prescribed particulars."
8. For section 21 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"21. (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, a single application may be
presented under section 20 on behalf or in respect of any number of employees
employed in the scheduled or unscheduled employment in respect of which minimum
rates of wages have been fixed and in such cases the maximum compensation which
may be awarded under sub-section (3) of section 20 shall not exceed ten times the
aggregate amount of such excess or ten rupees per head, as the case may be.
(2) The Authority may deal with any number of separate pending applications
presented under section 20 in respect of employees in the scheduled or unscheduled
employments in respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed, as a single
application presented under sub-section (1) of this section and the provisions of that
sub-section shall apply accordingly."
9. In section 26 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (2) and (2A), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) The appropriate Government may, if for special reasons it thinks so fit, by
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that subject to such conditions and for such
period as it may specify the provisions of this Act or any of them shall not apply to all
Amendment   of
section 5.
Amendment   of
section 8.
Amendment   of
section 12.
Amendment   of
section 18.
Amendment   of
section 21.
Single
application in
respect of a
number of
employees.
Amendment   of
section 26.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
or any class of employees employed in any scheduled or unscheduled employment or
to any locality where there is carried on scheduled or unscheduled employment.
(2A) The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that, having regard to
the terms and conditions of service applicable to any class of employees in a scheduled
or unscheduled employment generally or in a scheduled or unscheduled employment
in a local area or to any establishment or a part of any establishement in a scheduled or
unscheduled employment, it is not necessary to fix minimum wages in respect of such
employees of that class or in respect of employees in such establishment or such part
of any establishment as are in receipt of wages exceeding such limit as may be
prescribed in this behalf, direct, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to
such conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose, that the provisions of this Act or
any of them shall not apply in relation to such employees."
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Minimum Wages Act of 1948 was enacted to provide a floor rate of wages that
would allow all workers to lead a dignified life. It has been found that by virtue of the
limited coverage afforded by the Act, vast swathes of employment are left outside its
provisions. Due to the rise in Consumer Price Index (CPI) over the recent years, workers
across the country have been finding it difficult to lead a life that provides them the dignity
as envisaged in the Constitution under Article 21. This has affected the lakhs of contract
labourers and casual workers whose salary is not even connected to the CPI. Trade unions
across the country have been demanding a minimum wage of rupees eighteen thousand
across all sectors of employment which was also recommended by the Seventh Pay
Commission.
The Seventh Pay Commission Report recommended that the minimum wage for
government employees be fixed at rupees eighteen thousand per month. In view of the
recommendation of the Seventh Pay Commission, the objective of this Bill is to bring non-
governmental workers at par with government employees, by fixing a floor minimum wage
of rupees eighteen thousand, and also to extend the reach of the Act to hitherto unprotected
sections of the workforce, by making its provisions applicable to employment that is not
covered under the Schedule.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
BINOY VISWAM
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The provisions of the Bill provide that under no circumstances the minimum rates of
wages shall be less than eighteen thousand rupees per month in any Scheduled or unscheduled
employment. As the Central Govt. is also one category of an employer under the Principal
Act, it is estimated that an amount of Rupees Five Hundred crores per annum approximately
would be required for the purpose which would be of recurring nature and will be met from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948
(11 OF 1948)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
* * * * *
(b) "appropriate Government" means,—
(i) in relation to any scheduled employment carried on by or under the
authority of the [Central Government or a railway administration], or in relation
to a mine, oilfield or major port, or any corporation established by
 [a Central
Act], the Central Government, and
(ii) in relation to any other scheduled employment, the State Government;
* * * * *
(e) "employer" means any person who employs, whether directly or through
another person, or whether on behalf of himself or any other person, one or more
employees in any scheduled employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages
have been fixed under this Act, and includes, except in sub-section (3) of section
26,—
(i) in a factory where there is carried on any scheduled employment in
respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, any
person named under [clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Factories
Act, 1948 (63 of 1948)], as manager of the factory;
(ii)...................................
(iii)..................................
(iv)...................................
* * * * *
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in the manner hereinafter provided,—
[(a) fix the minimum rates of wages payable to employees employed in an
employment specified in Part I or Part II of the Schedule and in an employment added
to either Part by notification under section 27:
Provided that the appropriate Government may, in respect of employees
employed in an employment specified in Part II of the Schedule, instead of fixing
minimum rates of wages under this clause for the whole State, fix such rates for a part
of the State or for any specified class or classes of such employment in the whole State
or par thereof;]
(IA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I), the appropriate
Government may refrain from fixing minimum rates of wages in respect of any
scheduled employment in which there are in the whole State less than one thousand
employees engaged in such employment, but if at any time, *** the appropriate
Government comes to a finding after such inquiry as it may make or cause to be made
in this behalf that the number of employees in any scheduled employment in respect
of which it has refrained from fixing minimum rates of wages has risen to one thousand
or more, it shall fix minimum rates of wages payable to employees in such employment
[as soon as may be after such finding].]
* * * * *
7
Interpretation.
Fixing of
minimum rates
of wages.

8
8. (1) For the purpose of advising the Central and State Governments in the matters of
the fixation and revision of minimum rates of wages and other matters under this Act and for
co-ordinating the work of the Advisory Boards, the Central Government shall appoint a
Central Advisory Board.
(2) The Central Advisory Board shall consist of persons to be nominated by the
Central Government representing employees and employees in the scheduled employments,
who shall be equal in number, and independent persons not exceeding one-third of its total
number of members; one of such independent persons shall be appointed the Chairman of
the Board by the Central Government.
* * * * *
12. (1) Where in respect of any scheduled employment a notification under
section 5 is in force, the employer shall pay to every employee engaged in a scheduled
employment under him wages at a rate not less than the minimum rate of wages fixed by
such notification for that class of employees in that employment without any deductions
except as may be authorised within such time and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions of the Payment of
Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).
* * * * *
18. (1) Every employer shall maintain such registers and records giving such particulars
of employees employed by him, the work performed by them, the wages paid to them, the
receipts given by them and such other particulars and in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) Every employer shall keep exhibited, in such manner as may be prescribed, in the
factory, workshop or place where the employees in the scheduled employment may be
employed, or in the case of out-workers, in such factory, workshop or place as may be used
for giving out-work to them, notices in the prescribed form containing prescribed particulars.
(3) The appropriate Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the
issue of wage books or wage slips to employees employed in any scheduled employment in
respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed and prescribe the manner in
which entries shall be made and authenticated in such wage books or wage slips by the
employer or his agent.
* * * * *
21. (1) [Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, a single application] may be
presented under section 20 on behalf or in respect of any number of employees employed in
the scheduled employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed and
in such cases the maximum compensation which may be awarded under sub-section (3) of
section 20 shall not exceed ten times the aggregate amount of such excess [or ten rupees
per head, as the case may be].
(2) The Authority may deal with any number of separate pending applications presented
under section 20 in respect of employees in the scheduled employments in respect of which
minimum rates of wages have been fixed, as a single application presented under sub-section
(1) of this section and the provisions of that sub-section shall apply accordingly.
* * * * *
26. (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to such conditions if any as it may
think fit to impose, direct that the provisions of this Act shall not apply in relation to the
wages payable to disabled employees.
(2) The appropriate Government may, if for special reasons it thinks so fit, by
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that [subject to such conditions and] for such
period as it may specify the provisions of this Act or any of them shall not apply to all or any
Central
Advisory
Board.
Payment of
minimum rates
of wages.
Maintenance
of registers and
records.
Single
application in
respect of a
number of
employees.
Exemptions
and
exceptions.

9
class of employees employed in any scheduled employment or to any locality where there is
carried on a scheduled employment.
[(2A) The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that, having regard to
the terms and conditions of service applicable to any class of employees in a scheduled
employment generally or in a scheduled employment in a local area [or to any
establishment or a part of any establishment in a scheduled employment], it is not
necessary to fix minimum wages in respect of such employees of that class [or in
respect of employees in such establishment or such part of any establishment] as are
in receipt of wages exceeding such limit as may be prescribed in this behalf, direct, by
notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, if any, as it may
think fit to impose, that the provisions of this Act or any of them shall not apply in
relation to such employees.]
(3) Nothing in this Act shall apply to the wages payable by an employer to a
member of his family who is living with him and is dependent on him.
Explanation.—In this sub-section a member of the employer's family shall be
deemed to include his or her spouse or child or parent or brother or sister.
* * * * *

RAJYA SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Minimum Wages Act, 1948
—————
(Shri Binoy Viswam, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1576RS(S3)—15-07-2019.