1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill  No.  XV  of  2007
THE HERBAL MEDICINES (REGULATION OF PRODUCTION,
DISTRIBUTION, SALE AND ADVERTISEMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of production, distribution, sale and advertisement of
herbal medicines in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Herbal Medicines (Regulation of Production,
Distribution, Sale and Advertisement) Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "advertisement" means any visible representation by way of notice, circular,
label, wrapper or other document and also includes any announcement orally or
otherwise;
(b) "distribution" includes distribution or supply of herbal medicines by way
of sample;
(c) "herbal medicine" means any formulation of a medicine being used in
Ayurvedic and Homoeopathy system of medicine which has been mentioned in any
of the ancient text notified by the Central Government under the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940.
(d) "label" means any written marked stamped, printed or graphic matter fixed
to or appearing upon any package;
(e) "licence" means licences to be obtained to produce, supply, distribute and
sell herbal medicines from the Drugs Controller of India.
(f) "package" includes wrapper, box, carton, tin or other container;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) "production" means manufacturing or producing medicines and includes
packing, labeling of containers of herbal medicines;
(i) "sale" means sale of herbal medicine in any shop without any licence.
3. (1) Every person engaged in the production and distribution of herbal medicines
shall obtain a licence to produce and distribute the herbal medicines.
(2) No person shall sell, or permit sale of herbal medicines to any other person
without licence.
4. No person engaged in the production, distribution and sale of herbal medicines
shall advertise such medicines and no person having control over a medium shall cause to
be advertised herbal medicine through that medium unless accompanied by a licence under
this Act.
5. (1) No person shall produce, distribute or sell herbal medicines unless every package
of herbal medicine bears thereon or on its label the list of ingredients of each content along
with its accurate quantity.
(2) Any side effects of the herbal medicine and warning of contraindication shall be
displayed on its label in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. ( 1) The specified ingredients and warning on a package of herbal medicines
shall be:—
(a) legible and prominent;
(b) conspicuous by size and colour.
(2) The size of letters and figures on the label shall be such as may be prescribed by the
rules.
7. (1) Any police officer, not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police or
any officer of Drug Administration authorized by the Central Government may if he has any
reason to suspect that any provision of this Act has been or is being contravened, enter and
search in the manner prescribed, at any reasonable time, any factory building and business
premises.
(2) The provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, shall apply to every search and
seizure made under this Act.
(3) If the police officer and the person authorized by the Central Government referred
in sub-section (1) has reason to believe that any provision of this Act has been contravened
Definitions.
Mandatory
licence to
produce and
distribute
herbal
medicines.
Packet of herbal
medicines to
have a list of
ingredients and
warning of
contraindica-
tions.
Warning on
package to be
legible and clear.
Power to search
and seizure.
Prohibition of
advertisement
of herbal
medicines.

3
in respect of any package of herbal medicine, he may seize such package in such manner as
may be prescribed.
8. (1) Any package of herbal medicines in respect of which any provision of this Act
has been contravened shall be liable to be confiscated by an order of the Court of
jurisdiction.
(2) No order adjudging confiscation shall be made unless the owner or the person in
possession of the package of herbal medicine has been given a notice in writing informing
him of the grounds, on which it is proposed to be confiscated and giving him a reasonable
opportunity of being heard and make representation in such manner as may be prescribed.
9. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall on conviction, be punishable—
(a) in the case of first conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees or with both.
(b) in the case of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term,
which may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non bailable.
11. Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act
or of any rule made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company, for the conduct of
business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contraventioin took place without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means any body corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
12. All offences under this Act shall be tried summarily in the manner prescribed for
summary trial under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, 1973.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
14. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to herbal medicines.
15. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Confiscation of
package.
Penalty.
Offences by
companies.
Summary trial
Power to
remove
difficulties
Overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Of late, the herbal medicines have acquired a significant role in treating various
kind of diseases in the country. The market is flooded with all kinds of traditional and
herbal medicines. Some of these herbal medicines are imported from various neighbouring
countries which are claimed to be made of various parts of tiger or some other animal or
their formulations are based on ancient text in their countries. There are reports that many
of these medicines are containing steroids and heavy metals which are very harmful to
human body.
Similarly, advertisement of these medicines is also a big business. The broadcaster
without realising the side effects of various herbal drugs which are meant to reduce weight
or increase height or sexual desire, advertise them in their channel for earning money.
The laws in our country is such that if someone says that formulation of his medicine
is based on the ancient text he does not require any licence to sell and produce that medicine.
The unscrupulous elements in the society are making use of this loophole in the law and
are producing and selling spurious herbal medicines without any licence.
Although there are many reputed and good companies which are producing and selling
class products of herbal medicines but then there are many fly by night operators who are
fleecing the innocent people.
Many countries in the world have banned these herbal drugs which claim to reduce
weight, increase height, grow hair, etc. when they detected harmful elements in those
drugs.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to have a law on the regulation of sale, production,
supply, distribution and advertisement of herbal drugs to save the citizens from their harmful
effects.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers is
of normal character.
5

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of production, distribution, sale and advertisement of herbal
medicines in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Mahendra  Mohan,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1221RS (S5)—16-03-2007.