AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XV of 2000.

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title.
2. In clause (2) of article 324 of the Constitution, after the words "be made by the Amendment of
5 President" the following words shall be added, namely:— article 324

“on the recommendation of a Committee consisting of the Chairman of the
Council of States, the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India, the Speaker of the
House of the People and the Minister in charge of Law and Justice.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In order to ensure that the decision and directions of the Election Commission which
is entrusted with the function of conducting elections to Parliament and various Legislatures
inspire confidence and receive universal approbation and acceptance by the various political
parties and the vast majority of the electorate, it is considered essential to restructure the
method of appointment of the members of the Election Commission who are presently
appointed by the President on the recommendations of the Prime Minister. To keep the
members of the Election Commission beyond the pale of political din, it is necessary that
some of the top constitutional functionaries are involved in the selection process of the
Chief Election Commissioner and other members of the Election Commission.

The Bill seeks to achieve this object through an appropriate amendment of article 324
of the Constitution.

P. PRABHAKAR REDDY


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * *

324, (1)* * * *

(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner and
such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the President; may from time to
time fix and the appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election
Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament,
be made by the President.

* * *

direction &
control of
elections to be
vested in an
Election
Commussion.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3970RS—29-02-2000.