As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XV of 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

5 2. In article 84 of the Constitution, for clause (b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—

“(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than twenty five
years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty
one years of age; and”

10 3. In article 173 of the Constitution, for clause (b) the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—

“(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty one
years of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than twenty
five years of age; and”

Short title
and com-
mencement.

Amendment
of article 84.

Amendment
of article 173,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In the year 1988 the Government under the dynamic Prime Ministership of late
Shri Rajiv Gandhi took a historic decision to lower the voting age of citizens from twenty one
years to eighteen years which proved as a milestone in the annals of Parliamentary democracy
in our country. Accordingly in the month of December 1988, Parliament unanimously passed
the Constitution (Sixty-first Amendment) Bill, 1988 to give effect to the historic decision of
the Government of the day. This was a step of momentous importance as it enabled millions
of our youth to directly participate in the democratic process of choosing their own
Government. The youth of the country has also shown their maturity in the recently held
general elections, mid-term election and by-elections in this regard. This maturity qualifies
the youth to become the representatives ‘of the people as well. It is, therefore, equally
important to reduce the qualifying age to become legislators. In fact it could have been
reduced simultaneously while passing the Constitution (Sixty-first Amendment) Bill, 1988
but still it is better late than never.

Hence it is proposed to reduce the minimum age to become a member of Lok Sabha and
Legislative Assembly from the existing 25 years to 21 years and to become a Member of
Rajya Sabha and Legislative Council from the existing 30 years to 25 years. This will enable
our youth to directly participate in the governance of the country.

Hence this Bill.

SURESH PACHOURI


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
ee Pery ee
84. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless
he—
ee aoe ee
(6) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty years of age and,
in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty-five years of age; and
के ae ee
173. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislature of a
State unless he—
कक ee केक
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty-five

years of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than thirty
years of age; and

Qualification
for member-
ship of
Parliament.

Qualification
for member-
ship of the
State

« Legistature


RAJYA SABHA

a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6412RS—15.2 2001.