THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2011.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution,—
(i) for sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 1, the following sub-paragraph shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(a) 'House' means either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly
or as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State and includes
Regional and District Council constituted under the Sixth Schedule of the
Constitution;"
(ii) in paragraph 5, after the words "the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly of a State", the words "the Chairman or Deputy Chairman of the Council
formed under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution" shall be inserted.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XVI  of  2011
Amendment
of the Tenth
Schedule.
5
10
15

2
(iii) after sub-paragraph (2) of  paragraph 6, the following sub-paragraph shall
be inserted, namely: —
"(3) The proceedings of the Council constituted under the Sixth Schedule
shall not be called in question in any court on the ground of any alleged irregularity
of procedure."
(iv) after sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 8, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that the rules for the Council constituted under the Sixth
Schedule shall be framed with the approval of the Governor of the  concerned
State".
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are several autonomous regions in India to which Central Government has given
varying degrees of autonomy within the state legislature. The establishment and functions
of these autonomous councils are based on the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India.
The Sixth Schedule contains provisions as to the administration of tribal areas in the
states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. This law gives enormous freedom to the
autonomous regions and districts in terms of legislative and executive power. The law provides
that each autonomous region shall have its own Autonomous Regional Council and every
autonomous district shall have its own Autonomous District Council  in which the
administration of as autonomous district and region shall be vested respectively. The District
Councils are Autonomous bodies with the objectives of framing laws to safeguard the rights
and interest of the indigenous Tribal people within their jurisdiction.
The Elections to these Autonomous District Council are held at every five years
interval and the elections to each and every constituency of the District Councils are intensely
contested by the political parties of respective States. The national parties also take a keen
interest in the Autonomous District Council elections and often do have a prominent presence
in these autonomous council bodies.  The results of  the District Council elections are often
clear indicators to the political atmosphere of the State and are considered to be a preview to
the Assembly and Parliamentary elections.
For many years and even in recent times, many of the Autonomous District Councils
have witnessed unfortunate experiences of  horse-trading, defections and members' switching
of loyalties from one political party to another political  party because the anti-defection law
under the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution is not applicable to the Members of the
Districts Council(s). As a result, the aspirations of the local  indigenous people and mandate
of the public are clearly ignored and the selfish interests of the elected members take
precedence.
In the absence of the Anti-defection law in the District Councils, the elected members
have the liberty to leave the political party under whose principles and symbol he or she was
elected; then chose to join any other political party which is presently in power and return  to
his or her parent party at whim, or join some other party which is likely to come to power.
These actions of  the elected members create instability in the District Councils and the
very purpose of safeguarding the rights, traditions, practices, culture and laws of each
region for which the powers of the  Autonomous District Councils were vested upon, are
now defeated. Therefore, it is felt that the Anti-defection law under the Tenth Schedule of our
Constitution should also be extended to the Autonomous District Councils.
Hence, this Bill.
THOMAS  SANGMA

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
******
TENTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 102 (2) and 191 (2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "House" means either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as the
case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;
******
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, a person who has been elected
to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or the Deputy
Chairman of the Council of States or the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative
Council of a State or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly  of a
State, shall not be disqualified under this Schedule,—
******
I. Interpretation.
5. Exemption.
4

GMGIPMRND—952RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri Thomas Sangma,  M.P .)