Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of Section 18.
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
(Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After Section 18 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that the Commissions constituted to protect the interest of
women under the State legislations and also service providers recognized, if any,
under such legislations, may also issue protection orders under the above section,
which shall remain in force for a period of eight days, from the date of the order, until
a Magistrate having jurisdiction to decide in the matter of domestic violence in
question, takes cognizance of any complaint field by the aggrieved person and passes
an appropriate protection order in the matter, whichever is earlier.”
Bill No. XVI of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON  31ST JULY, 2009
43 of 2005.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Parliament has enacted the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005,
which has empowered magistrate to pass orders in the nature of Protection Orders under
Section 18, Residence Orders under Section 19, Orders for Monitory Relief under Section 20,
Custody Orders under Section 21 and Compensation Orders under Section 22, etc. However,
till the time an aggrieved person approaches a Protection Officer to file a case before magistrate
on behalf of an aggrieved person, it takes a considerable time and aggrieved person gets no
protection whatsoever, till that time.
Tendency among aggrieved person is to first approach the National Commission for
Women appointed under the National Commission for Women Act, 1990 or a similar State
Commission appointed under the respective State legislations. These Commissions have
powers to hear the parties and arrive at settlement in the event there is an agreement between
parties. The next course open to these bodies is to advise the aggrieved person to approach
Protection Officer or Police Authorities, as the case may be.
In this context, it is proposed to bring the commissions appointed under the State
legislations within the ambit of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act and
extend the powers of issuing Protection Order to a limited extent also to the Commissions and
Service Providers under the said State legislations, so that, aggrieved persons approaching
the Commissions in the first instance can also get relief from the Commissions or Service
Providers, as the case may be instead of, merely, an advice or guidance.
Hence, this Bill.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE BILL, 2005
(SECTION 18)
*** *** *** *** *** ***
18. Protection orders.—The Magistrate may, after giving the aggrieved person and the
respondent an opportunity of being heard and on being prima facie satisfied that domestic
violence has taken place or is likely to take place, pass a protection order in favour of the
aggrieved person and prohibit the respondent from—
(a) committing any act of domestic violence;
(b) aiding or abetting in the commission of acts of domestic violence;
(c) entering the place of employment of the aggrieved person or, if the person
aggrieved is a child, its school or any other place frequented by the aggrieved person;
(d) attempting to communicate in any form, whatsoever, with the aggrieved person,
including personal, oral or written or electronic or telephonic contact;
(e) alienating any assets, operating bank lockers or bank accounts used or held
or enjoyed by both the parties, jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent or
singly by the respondent, including her stridhan or any other property held either
jointly by the parties or separately by them without the leave of the Magistrate;
(f) causing violence to the dependants, other relatives or any person who give
the aggrieved person assistance from domestic violence;
(g) committing any other act as specified in the protection order.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
3

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
—————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3552RS(S-5)—31.07.2009.