AS INTRODUCED IN THE RasyA SABHA

Bill No. XVI of 2000.

THE PREVENTION OF COMMUNALISATION AND
SAFFRONISATION OF BUREAUCRACY BILL, 2000
A
BILL

to prohibit the Government from Communalising and Saffronising of its
bureaucracy and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Prevention of Communalisation and Saffronisation Short title,

of Bureaucracy Act, 2000. extent and
commence-

(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(०) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of _ Definitions.
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;

|
|
| 5 (2) It extends to the whole of India. ment.
|


Appropriate
Government
not to allow its
employees to
join any organi-
sation.

2

(b) “Organisation” means any organisation or outfit established to promote
religious fundamentalism in any manner and by whatever suffixes such as Volunteers,
Sangh, Parishad, Dal etc., including political outfits.

3. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force the appropriate Government shall not allow its employees to join any organisation.

(2) Any order or notification issued before or after the commencement of this Act
in contravention of sub-section (1) shall be void ab-initio.

(3) Any Government servant who has joined any organisation on the basis of
earlier order of the appropriate Government shall renounce his membership of such
organisation forthwith failing which he shall stand dismissed from the service since the day
of his joining the organisation and shall forefeit all his service benefits.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Gujarat Government’s decision to allow its employees to join R.S.S. has created
unprecedented controversy throughout the country and the issue is being hotly debated.
The controversy has further been deepened with the open support of Prime Minister and
his Ministerial colleagues to the Gujarat Government’s decision. On the basis of this and
following the principle of equality the Central Government employees and other State
Governments employees will also be permitted to join R.S.S. and such other fundamentalist
organisations which ultimately will communalise and saffronise the entire bureaucracy in
the country which will harm the secular credentials of our country and it will be a beginning
to convert the country into a theocratic State.

Hence a law is necessary to prevent the Central and State Governments from permitting
its employees to join fundamentalist and fascist organisations to protect the secular character
of our polity,

Hence this Bill.

SURESH PACHOURI


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to prohibit the Government from Communalisation and Saffronisation of its bureaucracy
and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3971RS—29-02-2000.