Bill No. XVI of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 20TH JULY, 2018
Short title and
Extent.
THE PREVENTION OF GENDER PAY GAP BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to address and curb the gender pay gap in the labour and employment sector and also
to repeal the Equal Renumeration Act, 1976
WHEREAS the Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women,
adopted by United nations in 1979 and ratified by India on 9th July, 1993 requires that all
forms of discrimination against women be condemned and states must take appropriate
legislative measures to prohibit all forms of discrimination against women and establish
legal protection of their rights on an equal basis with men;
A
ND WHEREAS the International Labour organisation (ILO) convention on Equal
Remuneration (Convention No. 100) ratified by India on 25 Sep. 1958 provides for equal
remuneration for work of equal value without discrimination;
A
ND WHEREAS Article 39 (d) of Constituion envisages that the State shall direct its
policy, among other things, towards securing that there is equal pay for work of equal value;
NOW THEREFORE it is expedient to re-enact the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 in order
to prevent discrimination between employees on the basis of gender in all workplaces and
all positions and to provide employees with an efficient grievance redressal mechanism and
to ensure that work done by different genders in valued fairly to achieve gender equality
which is a core component of decent work.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Gender Pay Gap Bill, 2018;
(2) It extends to the whole of India;5

2
2. Except where otherwise provided, for matters concerning equal remuneration for
employees for work of equal value, the provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force.
3. In this Act, Unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means—
(i) in relation to a workplace which is established, owned, controlled or
wholly or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly—
(a) by the Central Government or the Union Territory administration,
the central Government;
(b) by the State Government, the State Government;
(ii) in relation to any workplace not covered under sub-clause (i) and
falling within its territory, the State Government.
(b) "discrimination" means as defined in section 4 of the Act;
(c) "employee" means any person emplyed for remuneration at a workplace for
any work whether identified by the employer as regular, temporary, contractual,
ad hoc, daily wage worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice or identified by any other
such name, performing any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical,
managerial or supervisory work for reward, who gets remuneration from the employer
either directly or through an agent, including a contractor, with or, without the
knowledge of the employer, whether the terms of employment are express or implied
and could be of any age and can be identified as male, female or transgender;
(d) "employer" means—
(i) in relation to any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment,
enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit of the appropriate Government or a
local authority, the head of that department, organisation, undertaking,
establishment, enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit or such other officer
as the appropriate Government or the local authority, as the case may be, may by
an order specify in this behalf;
(ii) in any workplace not covered under sub-clause (i), any persons
responsible for the management, supervision and control of the workplace, if the
said affairs are entrusted to any other person, whether called a manager, or
managing director or by any other name, such person will be employer;
(e) ‘‘Other remuneration" includes any supplement, benefit, allocation, grant,
fringe benefit payment to cover expenses, payments for vehicle maintenance, use of
telephone, overtime quota, purchase of professional literature, clothing, use of vehicles,
or any other compensation in cash in kind, direct or indirect, and even if they do not
constitute wages;
(f) ‘‘remuneration’’ means wages any additional benefits, allowance and
emoluments whatsoever payable directly or indirectly, whether in cash or in kind, by
the employer to the employee and arising out of the employee's employment;
(g) "work of equal value" shall have the meaning as defined by the National Pay
Equity Committee from time to time and shall include work:—
(i) where employees perform work that is similar in responsibilities, skills
or qualification required, requires same effort and is performed in similar working
conditions; and
Application of
Act.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) where employees perform work that requires different effort, involving
different responsibilities, requiring different skills of qualifications, and is
performed under different conditions, but is overall of equal value.
(h) "workplace" includes—
(i) any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise,
institution, office, branch or unit which is established, owned, controlled or
wholly or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly by the
appropriate Government or the local authority or a Government company or a
corporation or a co-operative society;
(ii) any private sector organisation or a private venture, undertaking,
enterprise, institution, establishment, society, trust, non-governmental
organisation, unit or service provider carrying or commercial, professional,
vocational, educational, entertainmental, industrial, health services or financial
activities including production, supply, sale, distribution or service;
(iii) hospitals or nursing homes;
(iv) any sports institute, stadium sports complex or competition or games
venue, whether residential or not used for training, sports or other activities
relating thereto.
CHAPTER II
D
ISCRIMINATION
4. (1) Discrimination on the basis of gender identity including any distinction, exclusion,
restriction or preference made on the basis of gender identity which has the purpose or effect
of nullifying or impairing equality of opportunity or treatment in employment or is prohibited
occupation. Provided that any distinction, exclusion or preference in respect of a particular
job based on the inherent requirements thereof shall not be deemed to be discrimination.
(2) On and from the commencement of this Act, no employer shall, while making
recruitment for the work of equal value, or in any condition of service subsequent to
recruitment including payment of remuneration and other remunerations, promotions, training
or transfer, make any discrimination against any employee on the basis of gender except
where the employment of women in such work is prohibited or restricted by or under any
law for the time being in force:
Except when such payment of remuneration or other remunerations or both is made —
(a) where the performance of employees is evaluated using a gender-neutral
formal system of performance appraisal and employees have been made aware of the
same;
(b) where the employees receive periodic increases in remuneration based on
the time period of service with the employer or seniority;
(c) where an employer pays to an employee remuneration that are higher than
justified by the value of the work performed by that employee during recuperation of
limited duration from an injury or illness;
(d) where the employer, without decreasing the employee's remuneration,
reassigns an employee to a lower position due to unsatisfactory work performance of
the employee caused by factors beyond the employee's control, such as the increasing
complexity of the job or the impaired health or partial disability of the employee, or as
a result of an internal labour force surplus that necessitates the reassignment;
(e) where a procedure of gradually reducing remuneration is prescribed for any
of the reasons set out in paragraph (d);
(f) where, for the purposes of an employee development program that is equally
available to all employees and leads to the career advancement of the employees who
take part in the program, an employee temporarily assigned to the position receives
Prevention of
Discrimination.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
remuneration at a different level than an employee working in such a position on a
permanent basis;
(g) where there is an existence of an internal labour shortage in a particular job
classification;
(h) where there is a reclassification of a position to a lower level, where the
incumbent continues to receive remuneration on the scale established for the former
higher classification;
(i) where the wage scale that applies to the employees provides for different
rates of remuneration for the same job depending on the defined geographic area of
the workplace; and
(j) any other differential that is based on factors other than gender:
Provided, that an employer who is paying a wage rate differential in violation of this
sub-section shall not, in order to comply with the provisions of this sub-section, reduce the
rate of remuneration of any employee:
Provided further that the provisions of this section shall not affect any priority or
reservation for scheduled castes or scheduled tribes, socially and educationally backward
classes, persons with disability, ex-servicemen, retrenched employees of any other class or
category of persons only in matters of recruitment and promotion to the posts in an
establishment or employment, as provided under any law for the time being in force.
(3) where, in an establishment or employment, the rates of remuneration payable before
the commencement of this Act for employees for the same work or work of a similar nature
are different only on the ground of gender, then the higher (in cases where there are only
two rates), or, as the case may be, the highest (in case where there are more than two rates),
of such rates shall be the rate at which remuneration shall be payable, on an from such
commencement, to such employees:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to entitle an employee to the
revision of the rate of remuneration payable to them with reference to the service rendered
by them before the commencement of this Act.
CHAPTER III
C
ONSTITUTION OF COMMITTEES
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a body to be known as
the National Pay Equity Committee to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the
functions, assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The National Pay Equity Committee shall consist of the following members,—
 (a) a Chairperson, who is a person of eminence and has done outstanding
work for promoting gender equality to be nominated by the Central Government;
 (b) not less than six Members, out of which at least two shall be women,
from the following fields, to be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst persons of eminence, ability, integrity, standing and experience in,—
(i) Labour Welfare;
(ii) Human resources;
(iii) gender equality; and
(iv) best practices relating to gender equal pay.
(3) The Office of the National Pay Equity Committee shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for a term of three years from
the date on which they assume office:
Constitution
and
Jurisdiction of
National Pay
Equity
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Provided that, subject to fulfilment of criteria mentioned herein, each Member, including
the Chairperson, shall be eligible for re-nomination for a second term of three years, but no
subsequent nomination beyond the second term shall be permitted.
(5) If, for any reason, any member of the National Pay Equity Committee leaves the
Committee, the vacancy so created shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with
the provisions of this section:
Provided that any decision taken or function performed by the National Pay Equity
Committee shall not be questioned merely on grounds of vacancy in the Committee.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) The National Pay Equity Committee shall have such member of officers and staff
on such term and condition as may be prescribed.
6. The National Pay Equity Committee shall perform the following functions namely:—
(a) conduct research to devise the format and methodology to draft Equality
Plan;
(b) establish or research for globally accepted gender neutral job evaluation
methods that assesses the four criteria of skill, effort, responsibility and working
conditions and reflect the range of work found in an organisation and capture that
organisation's values and are capable of measuring all jobs in the establishment;
(c) establish a framework to be followed by the National Pay Equity Committee
for evaluation of workplaces to issue the Certificate of Equal Pay;
(d) address any other matter deemed relevant by the Central Government for the
effective implementation of this Act.
7. (1) Every State Government and UT Administrative shall by notification constitute
a State Pay Equity Committee to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The State Pay Equity Committee shall have the following members,—
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated by the affordable Grant from amongst the
eminent women in the field of social work and committed to the cause of gender
equality;
(b) not less than five Members to be approved by apporpriate Government:
Provided that the Chairpersons and the Members shall have a background in law or
legal knowledge:
Provided further that at least one of the member shall be a woman or belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Backward Classes or minority community
as notified by the appropriate Government, from time to time:
Provided also that three members, shall represent employees' association or groups in
the state, the employers' association or groups and shall the transgender community.
(3) The Chairperson and every member of the State Pay Equity Committee shall hold
office for such period, not exceeding three years, from the date of their appointment as may
be specified by the Appropriate Government:
Provided that, subject to fulfilment of criteria mentioned herein, each Member, including
the Chairperson, shall be eligible for re-nomination for a second term of three years, but no
subsequent nomination beyond the second term shall be permitted.
(4) If, for any reason, any member of the State Pay Equity Committee leaves the
Committee, the vacancy so created shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with
the provision of this section:
Powers and
Functions of
National Pay
Equity
Committee.
Constitution
and
Jurisdiction of
State Pay
Equity
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other  terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that any decision taken or function performed by the State Pay Equity
Committee shall not be questioned merely on grounds of vacancy in the Committee.
8. (1) The State Pay Equity Committee shall:—
(a) set up Grievance Redressal Cells in each district of the State with not less
than three members, one of whom shall be a job evaluation expert and one of whom
shall be a woman and each Grievance Redressal Cell may within the local limits of its
jurisdiction:—
(i) require any employer to produce any register, or other documents
relating to the remuneration and employment of employees and examine such
documents;
(ii) take on the spot or otherwise, the evidence of any person for the purpose
of ascertaining whether the provisions of this Act are being, or have been,
complied with;
(iii) make copies, or take extract from, any register or other document
maintained in relation to the establishment under this Act;
(iv) conduct all such functions as, delegated by the State Pay Equity
Committee for effective grievance redressal.
(b) set up an Advisory Committee which shall consist of not less than three
members of which one shall be a woman or transgender member and it shall,—
(i) regulate its own procedure;
(ii) for the purpose of providing increasing employment opportunities for
women and transgender employees, advise the State Pay Equity Committee with
regard to the extent to which women and transgender employees may be employed
in such establishments or employments within the jurisdiction of the State Pay
Equity Committee;
(iii) having regard to the number of women and transgender employees
employed in the concerned establishment or employment, the nature of work,
hours of work, suitability of women and transgender employees for employment,
as the case may be, recommend the need for providing increasing employment
opportunities for women and transgender employees, including part-time
employment, and such other relevant factors as the State Pay Equity Committee
may think fit:
Provided that Government may, after considering the advice tendered to
it by the Advisory Committee and recommended by the State Pay Equity
Committee and after giving to the persons concerned in the establishments or
employments within its jurisdiction an opportunity to make representations, issue
such directions in respect of employment of women and transgender employees,
as it may think fit.
(c) examine the Equality Plans of different organisations and issue Certificate of
Equal Pay on being satisfied that the organisation does not discriminate on the basis of
gender in determining remuneration;
(d) maintain computerised records of all organisations that have received
certification, that have not submitted Equality Plans and that have been denied a
certificate alongwith reasons thereof;
(e) appoint Job Evaluation Experts using open recruitment based on the rules
prescribed by the Government.
Power and
Responsibilities
of State Pay
Equity
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(f) ensure systematic and efficient grievance redressal by taking informed
decisions based on the reports submitted by the Job Evaluation Expert;
(g) regularly collect and publish data on remuneration of employees in the State
or UT recommend changes based on the analysis of the findings to the State Government
or UT Administration report to the State Government or UT Administration with all
data which shall then be further handed to the Central Government to be published on
its website at the end of every financial year;
(h) receive the Equality Plan report from different organisations every year and
order an inquiry, in a manner that it deems fit, after one official warning if, the committee
finds that the organisation is discriminating on the basis of gender in determining
remuneration and not taking sufficient steps to bridge the gender pay gap in the
organisation;
(i) report to the Department of Labour of the respective State or UT
Administration with an Annual report of its work, which shall also be put on its own
website and laid on the table of the Assembly of the respective State or UT having
assembly;
(j) spread awarness about the rules and regulations under the legislation through
workshops and sessions and provide guidance and technical assistance to employers
in implementation of the rules under this Act;
(k) conduct research and provide recommendations to the Appropriate
Government to develop appropriate incentives to encourage employers to follow the
provisions laid under this Act.
(2) The State Pay Equity Committee appointed under sub-section (1) shall have all the
powers of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for the purpose of taking
evidence and of enforcing the attendance of withnesses and compelling the production of
documents, and shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
CHAPTER IV
C
ONSTITUTION OF INTERNAL AUDIT COMMITTEE
9. (1) Every employer shall, by an order in writing, constitute a Committee to be
known as the Internal Audit Committee on the commencement of this Act:
Provided where the offices or administrative units of an establishment are located at
different places, the Internal Audit Committee shall be constituted only at the head office or
head adminsitrative unit.
(2) The Internal Audit Committee shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Presiding Officer who shall be a woman employed at a senior level in the
workplace;
(b) not less than one representative of the employer to be nominated by the
employer or the employer themself;
(c) not less than one representative of the employees to be nominated by the
employees:
Provided that at least one member represents each gender in the workplace.
(3) All members of the Internal Audit Committee shall hold office for such period, not
exceeding three years, from the date of their nomination. Provided that they may be re-
nominated on the expiry of the tenure for one more term, but no subsequent nomination shall
be permitted.
(4) If, for any reason, any member of the Internal Audit Committee leaves the workplace
Constitution of
Internal Audit
Committee.
5 of 1908
2 of 1974
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
or the Committee, the vacancy so created shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance
with the provision of this secion.
10. (1) The Internal Audit Committee shall conduct self-audit by drawing an Equality
Plan, once within six months of the coming into operation of this Act and everytime the
employer revises pay-scale of any or every employment within the organization, as prescribed
by the National Pay Equity Committee, which shall include an analysis of the jobs performed
and pay received by employees, measures to address the gender pay differentials and a
review of their impact.
(2) The Internal Audit Committee shall submit the Equality Plan to the State Pay
Equity Committee at the end of the financial year.
CHAPER V
G
RIEV ANCE REDRESSAL
11. (1) Any aggrieved employee may make, in writing, a complaint of discrimination
at workplace to the Grievance Redressal Cell of the State Pay Equity Committee:
Provided that where such complaint cannot be made in writing, any member of the
Grievance Redressal Cell, shall render all reasonable assistance to the employee for making
the complaint in writing.
12. (1) The Grievance Redressal Cell shall forward the complaint to the Job Evaluation
Expert, within a period of seven days, who shall find all relevant facts to determine whether
the jobs in dispute were of equal value and whether the employee faced gender based
discrimination in determination of remuneration:
Provided that if the Job Evaluation Expert requires production of documents from the
employer, the employer shall provide the same with in a period of seven days from the date
on which such request is made:
Provided further that the Job Evaluation Expert shall maintain confidentiality in dealing
with such documents.
(2) The Job Evaluation Expert shall submit his report to the Grievance Redressal Cell
with a period of forty five days of receiving the complaint and based on the report submitted
by the Grievance Redressal Cell, the State Pay Equity Committee shall record its order and
forward the same to the employer to take action as specified in the order within a period of
thirty days from receiving the report.
(3) The State Pay Equity Committee shall provide the copies of the order as recorded
under sub-section (2) to the aggrieved employee and the employer.
(4) Where a settlement is arrived at under sub-section (2), no further inquiry shall be
conducted by the State Pay Equity Committee.
13. (1) Any person aggrived from the recommendations made under sub-section (2) of
section 12 or non-implementation of such recommendations may prefer an appeal to the
Labour Court or Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable
to the said person or where no such service rules exist then, without prejudice to provisions
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the person aggrieved may prefer an
appeal in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred within a period of ninety days
of receiving the order.
14. (1) An action under this law may be brought by —
(a) the employee;
(b) with the employee's consent - the representative employees organisation at
Self-Audit and
Equity Plan.
Complaint of
discrimination.
Conciliation.
Appeal.
Rights of
action.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
that workplace, and if there is no such employees organisation to which the employee
belongs — by an employees organisation to which the employee belongs;
(c) with the employee's consent — by an organisation that deals with women's
rights.
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES OF THE EMPLOYER
15.  All employers shall —
(a) upload the Equality certificate, if issued by the State Pay Equity Committee,
on the website of the organisation or be available for public view in an accessible
manner;
(b) disclose, on the employee's demand, information for the purposes of this Act
regarding the wage levels of persons employed by him, according to categories of
employees, categories of jobs or categories of grades, provided that the employee
shall only be required to deliver such information to such extent as the circumstances
require, that avoids disclosure of details of the identity of employees, and which does
not by virtue thereof, constitue a breach of any other law, within a period of fourteen
days;
(c) ensure constititution of Internal Audit Committee to draw up an Equality
Plan and ensure submission of the same at the end of each financial year;
(d) ensure the use of effective job evaluation methods, as prescribed by the
National Equity Pay Committee, to eliminate gender based discrimination;
(e) maintain such registers and other documents in relation to the employees
employed by him as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
16. (1) If after the commencement of this Act, any employer, being required by or
under this act, so to do—
(a) omits or fails to maintain any register or other document in relation to
employees employed by him under section 15, or
(b) fails to submit the Equality Plan to State Pay Equity Committee under
section 15, or
(c) fails to constitute an Internal Audit Committee under section 9, or
(d) fails to disclose the payroll of employees under section 15,
he shall be liable to pay a fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which
may extend to an amount decided by the State Pay Equity Committee or Labour Court.
(2) If, after the commencement of this Act, any employer—
(a) makes any recruitment in contravention of the provisions of his Act under
section 4, or
(b) makes any payment or remuneration at unequal rates to employees of different
genders, for work of equal value under section 4, or
(c) makes any discrimination between employees in contravention of the
provisions of this Act under section 4, or
Duties of
employers.
Penalty for
non-
compliance
with
provisions of
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(d) omits or fails to carry out any direction made by the appropriate Government
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 8, or
(e) fails to follow the orders of the State Pay Equity Committee within the time
limit prescribed as under sub-section (2) of section 12, or
(f) omits or refuses to gives any evidence to the Job Evaluation Expert or prevents
his agent, servant, or any other person in charge of the workplace, or any employee,
from giving evidence under sub-section(1) of section 12,
he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which
may extend to an amount decided by the State Pay Equity Committee or Labour Court or
with imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than three months but which may
extend to one year or with both for the first offence, and with imprisonment which may
extend to two years for the second and subsequent offences.
(3) If, after the commencement of this Act, any Job Evaluation Expert or any member
of the State Pay Equity Committee discloses the information produced by any employer
under sub-section (1) of section 12, he shall be liable for penalty in accordance with the
provisions of the service rules applicable to the said person or where no such service rules
exist, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) If any employer, after having been previously convicted of an offence punishable
under this Act subsequently commits and is convicted of the same offence, he shall be liable
to—
(a) twice the punishment, which might have been imposed on a first conviction,
subject to the punishment being maximum provided for the same offence:
(b) cancellation, of his licence or withdrawal, or non-renewal, or approval, or
cancellation of the registration, as the case may be, by the Government or local authority
required for carrying on his business or activity.
Provided that in case a higher punishment is prescribed under any other law for the
time being in force, for the offence for which the accused is being prosecuted, the Court
shall take due cognizance of the same while awarding the punishment;
17. (1) For the purpose of determining the sums to be paid to the aggrieved employee
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 16, the State Pay Equity Committee, shall
determine the compensation which shall include —
(a) the amount by which the remuneration payable to the employee exceeds the
amount actually paid from the date when payroll was disclosed or first date of official
work of employee, whichever is later; and
(b) compensation which shall depend on the feasibility of such payment in lump
sum or in instalments and the amount of which shall be decided by the State Pay
Equity Committee depending on the financial sustainability of the workplace under
the employer.
18. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable
to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed
Determination
of
compensation.
Offences by
orgaisations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect of any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
19. (1) Nothing in this Act shall apply—
(a) to cases affecting the terms and conditions of a woman's employment in
complying with the requirements of any law giving special treatment to women, or
(b) to any special treatment accorded to women in connection with—
(i) the birth or expected birth of a child, or
(ii) the terms and conditions relating to retirement, marriage or death or to
any provision made in connection with the retirement, marriage or death.
20. The provisions of this Act shall be in additon to and not in derogation of, any other
law for the time being in free except to the extent the provisions of other laws are inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act.
21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely—
(a) the matters referred to in Section 6; and
(b) registers and other documents which an employer is required to maintain in
relation to the employees employed by him under Section 15;
22. (1) The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976  is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or any liability,
right or claim arising under the Act, so repealed including any notification, nomination,
appointment, order or direction made thereunder shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act, as if this Act were in force when such
thing was done or action was taken or any liability, right or claim had arisen.
Act not to
apply in
certain special
cases.
Act to be in
addition to
any other law.
Power to make
rules.
Repeal and
saving.
25 of 1976
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Gender pay gap is one of the most crucial and yet, the most disregarded gender issues
in India. Women in India earn twenty five per cent less than men. Women earned a median
gross hourly salary of Rs. 259.8 while men earned Rs. 345.8 in 2016. While the gap has
reduced by two percentage points since 2015, gender still plays a pivotal role in determining
salaries. Research shows that the pay gap increases with women's work experience, age,
educational qualification and rise in occupational hierarchy. Since women are overburdened
with disproportionate share of household chores, employers discriminate against women as
they are perceived to be less productive. Career breaks and socialisation also adds to the
gender pay gap. India ranked 108, out of 144 countries, on the World Economic Forum's
Global Gender Gap Report 2017. The situation is similar when it comes to transgender
employees. Marganilisation and discrimination pushes the transgender community down
the socio-economic ladder when it comes to social and economic empowerment. This also
translates into discrimination in remuneration at workplaces.
The situation is alike in labour intensive occupations, both, agricultural and non-
agricultural. As per the Labour Bureau of India, in December 2016, the average daily wage
rate for a man undertaking ploughing and tilling work was Rs. 291.17 and for a woman, it
was 201.36. In the same month, the average wage rate of construction workers varied too. A
man was paid Rs. 307.39 while a woman was paid Rs. 220.45 for construction work.
The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 attempts to address the issue, however, it is
insufficient, selective and limited in its scope. It is only applicable to employers covered
under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 which includes "employer" in relation to any
establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop either
Government or privately owned. The Act covers workers working in organisations that have
been listed in the definition of employer. Hence, it does not include corporate organisations
and NGOs with managerial and supervisory staff that do not engage in physical labour.
Lastly, the Act also fails to address the gender pay gap with respect to transgenders. Hence,
despite the existence of a relevant law, the gender gap has not been addressed appropriately.
The Global Wage Report of 2016-17 published by ILO has ranked India 42nd with one of
the widest gender pay gaps, out of 46 selected economies.
India ratified a key ILO convention on Equal Remuneration (Convention No. 100) on
25 September, 1958. This convention provides for equal remuneration for employees for
work of equal value which refers to rates of remuneration established without discrimination
based on gender. India ratified the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination Against Women on 9 July, 1993. As a result, it is committed "to ensure
elimination of all acts of discrimination against women by persons, organizations or
enterprises."
In Randhir Singh vs. Union of India, the Supreme Court held that 'Equal pay for equal
work' is not just a "demagogic slogan". It may not be a fundamental right but it is definitely
a constitutional goal. As a result, it is "capable of attainment through constitutional remedies
by the enforcement of constitutional rights". In the case of Grih Kalyan Kendra vs. Union of
India, the Supreme Court reiterated the importance of the doctrine of 'Equal pay for equal
work'. It held that "Equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared by the Constitution as
a fundamental right but in view of the Directive Principles of State Policy as contained in
article 39(d) of the Constitution 'Equal pay for equal work' has assumed the status of
fundamental right in service jurisprudence having regard to the constitutional mandate of
equality in articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
Article 39(d) of Constitution envisages that the State shall direct its policy, among
other things, towards securing that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women.
12

13
Articles 14 and 19 guarantee the fundamental rights to equality before the law and equality
of opportunity in the matter of public employment respectively. This Bill attempts to give
effect to these Constitutional provisions. It is essential to ensure that work done by different
genders is valued fairly to achieve gender equality. It is also a core component of decent
work.
Hence, this Bill.
HUSAIN DALW AI

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill inter alia provides for constitution of the National Pay Equity
Committee. Clause 7 seeks to constitute State Pay Equity Committee. Therefore, the Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India as well as Consolidated
Fund of the concerned State. However, it is not possible to access the actual financial
expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.
14

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
15

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to address and curb the gender pay gap in the labour and employment sector and also to
repeal the Equal Renumeration Act, 1976
————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—907RS(S3)—23-07-2018.