AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026 
Bill No. XVI of 2026 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
        BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force immediately.
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
5 2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following new article shall be
inserted, namely:—
“21B. The State shall provide free access to knowledge and 
information through public libraries and public library services to 
all persons in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.” 
Insertion of 
new article 
21B. 
 
Right to free 
access to 
knowledge and 
information 
through public 
libraries. 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 The insatiable quest of Dr. Ambedkar for books during his New York days 
led him away from Manhattan down to 42 nd street on Fifth Avenue in the city. 
During his stay in New York in the early 1900s, the imposing beaux- arts styled 
New York Public Library had recently opened its doors, and opened them to all – 
importantly, including to black people and to women. Historic al record shows 
that Dr. Ambedkar was extremely impressed with the public library. Later, upon 
learning of the death of Sir Pherozeshah Mehta in Bombay, and the Bombay 
municipality’s plan to prominently erect his statue, Dr. Ambedkar wrote for the 
Bombay C hronicle, the English -
language weekly that Mehta had himself 
launched in 1910, that the city should build a Public Library and not a statue. 
Ambedkar is said to have argued in his letter that erecting a public library in 
Bombay instead of a ‘trivial and unbecoming’ statue would be more appropriate 
than wasting resources on statues: 
“...It is unfortunate that we have not as yet realized the value of 
the library as an institution in the growth and advancement of a 
society. But this is not the place to dilate upon its virtues. That an 
enlightened public as that of Bombay should have suffered so long to 
be without an up -to-date public library is nothing short of disgrace 
and the earlier we make amends for it the better. There are some 
private libraries in Bombay operating independently by themselves. If 
these ill-managed concerns be mobilized into one building, built out 
of the Sir P.M. Mehta memorial fund and called after him, the city of 
Bombay shall have achieved both these purposes…” 
Bombay Chronicle, Tuesday,
  28th March, 1916. 
 History has shown us what happens when access to knowledge is controlled 
by a few. Such societies become pyramids of oppression —where those at the top 
read and rule, and those at the bottom are left to obey in darkness. Importantly, w e 
learn that in such circumstances, even the tiny minority of elites eventually 
struggle to thrive. This Bill seeks to demolish that pyramid and replace it with a 
sphere of associated living: where all citizens may meet, think, learn, and grow as 
equals. 
 No person can be a full participant in political democracy unless they are 
also a participant in social and educational democracy. The ability to read, to 
think, and to inquire—these are not mere ornaments of the privileged; they are the 
instruments by which liberty, equality, and fraternity are made real for all. In the 
Constitution of India, the framers affirmed the Freedom of Speech and 
Expression under Article 19(1)(a). They affirmed the Right to Life and Dignity 
under Article 21. We have the Right to E ducation under Article 21A. But the 
exercise of these rights requires certain preconditions, and predominant among 
them is the availability of institutions where the people —all the people —may 
access knowledge, culture, and community. That institution is the public library. 
 It is a proven fact that public libraries serve not only as supportive third 
space for promoting economic growth, scientific innovation, and social mobility, 
they are essential elements of great civilizations. A nation cannot truly 
democratize opportunity without democratizing access to knowledge.  
 Around the world, public libraries are recognized as essential to democratic 
life. In many democracies worldwide, public libraries are legally guaranteed, 
digitally networked, and spatially integrated with other public services. Yet, in 
India, access to libraries —those most vital of civic institutions for building and 
sustaining robust democratic societies —remains severely inadequate, unequal, 
and unguaranteed, let alone developing a country wi de interconnected system of 
public libraries.  
 Current data reveals: 
● India spends a mere 7 paise per person per year on libraries.
● Many districts lack even one functional library.

3 
● Despite our famous Digital Public Infrastructures, we have no  official
statistics on our public library ecosystem. 
● Only 4 State Governments have managed to put in place the bare
minimum financial arrangement to sustain libraries under their purview. 
 Today India has among the highest numbers of first -generation learners in 
the world. It also has vast disparities in access to quality reading material beyond 
school curricula, particularly in local languages. Although the digital age has 
opened up new frontiers, it has also exacerbated inequalities:  for every 
smartphone user, there are many who lack digital literacy, stable connectivity, or 
the resources to participate in the knowledge economy. For those who can afford 
smartphones and internet, without supportive reading communities of trained 
librarians and peers, they are as unlikely to take advantage of learning 
opportunities as those without. 
        In any country calling itself a democracy, the means of mental uplift must be 
placed at the disposal of all. Education does not end with the school -leaving 
certificate, diploma, or a college degree. Nor is learning the sole business of the 
elite. In the villages of India, in the bastis and chawls of the cities, there are 
Indians with minds as sharp and souls as hungry for knowledge as any who sit in 
Parliament or the few of our fellow citizens who have inherited financial and 
social capital to afford personal libraries.  Continued under -investment in public 
libraries is not only depriving the underprivileged, it will also permanently 
relegate India to being a backward region. 
        As the planet hurtles through the polycrises of climate change, 
transformations in the global order of power among nations, and financial and 
trade relations, and the promises and perils of Artificial Intelligence, India as a 
country is poised to reclaim its lost glory. But this glory will not be served to us 
on a silver platter. We must mobilize the country’s demographic dividend to 
usher in a long period of abundance. Public Libraries are absolutely central 
towards meeting this objective. India is already 75 years late, we cannot afford to 
waste any more time.  
        It thus follows, that in a democracy premised on justice, equality, and 
liberty, the right to read is not a luxury —it is a foundational necessity. The right 
to public libraries must therefore be secured as a fundamental right, and their 
access must therefore necessarily be free, as they are as basic to survival and 
human life and dignity as food, water, air, clothing and shelter.  
        L et it be said that i n the 77th year of our independence, we remembered what 
the Constitution demanded: not merely freedom in theory, but equality in 
practice. By declaring access to public libraries as a fundamental right, this 
Parliament would be taking a historic step to en sure that the Republic of India is 
also a republic of readers. 
 H
ence, this Bill. 
V
. SIVADASAN.

4 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
        Cl ause 2 of the Bill inter alia provides for free access to knowledge and 
information to all persons through public libraries and public library services . 
This Bill, therefore, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. However, it is not possible to assess the actual financial expenditure likely 
to be incurred at this stage. 

RAJYA SABHA 
 _
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
 ______________ 
 (Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.) 
 RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—153-16.03.2026