AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XVI of 2025 
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
 further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:― 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Insertion of new 
section 66AA. 
 
Punishment for 
online 
harassment, 
threats, and 
malicious 
communications. 
2. In the Information Technology Act, 2000, after section 66A, the following
new section shall be inserted, namely: —
“66AA. (1)  Any person who — 
(a) sends, publishes, or transmits any electronic
communication which — 
(i) is deliberately and objectively intended to incite
violence, communal disharmony, or public disorder, with a 
direct and imminent threat to public safety; or 
(ii) contains specific and credible threats of harm, sexual
violence, or criminal intimidation; or 
(iii) is knowingly and demonstrably false and is intended
solely to cause public alarm or panic; or 
(iv) d
isseminates obscene or defamatory material with clear
and demonstrable intent to harm the dignity of an individual or 
a group, provided such material does not fall within the ambit 
of fair criticism or satire; or 
(b) uses electronic communication to persistently stalk,
harass, or intimidate any person in a manner that causes severe 
harm to their privacy, dignity, or mental well-being; or 
(c) e ngages in the creation or distribution of deepfake media,
impersonation, or any other digital forgery intended explicitly to 
defame, deceive, or cause measurable harm, 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year or with fine, which may extend to rupees one lakh, or with 
both. 
(2) No action shall be taken under this section except upon a
complaint made by the aggrieved person, their legal guardian, or a
competent authority designated by the appropriate Government, in
such form and manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) T he offence under t his section shall be non -cognizable and
bailable, unless the violation involves threats to life, bodily harm, or 
national security, in which case it shall be cognizable and non -
bailable. 
(4) No complaint under this section shall be registered unless
approved by an officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent
of Police after determining a prima facie case.
(5) Any arrest under this section shall require prior approval from a
Magistrate of the First Class, except in cases involving credible
threats to life or national security.
(6) The Central Government shall constitute a Review Committee
consisting of a Chairperson and such number of members having 
special knowledge of the subject matter, as it may deem fit, to assess 
complaints and prevent frivolo us misuse of this provision while 
ensuring protection of free speech, dissent, satire, fair criticism, and 
journalistic freedom. 
(7) The manner of appointment, salary and allowances and other
terms and conditions of the Chairperson and members of the Revie w
Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(8) Social media platforms and intermediaries shall be required to
implement grievance redressal mechanisms, in such manner as may
be prescribed, to allow users to report violations of this section before
resorting to any legal action.
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
 
21 of 2000. 

3 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
(9) A ny person found misusing the provisions of this section to file
frivolous or malicious complaints shall be liable to a penalty,
including a fine up to rupees fifty thousand or community service as
determined by the adjudica ting officer, appointed under sub -section
(
1) of section 46.
(10) A mechanism shall be developed by the appropriate Government
ba
sed on the recommendations of the Review Committee, to ensure
that individuals posting content in good faith, including opinions,
satire, or journalistic investigations, are not wrongfully targeted under
this provision.
(11) Law enforcement officials found misusing the provisions of this
section to curb free expression shall be subject to disciplinary action;
and
(
12) All legal actions under this section shall be reviewed by a
Digital Right s Ombudsman, to be appointed in such manner as the 
Central Government may by rules prescribe, to ensure compliance 
with constitutional safeguards. 
Explanation.― For the purposes of this section,― 
(a) “electronic communication” means an e -mail or message
or information created or transmitted or received on a computer, 
computer system, computer resource or communication device 
including attachments in text, image, audio, video and any other 
electronic record, which may be transmitted with the message; 
(b) “deepfake” means digitally manipulated or fabricated
digital content, including but not limited to images, videos or 
audio recordings, created through the use of advanced digital 
technologies such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, or 
other advanced technologies, with the intent to convincingly and 
deceptively depict subjects or issues or represent individuals 
engaging in actions, making statements, or being in circumstances 
that did not occur or exist in reality; and 
(c) “digital forgery means t he act of utilization of
technologies, such as artificial intelligence and machine learning 
methodologies, to create or alter audio, visual, or textual content 
with the purpose of deceiving.” 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Supreme Court of India, in Shreya Singhal v. Union of India (2015), 
struck down Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, citing 
concerns of vagueness and overreach, which led to arbitrary restrictions on free 
speech.  However, with the proliferation of online harassment, cyber threats, 
misinformation, and digital forgeries, there is a compelling need to frame  new 
provisions, which shall be a refined and constitutionally sound version of Section 
66A and intended to prevent such cases. 
This Bill ensures that only narrowly defined categories  of harmful speech — 
such as incitement to violence, criminal intimidation, targeted harassment, and 
deepfake-related offences  — are penalized while safeguarding fundamental 
rights. Additional procedural safeguards, such as prior approvals, intermediary 
grievance mechanisms, and review committee, ensure that misuse by law 
enforcement officials is prevented. The amended provisions also explicitly protect 
fair criticism, satire, dissent, and journalistic freedoms to uphold democratic 
values. This amendment ba lances national security, public order, and individual 
rights in the digital age. 
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 SASMIT PATRA. 

5 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
       Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the  constitution of a Review Committee 
consisting of a Chairperson and such number of members as the Central 
Government may deem fit and for the manner of their appointment, salary and 
allowances payable to them and other terms and conditions of service, as m ay 
be prescribed by rules.  It also provides for the appointment of a Digital Rights 
Ombudsman in such manner as the Central Government may by rules prescribe. 
The salary, allowances and other monetary benefits payable to the Chairperson 
and members of th e Review Committee and the Digital Rights Ombudsman as 
and when appointed shall be met from the annual Budget estimates of the 
Ministry.   
       The Bill, therefore, if enacted, may involve additional expenditure, both of 
recurring and non- recurring natur e, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely 
to be involved. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 
_________ 
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)―281―08.12.2025 