1
Insertion of
new article
330A.
Bill  No.  XVI of  2008
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted namely:—
‘‘330A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (2)
of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the
case may be, the Scheduled Tribes:
Short title,
and
commencement.
Reservation of
Seats for
women in the
House of the
People.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
Insertion of
new article
332A.
Amendment
not to affect
the
representation
in the House
of the People
or Legislative
Assembly.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State or Union
Territory so long as the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled
Tribes, as the case may be, in the State or Union Territory, is less than three.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election to the House of the People in a State or Union
Territory shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in the State or Union Territory:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State or Union
Territory so long as the number of seats allotted to such State or Union Territory is less
than three.’’
3.  After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted
namely:—
‘‘332A (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of
every State.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (3)
of article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the
case may be, the Scheduled Tribes:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State so long as
the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, as the case
may be, in that State, is less than three.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be
reserved for women and such may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in
the State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State so long as
the number of seats allotted to such State is less than three.’’
4. The Amendments made to the Constitution, by this Act, shall not affect any
representation in the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of the State
until the dissolution of the House or the Assembly, as the case may be in existence at
the commencement of this Act.
Reservation of
seats for
women in the
Legislative
Assemblies of
the States.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Articles 243D and 243T inserted by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act,
1992 and the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 respectively provide that
not less than one-third of the seats shall be reserved for women in every Panchayat and
every Municipality. Further, the said articles provide that, from amongst the seats reserved
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, not less than one-third seats shall be
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled
Tribes. The said articles also provide that such seats reserved for women may be allotted by
rotation to different constituencies.
2. Having provided reservation for women in Panchayats and Municipalities, it is now
proposed to provide reservation for women on the same lines in the House of the People and
in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by amending the Constitution. The major political
parties are in favour of making such reservation for women.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object.
BRINDA   KARAT
3

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Brinda Karat, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4737RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.