Bill No. XVI of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 29TH DECEMBER, 2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE LABOUR (WELFARE AND REHABILITATION) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to establish a Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority to look into the dynamic
trends in the labour market, provide for schemes to give interest free loans to workers
un-employed for certain periods, issue guidelines for social sector schemes including
universal basic income for all working in private and public sector, provide for
wages during non-work time for seasonally employed workers, provide for hardship
bonus for plantation workers, formulate schemes for rehabilitation of workers of
closed industries and for all matters connected  therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Repulbic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Labour (Welfare and Rehabilitation) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazettee, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Annual Report" means a report giving the details of developmental activities
taken up over the year by the Authority and detailing about targets set and achieved;
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State or a Union Territory
having legislature, the concerned State Government or the Union Territory Government,
as the case may be, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Authority" means the Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority
established under section 3;
(d) "health certificate" means a document signed by a competent health authority
providing proof that person is healthy and competent to work;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority, to be known as
the Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority consisting of the following members,
namely:—
(a) Union Minister of State in the Ministry of Labour and Employment—
ex officio Chairperson;
(b) Secretaries of the Union Ministeries of Labour and Employment, Heavy
Industries and Statistics and Programme Implmentation—ex officio Members;
(c) Director  General V .V . Giri National Labour Institute—ex officio Members;
(d) Director, Central Board for Workers Education, Union Ministry of Labour
and Employment—ex officio Member;
(e) Director, Directorate General of Employment Union Ministry of Labour
and Employment—ex officio Member.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(3) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of services of officers and staff of
the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed from time to time.
(4) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the Authority may
establish offices at other places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) The Authority shall meet at such in tervals and places and shall determine its
own procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
(2) The expenditure incurred to attend meetings by the Members referred to in
sub-clauses (a) to (e) of section 3, shall be borne by their concerned controlling authorities.
5. (1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as it may deem necessary to
ensure welfare and rehabilitation of workers in the country and formulate   a comprehensive
policy within one year of its constitution for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of
the Authority shall include to:—
(a) undertake a baseline study to collect comprehensive data about the existing
minimum working standards in all industries and necessary data on the labour industry
which shall be completed within one year of setting up of the Authority;
(b) formulate a scheme for giving interest free loans for workers who are
un-employed upto a certain period till they get employment;
(c
) recommend to the appropriate Government to formulate social security
schemes including a universal basic income for all workers in private and public
enterprises;
Constitution
of Labour
Welfare and
Rehabilitation
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(d) formulate a scheme for providing wages all through the year for those
employed seasonally;
(e) study and recommend schemes including hardships bonus for workers in
the plantation sector and other heavy industry sector;
(f) study existing safety guidelines for workers and formulate a comprehensive
set of common guidelines for workers keeping in line with international standards;
(g) undertake organisation of labour  fairs and labour awards region-wise and
sector-wise for creating greater awareness on importance of a high quality labour
force;
(h) create an establishment to maintain data of workers of closed sick industries
and to formulate schemes for the welfare of such workers;
(i) undertake, promote and publish studies relating to the importance of labour
safety standards and welfare; and
(j) undertake such other activities as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) The Authority shall disseminate the necessary knowledge and information collected,
to the respective department of the Central Government and the State Governments.
6. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year in such form and at such time as
may be prescribed, an Annual Report giving the summary of its activities including schemes
it has undertaken and recommended to the Government during the previous year and it shall
contain statements of Annual Accounts of the Authority.
(2) A Copy of the Annual Report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and
the Central Government shall cause the Annual Report to be laid as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
7. The Central Government shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
9. The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Annual
Report and its
laying before
Parliament.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is being termed as the next big economic powerhouse and recently we surpassed
China to become the fastest growing economy in the World. The challenge that we as a
country face though is to ensure better labour market conditions to couple with this high
growth rate. Vast majority of workers in our country still work in the informal sector. Though
there has been a shift of workforce from agriculture to the manufacturing sector, still majority
of the workforce are out of the social security net provided by existing legislations.
Data shows that between 2004-05 and 2011-12, the share of workers in unorganised
sector fell from 86% to 82%. At the same time though, the informal workers in the organised
sector (contract and other forms of casual labour) increased. These workers do not have
access to proper social security. As of 2011-12, 79% of the non-agricultural wage workers
had no written contract. Unemployment rates among skilled workforce is also high. Favourable
policy needs to be put in place to capitalise on the demographic dividend of the country and
to keep up with the changing trends in the labour market.
This Bill aims at creating a Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority, to study the
dynamic trends in the labour market and provide for actionable schemes. The Authority shall
provide for a scheme to give interest free loans for those un-employed upto a certain period
until they get a job. This Authority will issue guidelines for a social security scheme which
shall be applicable for all private and Government workers which will include a minimum
basic income. Those who have seasonal employment will be given the same wages for the
other months when they don't have work. The Authority will also make a study of plantation
workers and other heavy factory workers and provide for a scheme to give hardships bonuses
for labourers in these sectors. This will also include framing uniform safety guidelines relating
to working conditions in these sectors. It will also be responsible for conducting labour fairs
and also constitute labour awards sector-wise to enthuse the worker community. A body to
rehabilitate workers from closed or sick industries will be formed by this Authority.
The economic growth is sustainable only as long as the quality of the labour force is
maintained. A well-nourished labour market is the fuel which drives this growth engine. Since
a large number of workers are not covered within the ambit of existing laws, this Bill provides
for the necessary safety net. By providing for these measures, it will be the much needed
antidote required for a faster and more inclusive growth within the country.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation
Authority and also appointment of such number of officers and staffs for its functioning.
Clause 7 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring
expenditure of three thousand crore rupees per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority to look into the dynamic
trends in the labour market, provide for schemes to give interest free loans to workers
un-employed for certain periods, issue guidelines for social sector schemes including
universal basic income for all working in private and public sector, provide for
wages during non-work time for seasonally employed workers, provide for hardship
bonus for plantation workers, formulate schemes for rehabilitation of workers of
closed industries and for all matters connected  therewith and incidental thereto.
.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3406RS(S3)—02-01-2018.