THE NATIONAL FILMS DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Films Development Authority for ensuring
the overall development of film industry and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Films Development Authority Act, 2006.
    (2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)  “Authority” means the National Films Development Authority established
under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b)  “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) words and expressions used but not defined and defined in the
Cinematograph Act, 1952 or the Copyright Act, 1957 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 16TH MARCH, 2007
Bill No. XVI of  2006
37 of 1952.
14 of 1957.

2
3. The Central Government shall take all such measures as it deems necessary or
expedient for the overall development of the film industry in the Country by prescribing
guidelines for that purpose.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish for
the purposes of this Act an Authority to be called the National Films Development Authority.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at Mumbai.
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall be appointed by
the Central Government namely:—
(a) the Chairperson who is an expert in the field of the film industry;
(b) one member to represent the Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting;
(c) one member to represent the Union Ministry of Culture;
(d) one member to represent the Union Ministry of Human Resource
Development;
(e) five members to represent Eastern, Western, Southern and Northern regions
and Mumbai Cinema;
(f) one Member-Secretary.
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson and every other member shall be three years.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(7) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed.
5. (1) For the purposes of discharging its functions, the Authority shall appoint such
number of officers and other employees, as it may consider necessary on such terms and
conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) The Authority may appoint, from time to time, any person from the film industry as
adviser or consultant as it may consider necessary on such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed.
6. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under section 3, the
Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps in close coordination with concerned
Ministries and Departments of the Central and State Governments, the film industry and
fraternity to ensure rapid and accelerated development of film industry in all the regions of
the country where Hindi or regional languages films are produced as it may deem necessary
and expedient to do so for the overall development of film industry.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall,—
(a) develop necessary infrastructure for film industry such as film cities, studios
and sites with modern equipment to shoot films;
(b) take up the issues pertaining to the film industry with the Central and State
Governments so as to get concessions, duties and tax reliefs for the industry;
Power of
Central
Government
to take
measures for
the
development
of film
industry.
Establishment
of Authority.
Appointment
of officers,
adviser
consultant
and other
employees of
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.

3
(c) coordinate with the Central Government and State Government to have a
uniform entertainment tax regime throughout the country;
(d) coordinate with the Central Government and Banking sector and Financial
Institutions to ensure easy loans at reasonable rates of interest to the film industry
from such Banks and Financial Institutions;
(e) promote construction of Cinema Halls and see that Cinema Halls are not
closed on frivolous grounds;
(f) take such other measures for the overall development of film industry as it
may deem necessary.
(3) The Authority shall establish a National Film Museum at a conspicuous place
preferably in Mumbai to keep, preserve and display,—
(a) the entire history of film industry, all the films right from the dumb era to the
present day in cassettes, compact discs or microchips;
(b) instruments, projectors and other gadgets used in producing films or
composition of music of films since the beginning of the film industry in the Country;
(c) costumes, jewellery, dresses, etc. used by famous film artistes, and doyens of
film industry;
(d) consolidated whose’s who of the film industry right from the beginning of the
industry to be got prepared by the Authority within a time frame and revised from time
to time.
7. On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(a) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to National Films
Development Corporation shall rest in the Authority;
(b) every person employed by National Films Development Corporation
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold his office or service in the
Authority for the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and
conditions and same rights and privileges.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by
law in this behalf, pay to the Authority in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this Act.
(2) The Authority shall prepared in such form and at such time each year as may be
prescribed, a budget, in respect of the financial year next ensuing, showing the estimated
receipts and expenditure and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
9. (1) The Authority shall have its own fund and all sums which may, from time to time,
be paid to it by the Central Government and all the receipts of the Authority including any
sum which any State Government or any other Authority, body corporate, film personality or
person may donate or hand over to the Authority, shall be credited to the fund and all
payments by the Authority shall be made therefrom.
(2) The Authority may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the fund of the
Authority.
(3) The Authority may also give financial assistance to the film artistes, musicians,
supporting artistes and technicians who have devoted their life to the film industry and who
are in distress due to old age, infirmity and uncared for their subsistence, medical treatment
and other personal needs in such manner as may be prescribed.
10. The Authority shall prepare once in every calender year, in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities
Effect of the
establishment
of the
Authority.
Payment to
Authority.
Fund of the
Authority.
Annual
Report

4
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government
and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both houses of Parliament.
11. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:—
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this Section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the provisions of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Every year our country produces the largest number of films in the world. Majority of
the films produced are in Hindi followed by regional languages like Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam,
Kannada, Bhojpuri, Gujarati, Bengali, Punjabi, Assamese, Rajasthani and other languages.
The film industry gives employment and means of livelihood to millions of people directly as
well as indirectly. This industry substantially contributes to the revenues of the Central and
State Governments in the form of customs and excise duties, income tax, VAT, entertainment
tax, etc. but, unfortunately, this industry has been left to fend for itself. There is no exclusive
agency to ensure overall development of this industry. Moreover, this industry is under
threat of video and audio piracy. Though Banks and financial institutions are supposed to
provide loans to this industry but so far they are not forthcoming to help this industry. As a
result, the producers have to borrow finance  at a very high rate of interest. The film industry
has a very interesting and chequered history but there is not even a museum at the national
level to preserve the history and legacy of  the industry. Similarly, many a time the film artist's
at the fag end of their lives become indigent and helpless  and are in dire need of medical and
financial assistance but no agency takes care of them and, unfortunately, they die a unsung
death. It has, therefore, become necessary to establish an exclusive Authority in place of
National Films Development Corporation to take care of all these problems of the film industry
and ensure the overall development of the industry.
Hence the Bill.
HEMA MALINI
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Films Development
Authority. Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide funds to the
Authority. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand crores may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A sum of rupees five thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause I2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purposes
of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Films Development Authority for ensuring the
overall development of film industry and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
————
(Shrimati Hema Malini, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1203RS(5)—16.03.07.