Bill No.  XVI  of  2010
Short title
and
commencment.
THE STANDARDISATION OF STYLE OF NAMES OF
CITIZENS BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for standardisation of style of names of citizens and matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Standardisation of style of Names of Citizens
Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “citizen” means a citizen of India;
(b) “first name” means the name of the person;
(c) “Government” means the Central Government;
(d) “middle name” means the name of the father or mother of a person;
(e) “surname” means the community or village name of a person.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
3.  From the date of commencement of this Act, all citizens shall be write their names in
the following manner:—
(a) a citizen shall write firstly his or her first name, which shall be followed by
either his or her father’s name or mother’s name and shall be followed by his or her
surname;
(b) neither the first name, middle name or surname shall be written in split form
but the same shall be written as a composite word.
Illustration
A person’s name is Shantaram, his father’s name is Laxman and his surname is Naik.
The correct style of his name is “Shantaram Laxman Naik” and the incorrect style is “Shanta
Ram Laxman Naik”.
4. The Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules to carry out
the purposes of this Act.
Power to
make rules.
Style to be
followed
writing the
names.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is no standardisation or uniformity in writing of names by citizens of our country.
People in various States write their names in different manner and style. Members of different
communities, religions write their names in varied fashion.
In some parts of the country, citizens use only their first name, not only for social
purposes but also in official matters including in the electoral rolls. It is high time that Indian
citizens, whichever State they may belong to, should adopt a uniform way of writing their
names. A standard way of writing names will also help in proper identification of citizen. In
the interest of national security too, bringing in standardisation in the writing of names is
absolutely necessary.
It is also possible that in cases of some communities there are certain conventional
ways of writing but, if for official purposes one standard is adopted it will certainly serve
national interest.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM  LAXMAN  NAIK

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only as such the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for standardisation of style of names of citizens and matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2352RS(S5)—03.05.2010.