 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No. XVI of 2024 
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012. 
 BE  it  enacted  by  Parliament  in  the  Seventy  fifth  year  of  the  Republic  of  India 
 as follows:– 
5 
1. (1) This Bill may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment 
of section 
19.  
2. In the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in section 19, for sub-section (6), the following shall be,
substituted, namely: ––
“(6)  The Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall, without 
unnecessary delay but within a period of twenty-four hours, produce the child 
against whom an offence under sub-section (1) has either been committed or 
was likely to be committed, before the Child Welfare Committee and report 
the matter to the Special Court or where no Special Court has been designated, 
to the Court of Session, including need of the child for care and protection 
and steps taken in this regard: 
      Provided that on production of the child, the Child Welfare Committee 
shall conduct an inquiry from the child in the manner as prescribed under the 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.”  
5 
10 
32 of 2012. 
Amendment 
of section 
21. 
3. In the principal Act, in section 21, for sub-section (2), the following shall be
substituted, namely:––
 “(2) Any person, being in-charge of any company or an institution (by whatever 
name called) who fails to report the commission of an offence under sub-section (1) of 
section 19 in respect of a subordinate under his control  or an apprehension that such 
an offence  is likely to be committed or  the knowledge that such an offence has been 
committed, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year and with fine.” 
15 
20 
2 of 2016. 
Amendment 
of section 
25. 
4. In the principal Act, in section 25, after sub-section (2), the following new sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:––
“(3)  The statement recorded before the Child Welfare Committee shall be treated 
as a supplementary statement to the statement recorded before the Magistrate 
under  sub-section (1).  
(4) Where there is any deviation in the statement given before the Magistrate
and the statement given before the Child Welfare Committee, the Special Court
shall also take into consideration the statement given to the Child Welfare
Committee.”
25 
30 
Amendment 
of section 
33. 
5. In the principal Act, in section 33, sub-section (8) shall be omitted.
Insertion of 
new 
Chapter 
VIIIA. 
6. In the principal Act, after Chapter VIII, the following new Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:––
“CHAPTER VIIIA 
COMPENSATION AND FINANCIAL AID 
38A.  Any victim under this Act shall be paid final compensation, as applicable.
 
38B. (1) The Special Court may, on its own or on an application filed by or on 
behalf of the victim, recommend the award of final compensation, where the 
accused is convicted, or where the case ends in acquittal or discharge, or the 
accused is not traced or identified, and in the opinion of the Special Court the 
child has suffered loss or injury as a result of that offence: 
35 
40 
Final 
Compensation. 
Procedure for 
final 
compensation. 

3 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Provided that the Special Court may, on its own or an application filed by 
or on behalf of the victim, pass an order for interim compensation to meet the 
needs of the child for relief or rehabilitation at any stage after registration of the 
First Information Report and in such cases, the interim compensation paid shall 
be adjusted against the final, compensation, if any. 
(2) The Special Court  may also make a recommendation for appropriate
compensation, in case it is satisfied that the compensation awarded under 
this Act or any Act or Scheme, as may be applicable in the case, is not 
adequate for rehabilitation of the victim. 
38C. (1) An application for payment of interim or final compensation, as the case 
may be, may be filed by or on behalf of the victim to the concerned District Legal 
Services Authority. 
(2) In cases where the Special Court has made a recommendation, the
concerned legal aid counsel or the victim or any person on behalf of the victim 
may file the application for payment of compensation to the concerned District 
Legal Services Authority. 
(3) The District Legal Services Authority shall in accordance with the
applicable scheme, decide the quantum of the compensation. 
(4) In order to decide the quantum of compensation and/or any other
financial aid that the victim may be in need of, the District Legal Services 
Authority shall conduct an inquiry and take such factors, as may be prescribed, 
into consideration for the purpose. 
(5) In cases where the Special Court has made a recommendation for
awarding compensation, the payment of compensation or any other financial aid, 
as the case may be, shall be made by the District Legal Services Authority within 
thirty days of such recommendation.  
(6) In cases where an application is filed by or on behalf of the victim, the
payment of compensation or any other financial aid, as the case may be, shall be 
made by the District Legal Services Authority within sixty days of receipt of such 
application. 
(7) In case of rejection of the application under sub-section (1), the victim
shall be informed of their entitlement to appeal against the order before State 
Legal Services Authority. 
(8) The District Legal Services Authority shall, wherever deemed
necessary, assign its empanelled counsels for representing the case for award of 
compensation before the Special Court. 
(9) The empanelled counsels of the District Legal Services Authority shall
be responsible for proactively taking up the applications filed before   it for 
payment of compensation.  
Role of the 
District Legal 
Services 
Authority. 

4 
Role of the 
State Legal 
Services 
Authority 
(10) In cases where the compensation amount is not disbursed due to
shortage of funds, the assigned counsel of the District Legal Services Authority 
shall inform the concerned Special Court where the trial of the case of the victim 
is pending or has concluded in this regard.  
(11) The District Legal Services Authority shall develop mechanisms and
protocols, as deemed necessary, to ensure that the Child Care Institutions 
properly utilise the victim compensation, in the best interest of the minor victim. 
38D. (1) Any application for payment of compensation received from the District 
Legal Services Authority shall be disposed of within a period of fifteen days of its 
receipt by the State Legal Services Authority. 
(2) The State Legal Services Authority shall examine all factors related to the
rehabilitation of the victim and then decide the payment of compensation and the 
quantum thereof. 
(3) In case of shortage of funds, the State Legal Services Authority shall take
all steps to ensure that compensation is being released to the victims in a timely 
manner.  
(4) The State Legal Services Authority shall develop a mechanism to track
and map the victim compensation applications with the outcomes of the 
applications.  
(5) The State Legal Services Authority shall develop a digitized mechanism
to track disbursal of funds for victim compensation through banks and ensure that 
bankers are crediting the compensation to the concerned accounts in a timely 
manner. 
(6) In case of Bank Accounts of minor victims without parents or legal
guardians, the State Legal Services Authority may communicate with the bankers 
to ensure that the victim compensation disbursed is being utilised in a timely 
fashion for immediate rehabilitative care of the minor victim. 
(7) The State Legal Services Authority shall create a grievance redressal
mechanism and forum to actively look into complaints filed by the victim or on 
behalf of the victim, regarding award of and/or non-receipt or late receipt of victim 
compensation.”  
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
10 
15 
7. In the principal Act, in section 43, after clause (b), the following new clauses shall be
inserted, namely:––
“(c) heads of educational institutions, teachers or any other person dealing 
with children in educational institutions shall be provided periodical training on 
the matters relating to the implementation of the provisions of the Act. 
(d) sensitization and periodic training on the implementation of the
provisions of the Act shall also be provided to the person in-charge, staff, and other 
personnel of Child Care Institutions.” 
35 
Amendment of 
section 43. 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The objective of a law is fully achieved when it adapts with the changes required 
over the passage of time. This year marks twelve years of the Protection of Children 
from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, 2012, which became the first comprehensive law 
of the country against child sexual abuse. The examination of POSCO by Courts, 
child experts, children organizations, and other stakeholders have brought out a 
series of recommendations to be included in the Act to increase its relevance. Since 
then, POCSO Act, 2012 has undergone amendments in the year 2019 and the new 
POCSO Rules, 2020 have been implemented in 2020. However, there are many 
more important reforms that need to be included in the Act to keep pace with the recent 
amendments to child-related legislation and the evolving child rights policies. The 
ambiguities surrounding certain provisions in the Act need to be addressed through clear 
and concise provisions. While the Rules, 2020 cover many procedural aspects of 
dealing with the victim and their case, there need to be strict provisions provided under 
the Act for complete and effective implementation. 
 There are certain ambiguities surrounding the manner in which heads of 
educational institutions or teachers or any other personnel dealing with children in such 
institutions have to report the offence and deal with the complaint under the POCSO 
Act, 2012. In many cases, the Court has been of the view that the onus of late reporting 
or non-reporting cannot fall on the shoulders of the heads of educational institutions or 
teachers and that they need to be given training in matters relating to implementation of 
the various provisions of the Act so that they are equipped to verify the facts before 
they lodge a complaint under this Act.  
Another important aspect of this law that poses serious ambiguity is about 
providing compensation to victims. A well-stated procedure is what is lacking in the 
existing legislation and the roles and responsibilities of the State and the authorities 
need to be clearly defined. There is a need for a well-established procedure to be 
entailed and followed by all levels of authorities so that the victims are able to get 
their right to compensation and access to compensation. The amendment brought 
out in this Bill provides for a clear procedure that helps in understanding the steps to 
award compensation as well as imposes a duty on the authorities to create 
mechanisms for tracking the process of awarding and payment of the compensation. 
This will help the victims in getting compensation in a timely manner and curb the 
existing delays in victim compensation delivery.  
This Amendment Bill proposes changes to the law which are victim-centric 
and friendly. The amendments are an endeavor to overcome the existing ambiguities 
and help in making the implementation process more transparent and helpful for the 
victims as well as for the institutions working towards implementation of the 
provisions of this Act. 
Hence, this Bill. 
FAUZIA KHAN

6 
ANNEXURE 
 THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT, 2012 (32 
OF 2012) 
 * *  * *  * *  * 
Punishment for 
failure to 
report or 
record a case. 
21. * * * * * *  * 
(2) Any person, being in-charge of any company or an institution (by whatever  name
called) who fails to report the commission of an offence under sub-section  (1) of
section 19 in respect of a subordinate under his control, shall be punished  with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine.
Recording of 
statement of a 
child by 
Magistrate 
 * *  * *  * *  * 
25. (1) If the statement of the child is being recorded under section 164 of the  Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (herein referred to as the Code),  the Magistrate
recording such statement shall, notwithstanding anything  contained therein,
record the statement as spoken by the child:
 Provided that the provisions contained in the first proviso to sub-section 
(1) of section 164 of the Code shall, so far it permits the presence of the advocate of the
accused shall not apply in this case.
(2) The Magistrate shall provide to the child and his parents or his
representative, a copy of the document specified under section 207 of the Code, upon 
the final report being filed by the police under section 173 of that Code.    
* *  * *  * *  * 
Procedure and 
powers of 
Special Court. 
33. * * * * * *  * 
(8) In appropriate cases, the Special Court may, in addition to the
punishment, direct payment of such compensation as may be prescribed to the child 
for any physical or mental trauma caused to him or for immediate 
rehabilitation of such child. 
* *  * *  * *  * 
Public 
awareness 
about Act. 
43.  The Central Government and every State Government, shall take all measures to
ensure 
that—
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through media
including the television, radio and the print media at regular intervals to  make
the general public, children as well as their parents and guardians  aware of the
provisions of this Act;
(b) the officers of the Central Government and the State Governments and  other
concerned persons (including the police officers) are imparted periodic training on
the matters relating to the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
* *  * *  * *  * 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012. 
_______ 
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)-060-06-02-2024 