1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words, "on the recommendation
of the National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A", the words
"based on the recommendation made by the National Judicial Appointments Commission in
accordance with provisions of Chapter IVA of Part V" shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST APRIL, 2022
Bill No. XVI of  2022
5
Amendment of
article 124.

2
Omission of
articles 124A,
124B and 124C.
3. Articles 124A, 124B and 124C of the Constitution shall be omitted.
4. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "on the recommendation
of the National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A", the words
"based on the recommendation made by the National Judicial Appointments Commission in
accordance with provisions of Chapter IVA of Part V" shall be substituted.
5. In article 222 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "on the recommendation
of the National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A", the words
"based on the recommendation made by the National Judicial Appointments Commission in
accordance with provisions of Chapter IVA of Part V" shall be substituted.
6. In Part V of the Constitution, after Chapter IV, the following Chapter IV A shall be
inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER IV A—NATIONAL  JUDICIAL  APPOINTMENTS  COMMISSION
147A. (1) There shall be a Commission to be known as the National Judicial
Appointments Commission.
(2)  The Commission shall consist of the following:
(a)  the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex officio;
(b)  three other Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of
India in seniority—Members, ex officio;
(c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice-Member, ex officio;
(d) two eminent persons from civil society to be nominated by the
committee consisting of the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the
Leader of Opposition in the House of the People or where there is no such
Leader of Opposition, then, the Leader of the single largest Opposition Party in
the House of the People—Members:
Provided that at least one of the eminent persons shall be nominated from
amongst the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,
Other Backward Classes, minorities or women:
Provided further that an eminent person shall be nominated for a period of
three years and shall not be eligible for renomination:
Provided also that the Commission shall, by regulations, specify such
criteria, procedures and conditions for nomination, disqualification and removal
of eminent persons, as it may consider necessary.
147B. (1) It shall be the duty of the Commission to—
(a) make recommendations of persons for appointment as Chief Justice of
India, Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and other
Judges of High Courts; and
(b) make recommendations for the transfer of Chief Justice and other Judges
of High Courts from one High Court to any other High Court:
Provided that the Commission shall ensure that the person recommended
is of ability and integrity:
Provided further that the Commission shall ensure fair representation of
backward classes, minorities, women and different regions in making appointment
of Judges.
Amendment
of article 217.
Amendment
of article 222.
Insertion of
Chapter IVA.
National
Judicial
Appointments
Commission.
Functions
of the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

147C. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of thirty days from the
date of coming into force of this Act, intimate the vacancies for the posts of Judges in
the Supreme Court and the High Courts to the Commission for making its
recommendations to fill up such vacancies.
(2) The Central Government shall, six months prior to the date of occurrence of
any vacancy on account of completion of the term of a Judge of the Supreme Court or
a High Court, make a reference to the Commission for making its recommendation to fill
up such vacancy.
(3)  The Central Government shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of
occurrence of any vacancy on account of death or resignation of a Judge of the
Supreme Court or a High Court, make a reference to the Commission for making its
recommendation to fill up such vacancy.
147D. (1) The Commission shall recommend the senior most Judge of the Supreme
Court for appointment as the Chief Justice of India if he or she is considered fit to hold
the office:
Provided that any member of the Commission whose name is being considered
for recommendation shall not participate in that meeting of the Commission.
(2) The Commission shall recommend, on the basis of merit and any other criteria
of suitability as may be specified by regulation, such person for appointment as a
Judge of the Supreme Court who is eligible to be appointed as such under clause (3)  of
article 124 of the Consititution:
Provided that while making a recommendation of a Judge of a High Court for
appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court, apart from seniority, the merit of such
Judge shall be considered.
(3)  The Commission may, by  regulations, specify such other procedures and
conditions for selection and appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court as it may
consider necessary.
147E. ( 1) The Commission shall recommend a Judge of a High Court for
appointment as the Chief Justice of a High Court on the basis of inter se seniority of
High Court Judges, merit and any other criteria of suitability as may be specified by
regulations.
(2) The Commission shall seek nomination from the Chief Justice of the concerned
High Court for the purpose of recommending a person for appointment as a Judge of
that High Court.
(3) The Commission shall also nominate, on the basis of merit and any other
criteria of suitability as may be specified by regulations, such persons for appointment
as a Judge of a High Court who are eligible to be appointed as such under clause (2)  of
artilce 217 of the Constitution and forward their names to the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court for its views.
(4) Before making any nomination under clause (2)  or giving its views under
clause (3), the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court shall consult two senior-most
Judges of that High Court and such other Judges and eminent advocates of that High
Court as may be specified by regulations.
(5)  After receiving views and nomination under clauses ( 2)  and ( 3), the
Commission may recommend that person for appointment who is found suitable on
the basis of merit and any other criteria of suitability as may be specified by regulations.
(6) The Commission shall elicit in writing the views of the Governor and the
Chief Minister of the State concerned before making such recommendation in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
3
Reference to
Commission
for filling up
of vacancies.
Procedure for
selection of
Judge of
Supreme
Court.
Procedure for
selection of
Judge of High
Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(7) The Commission may, by regulations, specify such other procedures and
conditions for selection and appointment of a Chief Justice of a High Court and a
Judge of a High Court as it may consider necessary.
147F. The Commission shall recommend for transfer of Chief Justices and other
Judges of High Courts from one High Court to any other High Court, and for this
purpose, specify, by regulations, the procedures and conditions for such transfer.
147G.(1) The minutes of the proceedings of each meeting of the Commission
shall be published within three weeks of the date of the meeting.
(2) While recommending the appointment of a person as Chief Justice of India,
Judge of the Supreme court, Chief Justice of a High Court or other Judge of a High
Court or the transfer of a Chief Justice of a High Court or other Judge of a High Courts
from one High Court to any other High Court, the Commission shall publish detailed
reasons for making such a recommendation for appointment or transfer, as the case
may be:
Provided that in the event of a dissenting opinion by any member, the Commission
shall record and publish the same in the form of a dissent note.
147H. The President shall, based on the recommendation made by the
Commission, appoint the Chief Justice of India, a Judge of the Supreme Court, the
Chief Justice of a High Court or a Judge of a High Court, as the case may be:
Provided that the President may, if considers necessary, require the Commission
to reconsider the recommendation made by it:
Provided further that if the Commission makes a recommendation after
reconsideration, the President shall make the appointment in accordance thereof.
147I.(1) The Commission shall have the power to specify, by regulations, the
procedure for the discharge of its functions.
(2) The Commission shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may
direct and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at
its meetings, including the quorum at its meetings, as it may specify by regulations.
147J.(1) The Commission may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
regulations consistent with the provisions of this Chapter, to carry out the provisions
of this Chapter.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the criteria, procedures and conditions for nomination, disqualification
and removal of eminent persons under article 147A;
(b) the criteria of suitability with respect to appointment of a Judge of the
Supreme Court under clause (2) of article 147D;
(c) other procedure and conditions for selection and appointment of a
Judge of the Supreme Court under clause (3) of article 147D;
(d) the criteria of suitability with respect to appointment of a Chief Justice
of a High Court under clause (1) of article 147E;
(e) the criteria of suitability with respect to appointment of a Judge of a
High Court under clauses (3) and (5) of article 147E;
(f) other Judges and eminent advocates who may be consulted by the
Chief Justice under clause (4) of article 147E;
Publication of
relevnt
information.
Procedure for
transfer of
Judges.
Power of
President to
require
reconsideration.
Procedure to
be followed by
Commission
in discharge of
its functions.
Power to make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(g) the manner of eliciting views of the Governor and the Chief Minister
under clause (6) of article 147E;
(h) other procedure and conditions for selection and appointment of a
Judge of a High Court under clause (7) of article 147E;
(i) the procedure for transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges from one
High Court to any other High Court under article 147F;
(j) the procedure to be followed by the Commission in the discharge of its
functions under clause (1) of article 147I;
(k) the rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at the
meetings of Commission, including the quorum at its meeting, under clause (2)
of article 147I;
(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by
regulations or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations."
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The procedure for judicial appointments in the Constitution has been subject to various
judicial interpretations over the years. While in S.P. Gupta v. Union of India (1981), the
opinion of the Chief Justice was held to be not binding on the President, in Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association v. Union of India (1993), this ruling was reversed and the
President was made bound by the opinion of the Chief Justice. The primacy of the judiciary
over the executive in making judicial appointments was clarified in Re Special Reference
No. 1 (1998) through the formation of a collegiums (consisting of the Chief Justice and the
next four senior judges of the Supreme Court) that would collectively provide a binding
recommendation to the President.
2. However, in the nearly three decades of its functioning, the collegium system has
attracted much disaffection over its manner of a functioning, absence of checks and balances
by other organs and lack of participation by various stakeholders. To remedy this, the
Constitition (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014 was enacted, with the aim of establishing
a broad-based National Judicial Appointments Commission (NJAC) for making judicial
appointments that would enable participation by judiciary, executive and eminent persons
alike and ensure greater transparency and objectivity in the process. However, the Act was
struck down by the Supreme Court in its entirety in Supreme Court Advocate-on-Record
Association v. Union of India (2015), thereby restoring the collegium system.
3. The primacy of the judiciary under the present collegium system is in stark
contradiction with the vision of the constitution makers, evidenced by the remarks of
Dr.  B.R.  Ambedkar during the Constituent Assembly debates (24th May 1949): "I personally
feel no doubt that the Chief Justice is a very eminent person. But after all, the chief Justice
is a man with all the failings, all the sentiments and all the prejudices which we as common
people have; and I think to allow the Chief Justice practically a veto upon the appointment
of judges is really to transfer the authority to the Chief Justice which we are not prepared
to vest in the President or the Government of the day. I ther efore, think that that is also a
dangerous proposition."
4. Given that it is ill-judged to allow any single organ to exercise unabated powers in
making judicial appointments, this Bill seeks to chart a middle path by reconstituting the
NJAC. However, in doing so, this Bill removes the defects in the then proposed NJAC that
were pointed out by the Supreme Court. For instance, the Bill retains independence of the
judiciary by granting majority representation to the judicial members and eliminating the
provision of veto powers. it provides extensive powers to the NJAC to prescribe appropriate
criteria for enabling objectivity in its recommendations and to regulate its own procedures
for ensuring flexibility in its functioning. The Bill also facilitates transparency by mandating
the publication of the minutes of its meetings and requiring it to publish detailed reasons that
form the basis of its recommendations along with the corresponding dissent notes, if any.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
V. VIJAYASAI REDDY
6

Establishment
and
constitution
of Supreme
Court.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
124. ( 1) * * * * * *
(2)   Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in article 124A and shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-
five years:
Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his
office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in clause (4).
* * * * * *
124A. (1) there shall be a Commission to be known as the National Judicial Appointments
Commission consisting of the following, namely:—
(a) the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of
India—Members, ex-officio;
(c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice—Member, ex-officio;
(d) two eminent persons to be nominated by the committeee consisting of the
Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the House of
the People or where there is no such Leader of Opposition, then, the Leader of single
largest Opposition Party in the House of the People—Members:
Provided that one of the eminent person shall be nominated from amongst the
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward
Classes, Minorities or Women:
Provided further that an eminent person shall be nominated for a period of three
years and shall not be eligible for renomination.
(2) No act or proceedings of the National Judicial Appointments Commission
shall be questioned or be invalidated merely on the ground of the existence of any
vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.
124B. It shall be the duty of the National Judicial Appointments Commission to—
(a) recommend persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges of the
Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and other Judges of High Courts;
(b) recommend transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts from
one High Court to any other High Court; and
(c) ensure that the persons recommended is of ability and integrity.
124C. Parliament may by law, regulate the procedure for the appointment of Chief
Justice of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges
of High Courts and empower the Commission to lay down by regulations the procedure for
the discharge of its functions, the manner of selection of persons for appointment and such
other matters as may be considered necessary by it.
* * * * * *
National
Judicial
Appointments
Commission.
Functions of
Commission.
Power of
Parliament to
make law.
7

8
217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in article 124A, and the Governor of the State, and, in the case of
appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court, shall
hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any
other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years:
Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his
office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the manner
provided in clause (4 ) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court;
(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by the President
to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the President to any
other High Court within the territory of India.
* * * * * *
222. (1) The President may, on the recommendation of the National Judicial Apointments
Commission referred to in article 124A, transfer a Judge from one High Court to any other
High Court.
* * * * * *
Appointment
and conditions
of the office
of a Judge of a
High Court.
Transfer of a
Judge from one
High Court to
another.

RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—44RS(S3)—04-04-2022.