THE  COMPULSORY  GENDER  SENSITISATION  CURRICULUM IN
EDUCATIONAL  INSTITUTIONS BILL,  2014
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory incorporation of gender sensitisation curriculum in educational
institutions from primary to secondary level in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Gender Sensitisation Curriculum in
Educational Institutions Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. XVI of  2014
Short title,
extent and
Commencement.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

2
(b) "Council" means the State Gender Sensitisation Council constituted under
section 7;
(c) "educational institution" means any school imparting education from primary
to secondary level;
(d) "gender sensitisation education" means education based on teaching that
propagates gender equality by improving curriculum and text books to include gender
positive material and any other learning activities that promote gender equality;
(e)"prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
 (f) "President" means the Chairperson of the State Advisory Council referred to
in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 7.
3. From such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify, gender sensitisation education shall be compulsorily imparted in all educational
institutions upto secondary level.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of notification under
Section 3, issue direction for compulsory imparting of gender sensitisation education in all
educational institution, within its jurisdiction.
5. The appropriate Government shall derecognise an educational institution, which
does not comply with the provision of section 3:
Provided that any such derecognition shall be done only after giving such educational
institutions a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
6. Subject to such rules, as many be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
cause to appoint such number of teachers with such qualifications as may be specified, for
imparting gender sensitisation education to students upto secondary level.
 7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a State Gender Sensitisation Counicl in each State.
(2) The Council shall consist of,—
(a) the Union Minister of Human Resource Development , President, ex officio;
(b) four persons from the State Boards of Primary and Secondary Education, to be
nominated by the specific State Board—Members:
Provided that the persons shall be nominated for a period of two years and shall be
eligible for re-nomination.
(c) three eminent persons from the civil society who are knowledgeable about gender
sensitisaton issues, to be nominated by the Governor of the State—Members:
Provided that the persons shall be nominated for a period of two years and shall not be
eligible for re-nomination.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Council,—
(a) to review existing policies, rules, regulations and procedures with a view to
encompassing gender values, needs and aspirations as well as removing those which
are gender blind or out-of-date.
(b) to actively suggest the state boards of education about changes and gender
perspective guidelines regarding curriculum design to achieve the aforementioned
objective.
(c) to co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and educational institutions
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of the Act.
Issuing of
direction by
appropriate
Government.
Compulsory
imparting of
gender
Sensitisation
education in
educational
institutions.
Derecognition
of educational
institution.
Appointment
of  teachers.
Establishment
of State Gender
Sensitisation
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(d) to have the responsibility of reviewing the concerned educational institution
in case of voilating of section 3.
(e) to recommend the appropriate government on derecognition of educational
institutions in case of  voilation of section 3 of the Act.
(f) to plan, implement, monitor and evaluate gender specific initiatives.
8. (1) The State Government may appoint such number of officers and other employees
as it may consider necessary for the discharge of functions of the State Gender Sensitisation
Council under this Act.
(2) The terms and other conditions of service of the officers and other employees of
the Council appointed under sub-section (1) of  Section 8, shall be such as may be prescribed.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to a minority educational  institution only if the management of such institution
conveys to the appropriate Government their willingness to impart gender sensitisation
education in their institution.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf provide adequate funds to the States for appointing teachers and other
infrastructure required for the purpose of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act, shall be  addition to and not
in derogation  of any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session  or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Officers and
staff of the
State Gender
Sensitisation
Council.
Application
to minority
educational
institutions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
affecting of
Act.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Recent spate of sexual and other crimes against women have once again indicated the
need to change social attitude towards women in the country. In the debate following these
reports, many civil society organisations and educationists have suggested that gender
sensitisation from an early age can transform the mind sets towards roles of women among
children of both genders.
As Indian society is rapidly changing, with greater participation for women in public
life, it is imperative that the new generation is more prepared to incorporate women in all
walks of life. In the past the National Council for Educational Research and Training  (NCERT)
has included gender as an issue in the National School Curriculum in 2005, however its own
curriculum implementation report fails to mention whether the recommendations have been
incorporated.
Recently, it has also been reported that Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE)
intends to incorporate gender sensitisation in its school curriculum. While this is a laudable
development, exposure to gender sensitisation to school students needs to extend to all
schools in the country regardless of which board they are studying under.
This Bill proposes that gender sensitisation be incorporated in primary and secondary
school curriculum all over the country. This is to signal a clear mandate from the national
legislature that school curriculums all over the country should be reviewed to make them
more gender sensitive.
The Bill aims that state boards with the recommendations of the State Gender
Sensitisation Councils tailor gender sensitisation curriculums to their contexts and ensure
successful implementation following this directive.
Hence, this Bill.
 KANW AR DEEP SINGH

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers to impart gender sensitisation
education to students. Clause 7 provides for establishment of State Gender Sensitisation
Council which shall include person having experience of teaching gender sensitisation
education. Clause  10 provides that Central Government shall provide funds for the purpose
of teachers and infrastructure. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one
hundred crore will be required for the purpose.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees three hundred crore will also be
required.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory incorporation of gender sensitisation curriculum in educational
institutions from primary to secondary level in the country and for  matters connnected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3782RS(S3)—18.12.2014.