As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SaBiia

Bill No. XVI of 2001

THE WELFARE OF CRAFTSMEN AND ARTISANS BILL, 2001
A
Bre

to provide for the protection and welfare of craftsmen and artisans in the country and for
matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Welfare of the Craftsmen and Artisans Act 2001.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
5 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means the Welfare Board Constituted under section 3;

(0) “craftsmen and artisans” means the persons whether male or female engaged
in craft of weaving, kalamkari, banjara embroidery, wood work, brass and bell metal,
shawls, wood carving, mat weaving, cane and bamboo textiles and leather work.

10 3. (2) There shall be constituted a Welfare Board to protect the interests and welfare
of all craftsmen and artisans in the country.

(2) The Government shall appoint Chairman and such other number of members of
the Board from among the members of the craftsmen and artisans in the country as may be
prescribed.

Short title and
commencement.

Constitution
of Board.


Functions of
the Board.

Overriding
effect of the
rules.

Power to
make rules.

4. The Board shall,—

(a) provide protection, help and assistance to artisans and craftsmen for
development of the art;

(0) make efforts to organise the artisans and craftsmen engaged in different
patterns of art under one forum;

(0 provide loans and financial assistance on such terms and conditions which.
may be prescribed by the Board; and

(@) make such other provisions for better service conditions and other
necessities of the life.

5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
give effect to the provisions of this Act. पु


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There is nearly 48.22 lakh population of handicrafts and artisans living in different -
parts of the country. All these craftsmen and artisans are living in the different States with
different pattern of crafts. These craftsmen and artisans have not been fully looked after and
no new technology has been provided to them. They live and die poorly and have no means
to look after them when they become old and are not capable of working any more. These
handicrafts industry besides providing direct and indirect employment to nearly 76 lakhs
people have played important role in the process of dissemination of social and economic
power in rural areas. The handicrafts artisans of India have become well-known in the world

7 for their perfection. The exports of handicrafts have shown great strength as well as promise.
Our carpet industry is one of the leading industry in the world. Various groups such as
artisans, exporters, designers, importers and craft lovers have brought this country pride.
Therefore, it is necessary that the Government should promote and look after the welfare of
the craftsmen weavers and artisans properly and make Provisions for betterment their
Conditions of service.

Hence this Bill.

RUMANDLA RAMACHANDRAIAH


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the Constitution of a Welfare Board to protect the
interests and welfare of all craftsmen and artisans in the country. Clause 4 provides for the
appointment of Chairman and members of the Board and to render such financial assistance
as may be necessary to the needy artisans and craftsmen. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees Four
Hundred Crores may involve as recurring expenditure per annum,

A sum of rupees two crores is also likely to be involved as non recurring expenditure.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the protection and welfare of craftsmen and artisans in the
country and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6383RS—1 4-02-2001.