THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE  AND  COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Right of Children to free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, for
Section 16, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘16. (1)  No child admitted in a school shall be expelled from school till the
completion of elementary education.
(2) A child undergoing elementary education in a school shall be promoted to
the next class only on fulfilling the criteria pertaining to attendance in the class and the
ability to read, write and understand in such manner as may be prescribed."
Bill No. XVI of 2016
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
new section for
section 16 of Act
35 of 2009.
Prohibition of
expulsion and
eligibility for
promotion.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MARCH,  2016

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 aims to facilitate
the children of  the country in acquiring elementary education. For achieving this objective,
section 16 of the Act provides for two things, namely, the first that no child undergoing
elementary education shall be expelled from the school and secondly that no such child shall
be held back in any class.
The later condition that no child shall be held back in any class while undergoing
elementary education is, however, not showing healthy results. It is seen that children  are
routinely being promoted from one class to the higher one without any linkage to the learning
they have attained. There are instances where the children's attendance have been very less
and consequently, they were not able to learn meaningfully. This defeats the purposes of the
Act.
The Bill seeks to lay down some bench mark the fulfilment of which should be made
mandatory before a child is elevated to the next higher class while acquiring elementary
education.
Hence this Bill.
BHUPENDER YADA V

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009
(35 OF 2009)
* * * * *
16. No child admitted in a school shall be held back in any class or expelled from school
till the completion of elementary education.
* * * * *
Prohibition
of holding
back and
expulsion.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009
————
(Shri Bhupender Yadav, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5046RS(S3)—11-03-2016.