Bill No. XVI of  2020
Short title.
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2020.
2. In the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, in section 8,
after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(j) provide incentive, financial or otherwise, to the parent or guardian, as the case may
be, whose child has been enrolled in any school:
Provided that a person shall be entitled to the incentive, financial or otherwise,
as the case may be, only if the gross annual family income is below eight lakh rupees,
or as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, from time to time."
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021
Amendment
of section 8.
5
10

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Bill, in essence, is based on the successful Jagananna Amma Vodi programme of
Andhra Pradesh. The said program has helped to increase the student enrolments in the
state. This law therefore can be replicated nationally.
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, tried to bring in a
healthy regime for compulsory elementary education, such as establishing neighbouring
schools, providing training to teaching staff and prescribing of curriculum in a timely manner
but fell short of incentivising the parents or the guardians who would be sending their wards
to school.
The insertion of clause(s) of article 51A in the constitution of India merely made it a
fundamental duty for the parent or guardian to provide educational opportunities to his child
between the ages of six to fourteen. However, a need was felt to take further steps which
would result in an increase in enrolment levels in the country.
An amendment in the 2009 Act to provide incentives to parents or guardian is required
to enable India to achieve its target of hundred per cent enrolment in elementary schools.
Hence, this Bill.
V . VIJAYASAI REDDY

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
The intended amendment to the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
Act, 2009 provides for giving incentives financial or otherwise, to the parents or guardians,
subject to a minimum income limit. A recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand
crore per annum is anticipated for the expenses towards the same.
No non-recurring expenditure likely to be incurred.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1313RS(S3)—07-12-2021.