THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 2015.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 500 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that any person who defames Mohandas  Karamchand Gandhi known
as Mahatma Gandhi and referred to, with great reverence, as "the Father of the Nation",
shall also be punished with imprisonment which may extend upto two years or with
fine or with both”.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of section
500 of Act
45 of 1860.
5
Bill No. XVIII of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH  APRIL, 2015
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mahatma Gandhi was a leader acclaimed throughout the world as messiah of peace.
International figures like Nelson Mandela and Barack Obama have publicly expressed the
relevance of Mahatma in today's world.
India would not have been a free country, had it not been for the political leaders in our
country who worked under the leadership of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, known as
Mahatma Gandhi and referred to as, with great reverence as “Father of the Nation”. However,
unfortunately, there is tendency growing in some sections of our society to demean the
personality, philosophy and preaching of Mahatma Gandhi, since their views differ from the
views of Gandhiji.
In recent times, Mahatma Gandhi is being defamed by certain political leaders and
others by using defamatory language. Some persons leave no opportunity to denigrate
Bapuji in unacceptable language which smacks of devoid of patriotism.
When we mention with great respect and recognition the role Gandhi in freedom
movement and say De Di Hame Aazadi Bina Khadag Bina Dhal Sabarmati Ke Sant Tune
Kar Diya Kamaal. Aandhi Me Bhi Jalti Rahi Gandhi Teri Mashaal Sabarmati Ke Sant
Tune Kar Diya Kamaal", we have also to respect the feelings of millions of Indians.
It  will, therefore, be in the fitness of things that those who defame Gandhiji are to be
severely punished.
Hence, this Bill.
SHANTARAM NAIK
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—571RS (S3)—27-04-2015.