AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007
THE JHUGGI-JHOPRI, SLUMS AND PA VEMENT  DWELLERS
 (BASIC AMENITIES, WELFARE AND MISCELLANEOUS
PROVISIONS) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the basic amenities like drinking water, sanitation, electricity,
healthcare, etc. to the dwellers of Jhuggi-Jhopri cluster, slums and pavements
 or footpaths of the Country and for non removal or demolition of clusters
or from the pavements without providing alternative habitation to the
dwellers and for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Jhuggi-Jhopri, Slums and Pavement Dwellers (Basic
Amenities, Welfare and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2006.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XVIII  of  2006
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) “Jhuggi-Jhopri” means a dwelling unit roughly built with mud, metal or wood
having thatched or tin shed covering roof;
(c) “pavement dweller” means the person who lives on the pavement of roads or
footpaths, street or in the open space;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “slum” includes an area consisting of badly built, overcrowded houses with
unhygienic conditions and without civic amenities around.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a national policy for
the betterment, removal and rehabilitation, upkeep of the slums and JJ clusters and for the
welfare of the people living therein and also for those living on the pavements or footpaths
in urban area particularly in the Metropolitan and other big cities.
(2) The National Policy so formulated under sub-section ( 1) shall be uniformally
implemented throughout the Country and the policy may incorporate provisions for civic
amenities like drinking water, electricity, sewerage, toilets, drainage, roads, passage, sanitation
and healthcare for the residents of slums, JJ clusters and pavement dwellers.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall construct such number of appropriate dwelling
units with attached kitchen, toilet and bathroom for the slum, Jhuggi Jhopri and pavement
dwellers and allot them to the dwellers with such terms, conditions and in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) The dwelling units constructed under sub-section (1) shall be provided with all
civic amenities such as potable water, electricity, sewerage system, toilets individual as
well as community toilets (sulabh) drainage, road passage, sanitation, park and health
services for the residents of such dwelling units.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
slum or Jhuggi Jhopri cluster which is in existence for more than a year shall be removed or
demolished either by the appropriate Government or its agency including local self Government
or its agency or body without making alternative arrangement of dwelling houses for the
residents of such slum or Jhuggi Jhopri cluster.
6. The appropriate Government, with a view to implementing welfare measures for
the pavement or footpath dwellers shall,—
(a) take a human approach for such dwellers by recognizing the right to use the
pavements for the purpose of living till alternative arrangements are made for them;
(b) construct such number of night shelters or Rain Baseras for the pavement
dwellers as it may deem necessary with such facilities as may be prescribed;
(c) provide the necessary healthcare with free check ups, medicine, diagnostic
checks through mobile dispensaries or units established for that purpose;
(d) distribute free of cost mosquito nets to the pavement dwellers to save them
from malaria, dengue, encephalitis and other vector borne diseases;
(e) admit the children of pavement dwellers in Government run or aided schools
and institutions and provide them with free accommodation, board and lodging, meals,
etc. wherever necessary with dresses, books and other educational material and
other facilities for educational, vocational training and for their rehabilitation and
such other facilities for the development of character and career so as to ensure all
round growth of such children.
Definitions.
National
Policy for
Jhuggi-
Jhopri, slum
clusters and
pavement
dwellers.
5
10
Provision of
houses for
slum, JJ
cluster and
pavement
dwellers.
Slum, JJ
cluster not be
demolished
without
providing
alternative
residence.
Special
provisions for
the welfare of
pavement
dwellers.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(f) render necessary help in cash, kind and advice for the self employment of the
pavement dwellers in such manner as may be prescribed.
(g) make such other provision as the appropriate Government may deem neces-
sary expedient for the purposes of this Act.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for the implementation of the provisions
of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and of any rules made there under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to supple-
ment other
laws.
Power to
make rules.
3
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In urban areas of our Country and more so in the Metropolitans, substantial population
lives in slums, Jhuggi Jhopri (JJ) clusters and on the pavements or footpaths. For instance,
in Mumbai Metropolitan alone there is Asia's biggest slum "Dharavi" and thousands of
other slum areas and JJ cluster right adjacent to airport and in every nook and corner of the
city where millions of people live in most inhuman conditions without civic amenities. Similarly,
millions of people live and subsist on pavements or footpaths of Mumbai struggling for
basic amenities of two square meals and healthcare. Similar is the case of rest of the Country
be it the national Capital Delhi or Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Bangalore,
Ahmedabad or any other big city or metropolitan city where slum and JJ clusters can be seen
in all parts. During night time, the pavement dwellers can be seen facing the vagaries of
nature particularly in the rainy and winter season. The number of slum, JJ and pavement
dwellers is increasing because of exodus from rural areas to urban areas in search of
employment. These unfortunate people have no other option but to live in inhuman conditions,
falling victims to various diseases and many a time losing their lives.
It is high time to have a National Policy for the slums, JJ clusters and pavement
dwellers of the Country. In a Welfare State like ours it is the duty of the Central and State
Governments to provide basic amenities like safe potable water, electricity, sewerage system,
toilets in individual household as well as community toilets on the lines of Sulabh latrines,
drainage, road passage, sanitation facilities, park, schools and healthcare facilities to the
slums and JJ cluster residents. Similarly, welfare measures have to be taken for the pavement
or footpath dwellers of the Country who are also part and parcel of our society.
Hence this Bill.
HEMA  MALINI
PRESIDENT’S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117(3)  OF
THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
(Copy of letter No. D.O. No. H-11017/1/2006-DD(M)I dated the 9th October, 2006 from
Kumari Salja, Minister of State (Independent Charge) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation to the Secrtary-General, Rajya Sabha).
“The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Bill viz.
‘The Jhuggi-Jhopri, Slums and Pavement, Dwellers (Basic Amenities, Welfare and Miscella-
neous Provisions) Bill, 2006’ by Smt. Hema Malini, M.P. (Rajya Sabha), recommends to the
Rajya Sabha the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution”.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill makes provision of houses for slum, JJ clusters and pavement
dwellers. Clause 6 makes special provision for the welfare of pavement dwellers. Clause 7
makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide adequate funds to the States for
the implementation of the provisions of this Bill. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees ten thousands crore
may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees five thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the basic amenities like drinking water, sanitation, electricity, healthcare, etc.
to the dwellers of Jhuggi-Jhopri cluster, slums and pavements or footpaths of the
 Country and for non removal or demolition of clusters or from the pavements
 without providing alternative habitation to the dwellers and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Hema Malini, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1205RS(S5)—16.03.2007.