THE SECURITISATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF FINANCIAL
ASSETS AND ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets
and Enforcement of Security Interest  (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, in clause
(c) of sub-section (1), the following words shall be omitted, namely,:—
"(iva) a multi-State co-operative bank; or".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XVIII of  2023
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
Amendment of
Section 2.
54 of 2022.
5
10

2
3. In the principal Act, after section 31A, the following new sections shall be inserted,
namely,—
"31B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, co-operative banks or
any other financial institutions established under any State Act, shall be excluded from
the operation of this Act.
31C. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act
shall not apply,—
(i) in the event of default by a borrower who has taken financial assistance for an
amount not exceeding ten lakh rupees; or
(ii) in the event of default by a borrower, when his debt security is the only
dwelling unit or house in the ownership of the borrower and his family, in India or
elsewhere,".
Insertion of
new sections
31B and 31C.
Exclusion of
co-operative
banks or any
other financial
institution
established
under any
State Act from
operation of
the Act.
Exemption of
certain debts.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
All States in the country are affected by debt related suicides of farmers and other
members of society. The approach in debt recovery as per the Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 is more
stringent and common people are left with no choice other than forced internal displacement
and homelessness. The agriculture sector is also affected when the farmers are forcefully
evicted due to this practice. The basic objectives of housing schemes are also thwarted
because of the present provisions of the Act.
2. This Bill seeks to address the above social issue at hand by providing a balancing
relief to the small debtors and farmers. It also intends to exclude the co-operative banks and
other financial institutions established under a State enactment, so that the States can redress
the issue by working out different solutions including the rehabilitation of debtor in the case
of bona fide default through a housing scheme or otherwise.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
A.A. RAHIM
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE SECURITISATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND
ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST
ACT, 2002
 (ACT NO. 54 OF 2002)
* * * * *
2. (1) * * * * *
(c) "bank" means—
(i) a banking company; or
(ii) a corresponding new bank; or
(iii) the State Bank of India; or
(iv) a subsidiary bank; or
(iva) a multi-State co-operative bank; or
(v) such other bank which the Central Government may, by notification,
specify for the purposes of this Act;
* * * * *
31A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the public interest, direct that
any of the provisions of this Act,—
(a) shall not apply to such class or classes of banks or financial institutions; or
(b) shall apply to the class or classes of banks or financial institutions with such
exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may be  specified in the notification.
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be  issued under sub-section (1), shall be
laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days, and if both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of notification or both Houses
agree in making any modification in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as
the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both
the Houses.
(3) In reckoning any such period of  thirty days as is referred to in sub-section (2), no
account shall be taken of any period during which the House referred to in sub-section (2) is
prorogued or adjourned for more than four consecutive days.
(4) The copies of every notification issued under this section shall, as soon as may be
after it has been issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
* * * * *
4
Definitions.
Power to
exempt a class
or classes of
banks or
financial
institutions.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.
————
(Shri A.A. Rahim,  M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB (E) –043–05.02.2024.