THE FARMERS AND AGRICULTURAL WORKERS SOCIAL SECURITY
BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for social security and welfare measures for Farmers and agricultural
workers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers and Agricultural Workers Social Security Act,
2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XVII of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE  24TH  APRIL, 2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural produce" include, paddy, wheat, coarse cereals, pulses,
sugarcane, gram, cotton, oilseeds, vegetables, fruits, jute, coconut, tobacco, areca
nuts and such other agricultural produce as may be notified by the Central Government
from time to time and also "seed" as defined in the Seeds Act, 1966;
(b) "agricultural worker" means a person who is engaged in agricultural
occupations like raising crops, dairy, farming, horticulture, poultry, etc. on payment of
wages;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
the State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(d) "Board" means the National Farmers and Agricultural Workers Social Security
Advisory Board constituted under section 4;
(e) "farmer" means a person who owns land and cultivates or causes it to be
cultivated for agricultural or horticulture purposes and includes small and marginal
farmers as identified by the appropriate Government;
(f) "Fund" means the National Farmers and Agriculture Workers Welfare Fund
established under section 6;
(g) "old age farmer or agricultural worker" means a farmer or agricultural worker
who has completed sixty years of age; and
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall formulate, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes
for farmers and agricultural workers on the matters relating to—
(a) Insurance covering life (death as well as suicide) and disability;
(b) health and maternity benefits;
(c) provident fund; and
(d) pension to old age farmers and agricultural workers.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Farmers and Agricultural Workers Social Security Advisory Board to exercise
the powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) two representatives of farmers to be nominated by the Central Government;
(c) two representatives of agricultural workers to be nominated by the Central
Government; and
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Ministry of
Agriculture shall be the ex-officio Member-Secretary to the Board.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall make available to the Board such number of officers
and staff as may be required for efficient functioning of the Board.
5. The Board shall :—
(a) make recommendations to the Central Government to formulate and implement
suitable schemes for the welfare of farmers and agricultural workers;
Definitions.
Framing of
welfare
schemes for
farmers and
agricultural
workers.
Constitution
of the
National
Farmers and
Agricultural
Workers
Social
Security
Advisory
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
54 of 1966.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the
administration of this Act as may be referred to it;
(c) advise the Central Government regarding administration of the Fund; and
(d) undertake such other functions as may be assisgned to it by the Central
Government from time to time.
6. (1) There shall be constituted by the Board a fund to be called the National Farmers
and Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees fifty thousand
crore to be provided by the Central Government, after due appropriation made by the
Parliament by law in this behalf for carrying out the purpose of this act.
(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in
such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) The fund also shall comprise all sums received by the Board from such other
sources as may be decided by the Central Government.
7. The fund shall be utilized to provide financial assistance to the farmers and agricultural
workers for the following purposes—
(a) compensation in case of death, suicide or accident;
(b) old age pension;
(c) disability assistance; and
(d) free health care facility to the farmers and agricultural workers and their family
members.
8. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more succesive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Establishment
of the
National
Farmers and
Agriculture
Workers
Welfare Funds.
Utilization of
Fund.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The poor farmers with small cultivable area of land and without any cultivable
land live a miserable life. They work either on their small land or on daily wages on the
farms of others. The wages of landless farmers are too low. They belong to the class of
have-nots, although they are the very backbone of our agriculture. They have a handful
of children and a bagful of debts. They are the worst victims of our society. These
farmers are like seeds that not themselves to give fruits and flowers to others.
Our real farmers are these small farmers and agriculture workers. They are known
by their very look. It is a look of despair. They look more dead than alive. There is
hardly a line of smile on their faces or a ray of hope in their hearts. They are hungry and
almost naked. The National Farmers Commission has recently highlighted that nearly
one lakh fifty thousand farmers have committed suicides in the country since 1990. A
large number of cases of suicides by farmers have taken places in Andhra Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and some other states. Acute
poverty and indebtedness is one of the major factors for farmers for taking the extreme
step of  committing suicide. After death or suicide of the only bread earner of the
family, the family of such poor farmer or agricultural workers leads a life in abject
poverty.
Though Government has formulated a number of schemes for agricultural sector
inclduing crop insurance, kisan credit card etc. yet in case of death or suicide, the
family of such small farmer or agricultural worker does not get any relief from the
Government or any other body and are constrained to fall in the trap of abject poverty.
Hence, there is an immediate need to formulate certain welfare measures by the
Government to provide immediate relief to the affected family of the farmer or agricultual
worker. A National Farmers and Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund is required to be
established for removal of indebtedness and abject poverty among small farmers and
agricultural workers and their families.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
SMT.  RENUKA CHOWDHURY

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides formulation and implementation of certain welfare schemes
for farmers and agricultural workers for carrying out the purposes of the Act. Clause 6
provides for the constitution of a National Farmers and Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund
with a initial corpus of fifty thousand crore rupees to be provided by the Central Government.
It further provides that the Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute
to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an initial non-recurring
expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crores will be incurred.
A recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crores will also be incurred per annum.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for social security and welfare measures for Farmers and agricultural workers
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Renuka Chowdhury, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—565RS(S3)—27-04-2015.