5

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XVIII of 1999

THE RESERVATION OF POSTS IN SERVICES AND SEATS IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS FOR PEOPLE BELONGING
TO ECONOMICALLY BACKWARD AREAS BILL, 1999

A
BILL

to provide for the reservation of posts in the services of the Union Government and Public
Undertakings and seats in all classes of educational institutions for the people
belanging to economically backward areas in the country with a view to improving
their living standard and exending them the benefits of progress made by the country
after independence and for matters connected therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (J) This act may be called the Reservation of Posts in Services and seats in
Educational Institutions For People Belonging to Economically Backward Areas Act,
1999.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

Short title and
commencement.


Definitions.

Reservation of
posts in
Government
services.

Reservation of
seats in educa-
tional and train-
ing institutions,

Benefits under
the Act to be
given only
‘once.
Power to make
rules.

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “economically backward area" means such area which has been declared backward
by the Planning Commission of the Union Government;

(6) "family" includes husband, wife, their dependent children and parents.
(c) “people” means all inhabitants of an economically backward area.
3, The Central Government shall reserve thirty percent of posts in Central

Government services and public undertakings for the candidates belonging to economically
backward areas.

4. Thirty percent of seats shall be reserved in all classes of educational and
training institutions for the candidates belonging to economically backward areas
and the entire expenditure on the education and training of such people shall be
borne by the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament in
this behalf from time to time.

5. The benefits specified under this Act shall be provided only once to a family
belonging to such backward area.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

After Independence, though there has been a lot of industrial, economic and
educational development in the country, some areas like the tribal areas of Madhya Pradesh
and drought prone Chattisgarh region in the State, Kalahandi in Orissa, deserts of Rajasthan
and Gujarat, the tribal belt of Bihar and hilly regions of Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu and Kashmir remain deprived of the benefits of this development. People living in
such economically backward areas of the country continue to suffer from abject poverty.
Some of these areas have already been declared as backward areas by the Planning
Commission and by some State Governments as well.

In such areas there are very few industries and little economic activity. As a result
people ‘of these areas find it very difficult to earn their livelihood. Due to their abject
poverty they do not get even two meals a day, leave alone education and other needs of
life. As such they remain illiterate and are greatly exploited throughout their lives. To
improve their lot it is necessary that posts are reserved in the services of the Central
Government and public undertakings and in all types of educational institutions for the
people belonging to economically backward areas of the country. It will not only improve
the economic conditions of such backward areas but will also help in their educational
advancement. It will be a good beginning for the welfare of economically backward areas
in the country.

Hence this Bill.

SURESH PACHOURI


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall bear the entire
expenditure on the education and training of people belonging to the economically
backward areas of the country. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will involve
a recurring expenditure of about rupees eighty crores per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.

A non recurring expenditure of about rupee fifty crores is also likely to be incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for the reservation of posts in the services of the Union Government and Public
Undertakings and seats in all classes of educational institutions for the people
belonging to economically backward areas in the country with a view to improving
their living standard and extending them the benefits of progress made by the country
after independence and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLUJMRND—104RS—08.04.1 1999.