THE DESERT, DROUGHT PRONE AND BACKWARD AREAS
(INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the integrated development of the desert, drought prone and backward areas
which are poverty stricken, underdeveloped and lag behind in the economic, social,
educational, infrastructural and industrial fields particularly in the States of Rajasthan,
Gujarat, Orissa, Bihar, Jharkhand, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, etc.
by establishing an autonomous Central Authority with the mandate of assuring speedy
development of such areas and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Desert, Drought Prone and Backward Areas (Integrated
Development) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill NO. XVII of 2009
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 31ST JULY, 2009

2
(b) ‘‘authority’’ means the Desert, Drought Prone and Backward Areas
Development Authority established under section 4;
(c) ‘‘backward areas’’ include the desert and drought prone areas with very low
or scanty rainfall and the areas which are economically, industrially, educationally and
socially lagging behind from the rest of the country and so declared by Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette;
(d) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, formulate a long term national policy for the integrated development of the backward
areas and in particular those areas which are desert and drought prone which shall be
implemented by the Authority.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare
such areas within its territorial jurisdiction, which in its opinion are backward and require
priority attention for integrated development and furnish the information to the Central
Government as well as to the Authority.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish an Authority to be known as the Desert, Drought Prone and
Backward Areas Development Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Jaipur in the State of Rajasthan
and the Authority may, with the consent of the appropriate Government establish
subordinate offices at other places in the country.
5. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Prime Minister who shall be the ex officio chairperson of the Authority;
(b) two vice-chairpersons,—
(i) the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission; and
(ii) to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the members
of the Authority in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
(d) twelve members to be appointed by the Central Government representing
the Planning Commission and Ministries or Departments of Agriculture, Agro and
Rural Industries, Rural Development, Industry, Finance, Telecommunications,
Railways, Road Transport and Highways, Human Resources Development, Power
and Water Resources of the Central Government; and
(e) not more than five members to be appointed by the Central Government by
rotation in the alphabetical order to represent the Governments of the States having
most of the backward areas.
(2) The Authority shall follow such procedure for holding its meetings and the quorum
for such meetings shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Authority shall have a Secretariat consisting of such officers, employees and
establishment with such conditions of service, emoluments and perks as may be prescribed
and determined from time to time for the efficient functioning of the Secretariat of the
Authority.
Long term
national policy
for backward
areas.
Establishment
of the Desert,
Drought Prone
and Backward
Areas
Development
Authority.
Composition of
the Authority.

3
6. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due
appropriation made by Parliament, by law, in this behalf, adequate funds for carrying
out the purposes of this Act and for the administrative expenses of the Authority.
7. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to implement the long term national policy
formulated under this Act for backward areas and ensure integrated development of the
backward areas by undertaking such special steps as it may deem necessary and expedient to
do so for the overall development of such areas.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall
initiate measures for the integrated development particularly to ensure industrial growth
with immunity of investments and various concessions by providing good and viable
infrastructure pertaining to roads and highways network, railways, communication network,
agriculture and agro industries, irrigation facilities through watershed projects, constructing
wells, bore wells, canals, ponds and other traditional water bodies, power projects based on
thermal, solar, hydal and wind energies, forests, promoting livestock rearing, poultry, piggery,
orchards, cooperatives, cottage and village industries, health services, family welfare,
educational facilities, network of PDS, tourism, vocational avenues and such other activities
as the Authority may deem necessary for the integrated development of backward areas.
(3) The Authority in particular shall initiate measures to provide safe drinking water in
abundance to the people of backward areas of the country.
8. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide requisite co-operation
to the Authority in undertaking its development work in the backward areas within the
territorial jurisdiction of such Government.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
10. The Authority shall submit an annual report, in such form and in such manner, as
may be prescribed, of its activities of development undertaken for the purposes of this Act to
the President of India who shall cause the Report to be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament along with action taken thereon by the Central Government as soon as it is received.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Funds of the
Authority.
Authority to
implement long
term national
policy for
backward areas
and ensure
integrated
development of
such areas.
Appropriate
Government to
cooperate with
Authority.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Annual Report
of the
Authority.
Act to
Supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ours is a vast country. There are desert areas, which are prone to famines and droughts.
The rainfall in such areas is generally very scanty resulting in severe shortage of drinking
water. Such areas are mostly in Rajasthan and Gujarat where even drinking water is a luxury.
Most of these areas are in rural and tribal belts where people are poverty stricken, debt
ridden and do not have any means of employment as there are no industries and agriculture
is not dependable as it is affected by the vagaries of monsoon. Such areas are chronically
backward in our country. In the eastern region, vast areas of Orissa, Bihar, Jharkhand, West
Bengal, Eastern U.P.; entire north-eastern region; in the Central India Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh; in the western parts Vidarbha, Marathwada, Saurashtra, Kutchh desert and large
parts of Rajasthan; in Southern parts T elangana, Mehboob Nagar, Rayalseema in Andhra
Pradesh and areas in other Southern States are still most backward. It is really a matter of
concern that even after more than five decades of Independence and implementation of
nearly ten five year plans, these areas are still underdeveloped, backward and afflicited with
extreme poverty, hunger and sufferings. Due to consistent neglect and apathy of the Central
and State Governments these areas are backward. No industries have come up in these areas
in the absence of requisite infrastructure. The agriculture is in shambles; rainwater is not
harvested and traditional water bodies have vanished which has turned these areas into drought
prone and famine prone. The backwardness and non-development of such areas has given
rise to demand for creation of new States like Vidarbha, Gorkhaland, Telangana, Harit Pradesh,
Bodoland, Bundelkhand, etc. as it is thought that by creating new States, the backwardness
of the areas can be removed.
Hence, it has become necessary to develop such desert, drought prone and backward
areas of the country for which special efforts have to be made through long term action plan.
It is felt that an autonomous Authority should be created to implement the action plan and
integrated development of such areas. This will be in the larger interest of our nation.
Hence this Bill.
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Desert, Drought Prone and
Backward Areas Development Authority. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the Central
Government to provide adequate funds for the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The actual requirement cannot be
assessed at this juncture but it is estimated that a sum of rupees ten thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of five thousand crore may also involve.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the integrated development of the desert, drought prone and backward areas
which are poverty stricken, underdeveloped and lag behind in the economic, social,
educational, infrastructural and industrial fields particularly in the States of
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Orissa, Bihar, Jharkhand, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Maharashtra, etc. by establishing an autonomous Central Authority with
the mandate of assuring speedy development of such areas and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Santosh Bagrodia, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3556RS(S5)—31-07-2009.