10

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XVII of 1999

THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (OBLIGATION AS TO FIDELITY AND
SECRECY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1999

A

BILL

further to amend the Public Financial Institutions (Obligation as to Fidelity and
Secrecy) Act, 1983.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (7) This Act may be called the Public Financial Institutions (Obligation as to
Fidelity and Secrecy) Amendment Act, 1999.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. in section 3 of the Public Financial Institutions (Obligation as to Fidelity and
Secrecy) Act, 1983, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(2A) Notwithstanding anything in this Act it shall be the Duty of a Public
Financial Institution or Banking Company, as the case may be, referred to in this
Act to divulge any information relating to the affairs of such a Public Financial
Institution or Banking Company required by a Parliamentary Committee appointed
by either House or Houses of Parliament in this behalf.”.

Short title and
‘commence-
ment.

Amendment of
section 3 of Act,
48 of 1983.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In the recent past the entire Banking Industry and Public Financial Institution
System in our country were rocked by the biggest ever scandal widely known as the
“securities scam” involving more than three thousand crores of rupees in which nationalised
and international Banks and major public financial institutions and their bosses were also
involved. It has now come to light that all the bankers and tinancial institution managements,
in connivence with some leading share brokers, particularly of the Bombay Stock Exchange,
siphoned the money and misappropriated the public money deposited therein. It has put a
question mark over the dependability of public financial institutions, and a sense of
insecurity is growing among the general public alfut their deposits in banks and
financial institutions.

One reason for the occurrence of such a scam is that the working of banking
companies and public financial institutions is immune from public scrutiny by any authority,
which perhaps emboldens their hosses to do whatever they like; hence the biggest-ever
scam.

In the recent past, the Public Accounts Committee of Lok Sabha had scrutinised
the working of our Defence establishments. Similarly, the Subordinate Legislation
Committees of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha scrutinise the rules of various Organisations
including Banks and their officers are summoned to give their views and evidence. So it
should be made legal for the Parliamentary Committees to inquire into the working of
Banks and Financial {nstitutions and it should be the duty of such institutions to place
everything before such a Committee.

Empowering Parliamentary Committees to scrutinise the functioning of Public
Financial Institutions including Banks may exert a healthy check on officials of banks
and public financial institutions who, at present, are somewhat immune to Parliamentary
Scrutiny, under fidelity and secrecy laws,

Hence this Bill.
SURESH PACHOURI


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

further to amend the Public Financral Institutions (Obligation as to Fidelity and Secrecy)
Act, 1983,

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1 05RS—8 4.1999.