1
THE  CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. After article 371I of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘371J.   (1) Parliament may, by law, declare the State of Uttrakhand, to be a
special category State for the purpose of overall development of the State.
(2) Law made by Parliament under clause (1) shall—
(a) provide for special financial assistance to the State of Uttrakhand to
meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the
Bill No.  XVIII of  2010
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
371J.
Special status
to the State of
Uttrakhand.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
State with the approval of Government of India for the purpose of promoting the
welfare of people of the State,  particularly those belonging to economically
weaker sections and for proper utilisation and exploitation of the resources of
the State, and
(b) provide for funds from pool of non-lapsable funds, originally created
for the North-Eastern States to the State of Uttrakhand with such transfer of
additional funds to the pool as may be specified by Government of India for
speedy development of projects and schemes undertaken in the States by the
Central and State Governments."
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Uttrakhand had been part of the State of Uttar Pradesh and the region, prior to becoming
an independent State had been economically and socially backward. Keeping this in view,
the State has been granted the status of Special Category State, though no legislative
measure has been initiated to this effect.
Notwithstanding special category status conferred on the State, Uttrakhand still
continues to be economically backward state in many respects. Problems poverty,
unemployment and illiteracy in the State need to be addressed on priority basis. Due to hilly
state, many parts or regions of the state lie in strategic zones where infrastructural development
at faster pace is the need of the hour. Still, many people living in remote areas are to be
brought in the mainstream of development. The State Government has launched many
ambitious schemes and projects for promotion of welfare of the people of the State, particularly
those belonging to economically backward section. These projects and schemes entail huge
funding.
The North-Eastern States enjoy the benefit of Non-lapsable Central pool of resources
for funding specific infrastructural projects and programmes for economic and social upliftment
of these states. This pool has been created by transferring the difference of the allocation
earmarked for North-Eastern States by all the Central Ministries/Departments and the actual
expenditure incurred on the region. Uttrakhand, which also has the similar features, needs
the same kind of financial assistance for its overall/allround development.
It is, therefore, felt that suitable provisions should be incorporated in the Constitution
to enable Parliament to make law for providing legislative backing to the special category
status given to the state of Uttrakhand and provide special financial assistance and extension
of the central pool of non-lapsable funds to the State on the pattern of the North-Eastern
States.
Hence this Bill.
BHAGAT  SINGH  KOSHIYARI
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides special financial assistance to the State of Uttrakhand to
meet the cost of such schemes of development undertaken by the State with the approval of
the Government of India. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure,
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE CONSTITUTION  OF INDIA
* * * * *
371-I. Special provision with respect to the State of Goa.—
Notwithstanding anything in the Constitution, the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Goa shall consist of not less than thirty members.
* * * * *
5

GMGIPMRND—2360RS(S5)—03-05-2010.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bhagat Singh Koshiyari, M.P.)