THE NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
in section 3, in sub-section  (1), for clause (iii), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(iii) two non-official members to be nominated by the President;
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 3.
84 of 1971.
[AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA]
Bill No. XVII of 2013
5

2
(iv) one member of the Planning Commission of India being in charge of the
north-eastern region, ex officio.”.
3. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“3A. (1) The term of office of members nominated under clause (iii) of
sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be three years:
Provided that the term of office of such members may be extended for a further
period not exceeding two years.
(2) The allowances or remuneration payable to the members nominated under
clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be such as may be determined by the
Central Government.”.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The Council may discuss any matter in which some or all of the States
represented in that Council, or the Union and one or more of the States represented in
that Council, have a common interest and advise the Central Government and the
Government of each State concerned as to the action to be taken on any such matter,
and, in particular, may discuss and make recommendations with regard to,—
(i) any matter of common interest in the field of economic and social
planning;
(ii) any matter concerning inter-State transport and communications; and
(iii) any matter relating to power or flood control projects of common
interest.”.
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, for the words “the Department of Development of
North-Eastern Region”, the words ‘‘Development of North-Eastern Region” shall be
substituted.
Insertion of
new section 3A.
Term of
office and
other
conditions of
service of
non-official
members.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 6.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The North-Eastern Council (NEC) was set up in 1972 by the North-Eastern Council
Act, 1971 for securing balanced and coordinated development and effecting coordination
among States of the north-eastern area viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura. The Governors and Chief Ministers of constituent States
are members of the Council.
2. The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Act, 2002, inter alia, added Sikkim as the
eighth member-State of the Council; envisaged functioning of the Council as a regional
planning body for the north-eastern area and provisioned for three members and Chairman
of the Council to be nominated by the President.
3. The nominated Union Minister, Governors and Chief Ministers of the constituent
States are members of the Council as long as they hold the office. Since establishment of
NEC, being a statutory body, is of permanent nature, therefore, tenure of nominated members
of the Council should be specified in the Act. Therefore, the Bill, inter alia, seeks inclusion
of (a) one member of the Planning Commission of India, being in charge of the north-eastern
region; (b) two non-official members nominated by the President for three years period
extendable for a further period not exceeding two years.
4. Second Administrative Reforms Commission, in its 7th Report on 'Capacity Building
for Conflict Resolution,' inter alia, recommended for suitable amendment in the Act of 1971,
to restore the original 'conflict resolution provision' requiring the Council to discuss issues
of mutual interest of two or more States in the region and to advise the Central Government
thereon. This recommendation was in-principle approved by the Group of Ministers headed
by the then Finance Minister in the meeting held on 8th December, 2009, NEC should be used
as forum for discussion on matters of common interest to the Region and make
recommendations. The Bill seeks amendment in the Act that will enable the Council to
perform this function.
5. Department of Development of North-Eastern Region was formed in 2001 within
Ministry of Home Affairs and subsequently upgraded to full-fledged Ministry in 2004. The
Bill also seeks amendment in the Act to that effect.
6. The Bill seeks to acheive the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; PABAN SINGH GHATOWAR
The 21st February, 2013.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 3A after section 3 of the Act;
sub-section (2) of which empowers the Central Government to determine the allowances or
remuneration payable to the members nominated under clause (iii) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 3.
The matters in respect of which the Central Government may determine are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

Setting up and
composition
of the North-
Eastern
Council.
Nomination
of certain
officers to
attend the
meetings of
the Council.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL ACT, 1971
(84 OF 1971)
* * * * *
3. (1) There shall be a Council to be called the North-Eastern Council which shall
consist of the following members, namely:—
* * * * *
(iii) three members to be nominated by the President.
* * * * *
6. In order to assist the Council in the discharge of its functions, each of the Ministries
of the Central Government dealing with matters relating to Defence, Finance, Home Affairs,
Planning and the Department of Development of North-Eastern region shall nominate an
officer to attend the meetings of the Council.
* * * * *
5

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971.
————
(Shri Paban Singh Ghatowar, MoS {I/C} in the Ministry of Development of North-
Eastern Region and MoS in the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs)
GMGIPMRND—5519RS—8-3-2013.