Bill No. XVIII of  2020
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  PUBLIC  HEALTH  (PREVENTION,  CONTROL  AND
MANAGEMENT  OF  EPIDEMICS)  BILL,  2020
A
BILL
to provide for Public Health and for prevention, control and management of epidemics
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Health (Prevention, Control and Management
of Epidemics) Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bio-hazardous material" means any infectious agent or hazardous biological
material that presents a risk of potential risk to the health of humans, animals, plants or
environment;
Definitions.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 13TH  MARCH, 2020

2
(b) "Central Government" means the Ministry or  Department of the Government
of India having administrative control of public health management;
(c) "clinical establishment" includes,—
(i) a hospital, maternity home, nursing home, dispensary, clinic, sanatorium
or an institution by whatever name called that offers services, facilities with
beds requiring diagnosis, treatment or care for illness, injury, deformity,
abnormality or pregnancy in any recognized system of medicine;
(ii) a place established as an independent entity or part of an establishment
as defined in c (i) above in connection with the diagnosis or treatment of diseases
where pathological, bacteriological, genetic, radiological, bio-chemical, biological
investigations or other diagnostic or investigative services with the aid of
laboratory or other medical equipments, are usually carried on, established and
administered or maintained by any person or body of persons, whether
incorporated or not, and shall include a clinical establishment owned, controlled
or managed by—
(a) the Government or a department of the Government;
(b) a trust, whether public or private;
(c) a corporation (including a society) registered under a Central, or
State Act, whether or not owned by the Government;
(d) a local authority; and
(e) a single doctor,
but does not include the clinical establishments owned, controlled or
managed by the Armed Forces;
(d) "decontamination" means a procedure whereby health measures are taken to
eliminate an infectious or toxic agent or matter on a human or animal body surface, in
or on a product prepared for consumption or on other inanimate objects, including
conveyances, that may constitute a public health risk;
(e) "deratting" means the procedure whereby health measures are taken to control
or kill rodent vectors of human disease present in baggage, cargo, containers,
conveyances, facilities, goods and postal parcels at the point of entry;
(f) "disaster" means a catastrophone, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence in
any area, arising from natural or man-made causes, or by accident or negligence which
results in substantial loss of life or human suffering or damage to, and destruction of,
property, or damage to, or degradation of, environment, and is of such a nature or
magnitude as to be beyond the coping capacity of the community of the affected area;
(g) "disinfection" means the procedure whereby health measures are taken to
control or kill infectious agents on a human or animal body surface or in or on baggage,
cargo, containers, conveyances, goods and postal parcels by direct exposure to
chemical or physical agents;
(h) "district" means administrative area as recognized by the revenue department
of a State or Union Territory Government for the purpose of revenue administration
and law and order purposes which is headed by a District Collector or a
Deputy Commissioner;
(i) "district authority" means and includes the Deputy Commissioner or the
District Collector or the District Magistrate or any other Revenue Officer or Executive
Magistrate so empowered under the prevailing Revenue Law or the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 or as the case may be:
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(j) "drug" includes—
(i) preparations for mitigation or prevention of any disease or disorder in
human beings or animals, including preparations applied on human body for the
purpose of repelling insects like mosquitoes;
(ii) such substances, other than food, intended to affect the structure or
any function of human body or intended to be used for the destruction of
insects which cause disease in human beings or animals, as may be specified
from time to time by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette;
(iii) all substances intended for use as components of a drug including
empty gelatin capsules;
(iv) such devices intended for internal or external use in the diagonsis,
treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or
animals, as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette; and
(v) any new drug for which permission has been granted by the Central
Licence Approving Authority under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.
(k) "epidemic" means the occurrence in a community or region of cases of an
illness, specific health related behavior, or other health related events clearly in excess
of normal expectancy;
(l) "epidemic prone disease" means a disease as listed in the Schedule of this
Act as may be notified by the Central Government from time to time;
(m) "ground crossing" means a point of land entry into India including one
utilized by road vehicles and trains as per Land Port Authority of India;
(n) "isolation" means separation of ill or contaminated persons or affected
baggage, containers, conveyances, goods or postal parcels from others in such a
manner as to prevent the spread of infection or contamination;
(o) "local area" means the area, within which a local authority exercises its
jurisdiction;
(p) "local authority" includes panchayati raj institutions, municipalities, a district
board, cantonment board, town planning authority or Zila Parishad or body of port
commissioner or any other body or authority, by whatever name called, for the time
being invested by law, for rendering essential services or, with the control and
management of civic services, within a specific local area;
(q) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(r) "outbreak" means epidemic limited to a localized increase in the incidence of
a disease;
(s) "point of entry" means a passage for international entry or exit of travellers,
baggage, cargo, containers, conveyances, goods and postal parcels as well as agencies
and areas providing services to them on entry or exit;
(t) "premises" means buildings, non-constructed area and any land;
(u) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(v) "public health emergency" means any sudden state of danger to public
health including extension or spread of any infectious or contagious disease or pests
affecting humans, animals or plants, occurrence of or threat of dangerous epidemic
disease, epidemic prone disease, or potential public health emergency requiring
immediate action for its prevention, control and management which cannot be dealt
with by any law other than this Act;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(w) "public health emergency of international concern" means an extraordinary
event which is determined, as provided in International Health Regulations (IHR) of
World Health Organization (WHO);
(x) "public health emergency of national concern" means a public health
emergency as declared or notified by the Central Government from time to time;
(y) "public health service" means services for the prevention and treatment of
diseases and promotion of health and includes environmental sanitation, immunization
and any other services provided under this act and establishment and maintenance of
any institution for the purpose of any such a services;
(z) "public health establishment" means an establishment maintained for the
purpose of  public health services, including any such establishment as notified by the
Central or the State Government from time to time for any purpose of this Act;
(aa) "quarantine" means the restriction of activities or separation from others of
suspect persons who are not ill or of suspect baggage, containers, conveyances or
goods in such a manner as to prevent the possible spread of infection or contamination;
(bb) "regulation" means regulations as specified under this Act;
(cc) "reservoir" means an animal, plant or substance in which an infectious
agent normally lives and whose presence may constitute a public health risk;
(dd) "Schedule" means a schedule included in this Act;
(ee) "social distancing" is a public health practice designed to limit the spread of
infection by ensuring sufficient physical distance between individuals;
(ff) "State Government" means the department of the State Government having
administrative control of public health management and includes administrator of
Union Territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;
(gg) "Union Territory" shall mean any Union Territory specified in the First
Schedule to the Constitution and shall include any other territory comprised within the
territory of India but not specified in that schedule;
(hh) "vector"  means an insect or any living carrier that transports an infectious
agent from an infected individual or its wastes to a susceptible individual or its food or
immediate surroundings.
CHAPTER  II
P
UBLIC HEALTH MEASURES
3. If any State Government or administration of Union Territory or any district or local
authority is of the opinion that a public health emergency has arisen or is likely to arise, it
may, by order—
(a) require or empower any official of the district or local authority as the case
may be, to take such measures and for such duration of time, to prevent, control and
manage the public health emergency, as may be stated in such order;
(b) require any person or class of persons to observe such measures, for such
duration of time, as may be stated in such order;
(c) prohibit any such activity as stated in the order, which is or is likely to be
inimical to public health in any area under its jurisdiction;
Powers of the
State Govt. or
the Union
Territory or
District or
Local
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(d) quarantine or restrict the movement of any person or class of persons or any
object or class of objects suspected to be exposed to any such disease or exposed to
any substance as may be stated in the order;
(e) isolate any person or class of persons infected or suffering from any such
disease as may be stated in the order;
(f) conduct medical examination including laboratory examination of, and provide
treatment, vaccination or other prophylaxis to any person or class of persons exposed
to or suffering from or suspected to be suffering from any such disease as may be
stated in the order;
(g) undertake deratting, disinfection, disinsection, decontamination, treatment,
destruction or disposal of baggage, cargo, containers, conveyances, goods, postal
parcels, human remains, animals, birds or biological substances to remove infection or
contamination including vectors and reservoirs of infection;
(h) notwithstanding any other provisions in any other Act or statute, ban or
regulate the purchase, transport, distribution, sale, supply, storage, as may be
appropriate, of any drug or of any other material which contains hazardous or toxic
substance;
(i) provide for the inspection and, if required, detention of any shipment, cargo or
objects being transported, as also of any vehicle, vessel, ship, aircraft, train, or any other
form of transport, leaving, arriving at or passing through any place including any port,
airport, bus station or railway station, ground crossing as the case may be, in any area;
4. When at any time the Central Government is satisfied that a public health emergency
has arisen or is likely to arise in the country or any part thereof, it may—
(a) give such directions as it may deem necessary to,—
(i) the State Government or administration of Union Territory to implement
the provisions of this Act and the State Government or administration of Union
Territory shall comply with such directions;
(ii) the district or local authority to implement the provisions of this Act
and the rule or order made thereunder and the district or local authority shall
comply with such directions:
Provided that where it appears to the Central Government that it would be
expedient and in public interest so to do, it may assume to itself any of the
powers specified under section 3.
(b) order such measures as it may consider necessary to be observed by the
general public or by any person or class of persons to prevent, control and manage the
public health emergency or threat thereof;
(c) require or empower any person to take such measures as it may deem
necessary to prevent, control and manage the public health emergency or threat thereof.
CHAPTER III
P
ENALTIES
5. (1) Any contravention due to negligence of any provisions of this Act or any rule or
order made or issued thereunder shall be punishable with a fine not exceeding ten thousand
rupees for the first contravention and not exceeding twenty five thousand for contravention
on subsequent occasions.
(2) Any willful or intentional contravention of any provisions of this Act or any rule or
order made or issued thereunder shall be a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment
which may extend upto a period of two years and with a fine which shall not exceed fifty
thousand rupees for first contravention and not exceeding one lakh rupees for contravention
on subsequent occasions.
Powers of the
Central Govt.
Penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
CHAPTER IV
APPEAL
6. ( 1) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Central Government, the State
Government or administration of Union Territory or district or local authority passed under
section 3 or section 4 may appeal against the said order before such Appellate Authority as
may be notified under this Act.
(2) Unless the Appellate Authority holds in abeyance the order being appealed against,
the pendency of such appeal, by itself shall not be a sufficient cause for non-implementation
of the order issued by the Central Government or the State Government or administration of
Union Territory or district or local authority appealed against.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
7. Any person authorized to take any action under this Act or any Order or Rule made
thereunder, shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860.
8. For any decision taken or to be taken to implement the provisions of this Act any
order or rule made thereunder, the decision of the State Government or administration of UT
shall prevail over the decision of the district or local authority under its jurisdiction and the
decision of Central Government shall prevail over the decision taken by the State or UT Govt.
or distt. or local authority.
9. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under section 5 except with the
previous sanction of such officer as may be prescribed.
(2) Any offence under the Act either before or after the institution of prosecution may
be compounded by such officer and on payment of such compounding amount as may be
prescribed.
10. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
anything which is done in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any
rule or order made thereunder.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect over any provision in any
other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, amend the Schedule to this Act
and the said Schedule shall, as from the date of such notification, be deemed to have been
amended accordingly.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
13. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act:
Provided that the State Governments may, with prior approval of the Central Government,
make amendments thereto appropriate to circumstances of each State.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which any report or return may be required to be
furnished under such section (1) of section 3;
(b) the officer who shall grant the previous sanction under sub-section (1) of
section 9;
(c) the officer who shall compound the offence and the compounding amount
under sub-section (2) of section 9.
(3) Every rule made under this section be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of the Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may
Appeal.
Certain persons
deemed to be
public servants.
Power to
supersede.
Cognizance of
offence.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
amend
Schedule.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive session, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making a modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should
not be made, the rule shall have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done or omitted to be under that rule.
14. (1) The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions
of the aforesaid Act, shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been taken under the provisions of this Act as if
the said provisions were in force when such thing was done or such action was taken and
shall continue in force accordingly until superseded by anything done or any action taken
under this Act.
Repeal and
savings.
3 of 1897.
5
10

THE SCHEDULE
[See Section 2 (m)]
EPIDEMIC PRONE DISEASES
1. Anthrax.
2. Bird Flu (Avian Influenza).
3. Chickenpox.
4. Chikungunya fever.
5. Cholera.
6. Dengue fever/Dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF).
7. Diphtheria.
8. Enteric fevers.
9. Epidemic dropsy.
10. Extensively drug resistant tuberculosis (SDR-TB)/Multidrug resistant TB
(MDR-TB).
11. Food poisoning.
12. HIV/AIDS.
13. Influenza.
14. Japanese encephalitis.
15. Kala-azar.
16. Kyasanur forest disease.
17. Leptospirosis.
18. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (Mad Cow disease).
19. Malaria.
20. Measles.
21. Meningococcal Meningitis.
22. Nipah viral disease.
23. Plague.
24. Poliomyelities.
25. Rabies.
26. Relapsing fever.
27. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS).
28. Smallpox.
29. Typhus.
30. Viral haemorrhagic fevers including Ebola.
31. Viral hepatitis.
32. Whooping cough.
33. Y ellow fever.
34. Any public health emergency of international concern.
35. Any other epidemic disease of public health importance as may be notificed.
8

9
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The object of the Bill is to ensure preparedness for any epidemic diseases and to
provide prevention and management in case of a public health emergency.
Even if medical counter measures are available, epidemic diseases remain a threat for
majority of our population, either because of their repidly evolving nature (e.g. influenza) or
because equitable access to effective public health measures is difficult. There are many
reasons for limited access to vaccines: production capacity does not meet the demand
(e.g. yellow fever, pandemic influenza), explosive outbreaks exhaust the available vaccines
(e.g. meningitis), or the absence of markets prevent access to the intervention in case of
emergencies (e.g. oral cholera vaccine). In addition, in many affected countries, the weakness
fo the existing health care system prevents effective access to medical interventions
(diagnostics and treatment).
This Bill provides for better preparedness for epidemic diseases.
Hence this Bill.
SANJAY SINGH

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules by notification in
the Official Gazette, to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The rules to be made by the
Government pertain to matters of administrative detail only, which cannot be laid down in the
Bill itself. The delegation is, therefore, normal in character.
10

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for Public Health and for prevention, control and management of epidemics and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sanjay Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—6019RS(S3)—16-03-2020.