1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. After article 18 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“18A. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to adequate food as Parliament may, by
law, determine from time to time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing provisions, nothing in
clause (1) shall prevent the State from making any provision for fixing norms and criteria
for distribution, quality and quantity of food to the citizens.
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
18A.
Bill No. XVIII of  2012
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MAY, 2012
Right to Food.
5
10

2
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from implementing special schemes
through its various authorities or agencies for the weaker section of the society including
below poverty line citizens, senior citizens, unemployed citizens and physically challenged
citizens.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a vast country having large population. Due to its size and population, there
are unequal allocation of the  Capital and Government resources. The day is not far, when
people will fight over food and water. Food is one of the basic needs for survival of all living
creatures on earth. Though article 47 of the Constitution provides that the State shall take
steps to raise the level of nutrition of its people and improve public health but nothing has
been done so far. Hunger and malnutrition, economic backwardness, poor health services in
our country reflect the most agonizing dilemma of India as a welfare State. A large section of
people, including children and women, die every year because of starvation and malnutrition.
In our country, where drought, floods and famines are so common, freedom from
hunger i.e right to adequate food needs the special attention of the Government. Many
districts in Orissa, Bihar and Andhra Pradesh face the acute problems of malnutrition and
starvation every year. Similar is the situation in areas affected by floods. The unprecedented
floods in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and other States has left lakhs of people homeless. Most often,
in famine or flood affected areas, the State administration appears to be unconcerned about
the happenings and, as such many person die of starvation.
Although, every year, there is a bumper crop of foodgrains in the country, yet millions
of people in the country have to sleep empty stomach. Therefore, there is need for recognizing
the right to food as one of the most essential of all human rights besides fixing norms and
criteria for equitable distribution of foodgrains in all parts of the country. The Bill, therefore,
seeks to make the right to food as a fundamental right so that citizens of India are not
deprived of this basic need for their survival and become independent in respect of getting
food.
Hence this Bill.
SHADI  LAL  BATRA
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that every citizen shall have the right to adequate food.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure for the consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees eighty thousand crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shadi Lal Batra, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1031RS(S3)—11-05-2012.