AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026
 Bi ll No. XVII of 2026 
THE URBAN AREAS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) 
 BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to 
establish an Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Committee 
 to ensure regulation and development of urban areas in the 
 country and for matters connected therewith 
 or incidental thereto. 
        BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation)  
Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central
Governmen
t;
(b) “Committee” means the Urban Areas (Development and
Regulation) Committee established under section 3;
( c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act ;
and 
( d) “urban area” means the territorial area of a Municipality as may
be notified by the Governor under article 243Q of the Constitution. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, “Municipality” means an 
institution of self -government constituted under article 243Q of the 
Constitution. 
 
5 
 
10 
Establishment 
of Urban 
Areas 
(Development 
and 
Regulation) 
Committee.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Committee to be known as the Urban Areas
(Development and Regulation) Committee for carrying out th e
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) t
he Prime Minister of India -who shall be the ex- officio
Chairperson of the Committee; 
(b) the Union Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs — ex-
officio Vice Chairperson; 
(c) t
he Leader of the Opposition in the House of People — ex-
officio Member; 
(d) the Leader of the House in the  Council of States  — ex-
officio Member; 
(e) the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States  —
ex-officio Member; 
(f) V ice Chairperson of NITI A ayog — ex-officio Member;
(g) S
ecretaries of the following Ministries or Departments of
the Central Government — ex-officio Members: 
(i) Ministry of Finance;
(ii) Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iii) Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change; 
(iv) Ministry of Road Transport and Highways;
(v) M
inistry of Railways;
(vi) Ministry of Power;
(vii) Ministry of Jal Shakti;
(viii) Ministry of Panchayati Raj;
(ix) Department of Space;
(x) Ministry of Education;
(xi) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare;
(xii) Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(xiii) Ministry of Communications;
(xiv) Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology; 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
40 
 
45 

3 
5 
10 
15 
 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(xv) Ministry of New and Renewable Energy;
(xvi) Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution; 
(xvii) Ministry of Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship;
(xviii) Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises;
(xix) Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports;
(xx) Ministry of Women and Child Development;
(xxi) Ministry of Labour and Employment; and
(xxii) Ministry of Commerce and Industry;
(h) Secretary, Departmen t of Urban Development or City 
Development of each State and Union territory — ex-officio 
Members; 
(i) five elected members from the House of People who shall 
be nominated by the Speaker — Members; 
(j) five el ected members f rom t he Council of S tates who  
shall be nominated by the Chairman — Members; 
(k) two Senior Specialists in the field of Architectural 
Engineering and three Senior Civi l Engineers in the field of 
Civil Engineering to be appointed by the Central Government 
on such terms a nd conditions, as may be prescribed — 
Members; and 
(l) Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Af fairs — ex-
officio Member Secretary. 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and
staff, as it deems necessary, to aid the efficient functioning of th e
Committee.
(4) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of services of
officers and staff of the Committee shall be such, as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Committee shall meet at least once in a month and shall observe
such rules of procedure with regard to tr ansaction of business at its
meetings as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that the Committee shall meet at such time and place and at 
such intervals, as the Chairperson of the Committee deems fit. 
Provided further that the Union Minist ry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs shall provide secretarial assistance during the meetings of the 
Committee. 
40 
45 
4. (1) The Committee shall recommend to the appropriate Government to,—
(a) ensure availability of means for the development and
regulation of urban areas under its jurisdiction; 
(b) i mpart modern training in techniques of urban development
to the institutions and persons involved in the regulation and 
development of urban areas; 
(c) e nsure adherence to the stipulated method for financing the
development of urban areas, i.e.,  seventy-five per cent of the 
expenditure shall be borne by the Central Government and rest of the 
twenty-five per cent by the State Government;  
(d) p ut an obligation on the District Magistrate concerned to
Functions of 
the 
Committee. 

4 
ensure appropriate development and regulation of urban areas under 
his jurisdiction;  
(e) e stablish durable, strong and inc lusive infrastructure
required for the development and regulation of urban areas in the 
country; 
(f) establish natural land cover, including parks a nd
playgrounds, in the urban areas in the country; 
(g) en sure availability of safe housing, clean water, water
management, healthcare facilities and appropriate educational 
facilities in the urban areas of the country;  
(h) e nsure complete ban on encroachment upon lakes, wet lands
and rivers; 
(i) establish balance between supply and demand of public
transport facilities in the urban areas; 
(j) e nsure availability of electric buses, establish bus corridor
and bus rapid transit system for promoting green mobility in the 
urban areas;  
(k) pr omote e -participation of urban local bodies in the
development and regulation of urban area under their jurisdiction; 
(l) e stablish suburbs along with metropolitan cities to make a
balance between population and resources; and 
(m) undertake such other measures as are required for the
regulation and development of urban areas. 
(2) The Committee shall prescribe the form and manner and the time within
which the appropriate Government shall prepare and submit an action taken
r
eport on its recommendations.
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
Duties of the 
appropriate 
Government.
5. The appropriate Government shall prepare a report on the action taken on
the recommendations of the Committee, including the reasons for non-
implementation and/or delay in taking action thereon and submit the report
to the Committee, in such form and manner and within such time, as may be
prescribed by the Committee.
30 
An
nual 
report.
6. (1) The Committee shall prepare once every year, in such form and manner
as may be prescribed, an annual report giving the summary of its activities,
including schemes it has undertaken and recommended to the State
Governments during the previous calendar year  containing therein the
statements of annual accounts of the Committee.
(2) A  copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and
the Central Government shall lay the report before each House of
Parliament as soon as it is received.
35 
Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 
7. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite 
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 
40 
Power to 
remove 
difficulty.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may
make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of
any difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
45 
Power to 
make rules.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
50 

5 
 
5 
10 
(2) Every rule made under this section, shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it  is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or i n
t
wo or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the sessio n
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; s o
ho
wever that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India’s biggest tragedy after independence is the migration of about fifty 
crore people from their ancestral homes and villages. A study of th e changes 
in this socio-economic structure reveals that almost one-third of the country’s 
population (about 31.16 per cent) is n ow living in cities. Census data of 2011 
shows that the number of people leaving the villages a nd migrating to the 
cities is increasing constantly and now thirty -seven crore and sev enty lakh 
people live in the cities. On comparing the figures of 2001 and 2011 census, it 
is fo und that during th is period, the population of cities increased by nine 
crore and ten lakh, whereas the population of villages increased by nine crore 
and five lakh. 
The population of villages in the country is still about 68.84 crore, that 
is, two -thirds of the total population  o f the cou ntry, but the contribu tion of 
agriculture in the country ’s GDP has b een continuously decreasing to o nly 
fifteen per cent. There is a decline in the standard of living in villages, lack of 
education, health care and basic facilities and lack of employment, and so 
people there are moving to the cities in search of a better life. As a result, all 
big cities including the metropolitan cities of the country have turned into 
slums. Out of a total of 7.89 crore families living in cities across the country, 
1.37 crore families live in slums. 
Urbanization should be seen as an opportunity and  urban centers as 
engines of growth. Urban and rural development in th e country  should 
complement each other. If we analyze from the perspective of development in 
the field of urbanization in different States of India, it is evident that 
the quantum and speed of urbanization in different States is not the 
same. For urbanization and develo pment to move on the same track, 
there should be people-centric urb an d evelopment, which  can weav e the 
fabric of such cities and which shall be built according  to the required global 
standards. A city that is two steps ah ead of peo ple’s aspiration s, a city built 
on global best practices,  a city that integrates technology, transportation, 
energy efficien cy, proximity  to work, etc. A city where all urb an 
development plans are undertaken with people’s p articipation. 
As per a report by the United Nations, glob ally, a total of 31 such cities 
are home to an estimated 5 crore people. This is 6 .8 per cent of the world’s 
total population. By the year 2030, the number of mega cities shall increase to 
41 and their population shall be 7.3 crore, which would be 8.7 per cent o f the 
population of the entire world. The administrative boundaries of the cities 
have not been relied upon in this report. Instead, priority has been given to use 
the concept of growing urban area. The report reveals that only people fro m 
urban areas live in these mega cities. About 21 per cent of the world’s people 
live in cities, whose population is between 50 thou sand and one crore. By the 
year 2030, 60 p er cent of the world ’s population shall live in small and big 
cities, which is currently 54 per cent. Most developing cities in Asia and 
Africa are seein g population growth, and by  2030, 33 of the 41 mega cities 
shall be in third world countries. 
According to a report by the Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs of United Nations, by the year 2030, India shall have seven mega 
cities, each with a population of 96 lakh. Among these seven, Delhi shall be 
second in terms of population. 
The World Cities Report, 2016 states that at present, the country has five 
mega cities - Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore and Chennai - each with a 
population of more than one crore. Hyderabad and Ahmedab ad will also join 
the ranks by the year 2030. 
The need is to create development centers across the country instead of 
adopting foreign models fo r urbanization. Inequality and imbalance shall 
increase further by adopting foreign mo dels. Uneven and imbalan ced 

7 
urbanization is not correct considering the diversity of India. In view of the 
above, the present Bill is very important so that the people of the urban areas 
of India may be able to live in conditions suitable for humans. 
Hence, this Bill. 
 BHIM SINGH. 

8 
 FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3  of the  Bill  provides  for  th e establishment  of  an  Urban  Areas  
(Development and Regulation) Committee , along with appointment of s p ecialists in 
the field s of Architectural Engineering and Civil Engineering  as  me mbers. It also 
provides for appointment of r equisite number of officers and staff to assist the 
Committee as well as their salary and allowances  and other terms and conditions of 
t
heir service. Clause 7 provides for the Central Government to provide r equisite funds 
to the Committee for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the  Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of  a bout rupees two 
hundred crore per annum will be involved from the Consolidated  Fund of India. 
A
 n on-recurring e xpenditure o f a bout r upees fifty c rore i s a lso l ikely t o be 
involved. 

9 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, in consultation with the 
State Governments, to make such order or give such direction for removing any 
difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.  Clause 9 empowers the Central 
Government to frame rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the orders, 
directions and rules will relate to matters of detail  only, the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 

 RAJYA SAB
HA 
A  
BILL  
to establish an Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Committee  
to ensure regulation and development of urba n areas in the  
country and for matters connected  therewith 
 or incidental thereto. 
 (Dr. Bhim Singh, M.P.)  
 RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–157–16.03.2026.