1
Bill No. XVII of 2022
THE  RIGHT  TO  FREE  ELECTRICITY  BILL,  2022
A
BILL
to provide for making consumption of free electricity a right for all citizens throughout
India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Free Electricity Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST APRIL, 2022
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agriculture" includes poultry, dairy farming, orchards, rearing of animals
and farming;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Captive power generation plant" means a power plant set up by any person
to generate electricity primarily for his own use and includes a power plant set up by
any co-operative society or association of persons for generating electricity primarily
for use of members of such co-operative society or association;
(d) "co-generation" means a process which simultaneously produces two or
more forms of useful energy including electricity;
(e) "consumer" means any person who is supplied with electricity for his own
use by a licensee or the Government or by any other person engaged in the business
of supplying electricity to the public under any law for the time being in force and
includes any person whose premises are for the time being connected for the purpose
of receiving electricity with the works of a licensee, the Government or such other
person as the case may be;
(f) "notification" means notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression "notify" shall be construed accordingly;
(g) Words and expression used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Electricity Act, 2003 shall have the meanings assigned to them in that Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in
force, every citizen shall have the right to consumption of free electricity.
(2) All the beneficiaries referred to under section 7 of this Act shall be entitled to
consume free electricity under the provisions of this Act.
(3) In addition to the beneficiaries referred to under section 7 of this Act, all such
households or entities shall also be eligible for consumption of free electricity, as already
notified by the appropriate Government before the commencement of this Act or as may be
notified by the appropriate Government from time to time.
4. All the rights pertaining to free electricity provided under this Act shall neither be
nullified nor restricted except in accordance with the procedure established by law made by
the appropriate Legislature.
5. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall:—
(i) compulsorily ensure the availability of free electricity.
(ii) encourage captive power generation plants and co-generation.
(iii) take measures against electricity losses incurred due to faulty electric meters
or electrical wiring and inefficient distribution and power system and take all such
steps including the use of modern technological systems as it may deem appropriate
and effective for achieving this objective.
(iv) encourage power generation entities, companies and traders to generate
electricity through non-conventional sources of energy to ensure the availability of
free electricity and encourage production of electricity through renewable sources of
energy like solar energy, wind energy, geothermal energy, biogas, tidal energy, wave
energy and biomass energy by setting a target of generating the quantum of electricity
necessary for domestic consumption and use in small scale industries entirely from
renewable energy sources, as may be prescribed.
(v) encourage local generation of electricity by the appropriate Government.
Right to free
electricity.
36 of 2003.
Legal
Protection.
Responsibilities
of the Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(vi) fix the quantum of free electricity for all consumers after observing and
taking into consideration the time and circumstances, in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the State Government shall discharge all its
responsibilities as mentioned under section 5 uniformly.
(2) The responsibility of making available all necessary means and facilities to the
State Governments for providing free electricity to the consumers shall lie with the Central
Government.
7. The beneficiaries to be covered under the ambit of right to free electricity under this
Act shall include—
(i) domestic consumers consisting of individuals or households including joint
families, nuclear families, tenants, labourers, farmers, widows, senior citizens and
differently-abled people.
(ii) businesses wholly based on agriculture, businesses wholly managed by
women, businesses having at least two-third of their employees as females and rural
schools.
8. (1) The appropriate Government  may make such rules and issue such guiding
principles in public interest as may be necessary for the implementation of the provisions of
this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government may issue such guiding principles and such directions
to local authority or power generation companies or licensees as referred to under section 14
of the Electricity Act, 2003, in public interest as may be necessary for implementation of the
provisions of this Act.
(3) The local authority may issue such guiding principles and such directions to power
generation companies and electricity traders, in public interest as may be necessary for
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(4) All rules made or guiding principles or directions issued under this section shall, as
soon as possible after they are made or issued, be laid before the State Legislature or, where
the appropriate Government is the Central Government, before both Houses of Parliament.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by general or special order, published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section that nullifies the right to
free and compulsory electricity.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Responsibilities
of the State
Government.
Beneficiaries
under the Act.
Power to
make rules and
issue
directions.
Power of the
Central
Government
to remove
difficulties.
36 of 2003.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The twenty-first century provides a new dimension to the needs and rights of the
people. Now food, clothing and housing no longer remain the only basic necessity. Other
factors related to education, medical treatment, electricity, road transport and personality
development for people also come under the category  of fundamental needs. Factors like
electricity, internet, road transport that are essentially required in the lives of people in the
modern world should also be included under essential rights. In present times, there is no
factor more important than electricity for people to lead their lives efficiently, which is
necessary for fulfilling the primary requirements and personality development of people.
Electricity generation is wholly dependent on natural resources and every human being has
equal rights over all the natural resources of nature. Therefore, power tariffs should never be
under the control of power companies. Hence, it is essential that right to electricity should be
made available to people compulsorily and free of cost.
2. The power policy of the Delhi Government has demonstrated that free electricity is
not a mere imaginary fact but it can be made available even to the common man through
diligent and honest policies of the concerned Government.
3. The possibility of the fulfillment of the objective of this Act and the objective of
providing free electricity to people is reflected by the power policy of the Delhi Government,
where due to continued cooperation between the Delhi Government and the power companies,
the electricity bills of thirty five lakh households have been reduced to zero. There is a need
to make consumption of free and cheap electricity throughout India a right of every citizen.
Hence, this Bill.
SANJAY SINGH
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that all the beneficiaries referred to under section 7 shall
be entitled to consume free electricity. Clauses 5 and 6 makes  the Central Government
responsible for taking measures to provide free electricity to the beneficiaries under the Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the expenditure involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill  inter alia empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. Clause 9 empowers the Central Government to issue
orders to remove difficulties which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
The rules or orders will relate to matter of detail only. The delegation of legislative powers is,
therefore, of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for making consumption of free electricity a right for all citizens throughout
India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sanjay Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—40RS(S3)—04.04.2022.