AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

4 8 ३॥ ivy)

Bill No. XVH of 1991
—<——————

Tilk DURGAH KHAWAJA SAHEB (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991

A
BILL
further to amend the Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act, 1935.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:-—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Durgah Khawaja Saheb (Amend-
ment) Act, 1991.

(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint,

2. In section 2 of the Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act, 1955 (hereinafter
referred to as the Principal Act) in clause (b) sub-clause (10) for the
words “including the Jagirdari villages of Hokran and Kishanpur in
Ajmer” the words “excluding Jagirdari villages of Hokran and Kishanpur
in Ajmer from the Durgah Endowment which are held by the hereditary
Sajjadanashin in lieu of the Perquisites attached to the said hereditary

office of the Sajjadanashin shall be substituted.

Short title
and com-
mence
ment.



Amend-
ment of
Section
11.

Insertion
of new
Section
1A.

Functions
and
Powers of
Sajjada-
nashin,

Substitu-
tion of
new scc-
tion for
Section
12.

Substitu-
tion of
new Sec-
tion for
Section
13.

Succes.
Sion to
the here.
ditary
Office of
the Sajja-
danashin,

2

In section 11 of the principal Act clause (h) shall be Omitte
3. In see 7

After section 11 of the principal Act, the following Section sh
4, After sec । a

I
be inserted, namely:—

aZray
UNCtions
cer cise sh
itary Tight;

have bee,
yat Laws >

“HLA, The hereditary Sajjadanashin, the great &randson of H,
Khawaiz “Moin-ud-din Hasan Chishti, shall preside over all f
hawaja sloms and traditions of the Durgah and he shall oxer
other powers as have been inherited by him under hered
since ancient times and which by virtue of such rights
conferred on him according to Shariyat or by the Shari

5. For Section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be i
substituted, namely: —

“12. (1) There shall be paid to the person holding the hereditary
office of the Sajjadanashin,— ।

(2) maintenance for the said hereditary office at the rate of

rupees ten thousand per mensem; and I5

(०) allowance at the rate of rupees ten thousand per mensem

oly Khanqah Shareef of Hazrat
Chishti out of the revenues of the

(2) The hereditary Sajjadanashin shall
all incomes, whether in cas

and Kishanpur in Ajmer,
fulfilled in the manner des:

also be entitled to receive 20
h or in annuity from the villages of Hokran
until the objects of the endowment are
ired by the donor.”,

6. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
Substituted, namely:— ! -

25

“13. As soon as the Office of Sajjad
office which is her

: editary one in the fami
ud-din Hasan Chishti as Per law, shall a
the eldest son of the deceaseg Sajjad
of his near,

anashin falls vacant, the
ily of Hazrat Khawaja Moin-
utomatically be succeeded by
anashin in hig absence the young-
est male relative shall succeed as 3

i © customs and traditions of t jjadana-
shin and Hazrat Khawaja Saheb’s family.”, he Sajja

&
Ss


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act which enacted in 1955 bas become
outdated in the present context and requires to be further amended to
make it upto date. For example the remuneration of the Sajjadanashin
was fixed at rupees two hundred per mensem at the time of its enact-
ment whereas the inflation rate hag risen manifold rendering the amount
insufficient. The word ‘remuncration’ shall also be substituted by word
‘the maintenance‘of Sajjadanashin’ to give it proper meaning. The rnain-
tenance allowance should also be raised to rupees ten thousand per men-
sem for maintaining the holy Khanqah Shareef where Hazrat Khawaja
Moin-ud-din Hasan Chishti lived during his life time. It is also felt neces-
sary to give legal protection to hereditary succession to the office of
Sajjadanashin. j

Hence this Bill.

| j SURESH PACHOURI


Defini-
tions.

Powers
and

duties

of the
Committee,

Remunc-
ration of
the Sajja-
danashin.

Succes-
sion to
the office
of Sajja-
danashin.

ANNEXURE
Extracts From

THE DURGAH KHAWAJA SAHEB ACT, 1955
(No. 36 oF 1955)

के * a * %

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

* * ” * a

(7) “Durgah Endowment” includes—
(i) the Durgah Khawaja Saheb, Ajmer;

(ii) all buildings and movable property within the bound.
aries of the Durgah Sharif;

68) Durgah Jagir, including all land, houses and shops and
all immovable property wherever situated belonging to the
Durgah Sharif;

(iv) all other property and all income derived from any
source whatsoever dedicated to the Durgah or placed for any
religious, pious or charitable purposes under the Durgah Ad-
ministration, including the Jagirdari villages of Hokran and
Kishanpur in Ajmer; and

(v) all such nazars or offerings as are received on behalf
of the Durgah by the Nazim or any person authorised by him;

* * * * 2

11. The powers and duties of the Committee shall be—

= = * . *

(h) to determine the functions and powers, if any, which the
Sajjadanashin may exercise in relation to the Durgah;
= * * * *

me There shall be paid to the person for the time being holding the
office of the Sajjadanashin remuneration at the rate of rupees two
hundred per mensem out of the revenues of the Durgah Endowment.

13. a) As soon as the office of the Sajjadanashin falls vacant, the
Committee shall, with the previous approval of the Chief Commissione?,
make such interim arrangements for the performance of the functions
of the Sajjadanashim as it may think fit, and immediately thereafter
ee a notice in such form and manner as may be determined by the
41 एतत०० inviting applications within one month of such publication

rom persons claiming to succeed to that office

4


5

(2) Where only one person claims to succeed to the office of the
Sajjadanashin and the Committee is satisfied as to his right to suc-
ceed, it shall, with the previous approval of the Chief Commissioner,
pass an order in writing according recognition ag Sajjadanashin to
such person.

(3) Where more persons than one claim to succeed to the office
of the Sajjadanashin, the Committee shall, after consultation with
the Chief Commissioner, refer the dispute to the Judicial Commis-
sioner of Ajmer for a decision regarding the claim to succeed to
that office, and the Judicial Commissioner, after taking such evi-
dence as he considers necessary and after giving an opportunity to
the claimants to be heard in respect of their claims, shall com-
municate his decision to the Committee.

(4) The Committee, on the receipt of the decision, shall, with
the previous approval of the Chief Commissioner, pass an order in
writing in accordance with such decision declaring the person found
entitled to succeed to the office of the Sajjadanashin and according
recognition as Sajjadanashin to such person.

(5) An order passed by the Committee under sub-section (2)
or sub-section (4) shall be final and shall not be questioned in any
court.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act, 1955.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)