THE WOMEN (EMPOWERMENT AND WELFARE) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to establish a Women Empowerment and Welfare Authority to provide for monthly
incentive schemes for girl Children to delay marriage until age of twenty one
years, special saving schemes for women with higher rate of interests
inclusive of annual bonus if husband is non-alcoholic, special fund
for micro credit schemes, guidelines for mobile healthcare facilities
for agricultural labour, regulation of private placement agencies,
schemes for widows and for all matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women (Empowerment and Welfare) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "annual report" means a report giving the details of developmental activities
Bill No. XVII of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 29TH DECEMBER, 2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Definitions.

2
Constitution of
Women
Empowerment
and Welfare
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
taken up over the year by the authority and detailing about targets set and achieved;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State or a Union territory
having legislature, the concerned State Government or the Union Territory Government,
as the case may be, and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(c) "authority" means the Women Empowerment and W elfare Authority
established under section 3;
(d) "domestic worker" means a woman employed to do work in or for a private
household(s) which includes cooking, cleaning, gardening, childcare, and old-age care.
(e) "health certificate" means a document signed by a competent health authority
provding proof that a person in non-alcoholic.
(f) "placement agency" means any agency or contractor, whether registered or
otherwise, engaged in the placement of domestic workers with prospective empolyers.
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
(h) "small family" means family having not more than two children.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this act, an Authority, to be known as
the Women Empowerment and Welfare Authority consisting of the following members,
namely:—
(a) Union Minister, Ministry of Women and Child Development —ex officio
Chairperson;
(b) Chairperson, National Commission for Women—ex officio Member;
(c) Secretaries of the Union Ministries of (i) Women and Child Development,
(ii) Health and Family Welfare and (iii) Statistics and Programme Implementation—
ex officio Members;
(d) Director General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—
ex officio Member;
(e) Director, National Institute of Health and Family Welfare— ex officio
Member.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority under this Act.
(3) The qualifications and experience, salary, allowances and terms of conditions of
services of officers and staff of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall meet at such intervals and places and shall observe such
rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
(2) The expenditure incurred to attend meetings by the Members referred to in sub-
clauses (a) to (e) of section 3, shall be borne by their concerned controlling authorities.
5. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such functions as may be necessary
to ensure empowerment of women in the country and shall formulate a comprehensive policy
within one year of its constitution to achieve the objective.
(
2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of
the Authority shall include to:—
(a) undertake a baseline study to collect comprehensive data about girl children
Functions of
the Authority.

3
5
10
Annual report
and its laying
before the
parliament.
and their families above the age of eighteen which shall be completed within one year
of setting up of the authority;
(b) formulate a monthly incentive scheme to provide for regular income to families
having unmarried girl children upto the age of twenty one years;
(c) recommend to the Central Government to prepare a special savings schemes
for woman with higher rates of interest;
(d) formulate a special bonus scheme for families where the husband produces
health certificate;
(e) provide for funds to encourage micro credit for young women enterpreneurs;
(f) frame guidelines for agricultural land owners to provide for mobile health care
facilities and social security cover for the women agricultural labour;
(g) recommend to the appropriate Government for formulating stringent
regulations for private placement agencies and regulations for domestic workers;
(h) recommend to the appropriate Government for penalties for harassment of
domestic workers;
(i) establish a separate widow welfare board to look into collecting data on
widowed woman and formulating rehabilitation schemes for widowed women;
 (j) provide guidelines to the appropriate Government for establishing all woman
police stations, banks and courts as district levles within specific timelines;
(k) undertake, promote and publish studies relating to the importance of woman
empowerment;
(l) frame syllabus for including awareness about woman empowerment in school
curriculum; and
(m) undertake such other activities as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) The Authority shall disseminate necessary knowledge and information collected,
to the respective departments of the Central and the State Governments.
6. (1) The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at such time as
may be prescribed, an Annual Report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes
it has undertaken and recommended to the Government during the year and it shall contain
statements of Annual Accounts of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and the Central
Government shall lay the report before each House of Parliament.
7. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government in consultation with the State Governments may make such order or give such
direction not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
9. The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Government to
provide funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to make
rules.
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
'There is no chance for the welfare of the world unless the condition of woman is
improved. It is not possible for a bird to fly on only one wing.' This was said by Swami
Vivekananda when he was asked about welfare of woman. Out of the 125 crore citizens of this
country, 65.2 crores are women. The sex ratio is 945females per 1000 males. Though targeted
welfare schemes, taken up by the Government over the past five decades for woman have
resulted in better livelihood for them, still there is a lot more to be achieved. Literacy rates
among woman in India is still lagging and the numbers relating to woman in the workforce is
abysmal. Though our Constitution envisages to provide for equal means of livelihood and
equal pay for men and woman, it is still a distant dream.
We pride ourselves as a country, with regard to our economic growth but this growth
remains a façade, masking our low social indicators. Woman should be key players for this
change to happen. Policy which aims at bringing higher proportion of woman into the
workforce, as teachers, health care workers and skilled labour force in factories should be the
first stepping stone towards this. Providing them with the weapon of education will give
them this much required freedom.
This Bill, proposes to create a Women Empowerment and Welfare Authority to carry
out major policy changes and provide for the necessary guidelines. This Authority will inter
alia bring in monthly incentive schemes for families of girl children who have not been
married until the age of twenty one. Also, special saving schemes shall be introduced for
woman in every household with higher rates of interest and annual bonuses if husband
produces a non-alcoholic certificate from government hospital. Special fund would be created
to provide for micro credit to woman entrepreneurs who plan on start-ups just after their
college education. Mobile health care facilities and social security cover would also be
provided for agricultural labour working in their lands. It will regulate placement of agency
and also organizing domestic workers under a newly formed body to safeguard their rights.
A separate Widows welfare arm proposed to be created to provide for maintaining data on
widowed woman in the country and to provide for a subsistence allowance to the needy.
This Bill, shall endeavour to create a positive and just social and economic environment
for the woman of this country. Woman must be put in a position to solve their own problems
in their own ways. The State must endeavour to take that extra effort to provide for the equal
platform. This is what this Bill envisions, to offer the required momentum to kick start this
process. Our country's journey to regain the status of ' Vishwa Guru' will become a realty
only if the woman folk of this great nation lead the way.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for Constitution of the Women Empowerment and Welfare
Authority and appointment of officers and staffs for its functioning. Clause 7 makes it
obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring expenditure of five thousand
crore rupees per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure to
the tune of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3408RS(S3)—02.01.2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a Women Empowerment and Welfare Authority to provide for monthly
incentive schemes for girl Children to delay marriage until age of twenty one
years, special saving schemes for women with higher rate of interests
inclusive of annual bonus if husband is non-alcoholic, special fund
for micro credit schemes, guidelines for mobile healthcare facilities
for agricultural labour, regulation of private placement agencies,
schemes for widows and for all matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Vivek Gupta,  M.P .)