1
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill  No.  XVII of  2008
THE CHILDREN SOCIAL SECURITY BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for social security to the families living below poverty line in the country
whose children upto the age of  fourteen years have been prohibited under the law to
undertake any kind of employment by extending financial assistance and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Children Social Security  Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
(3) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise, requires, “prescribed” means precribed by
rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall provide financial assistance to every family living
below poverty line, having two children upto the age of fourteen years at such rate and in
such manner as may be prescribed.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD JULY, 2009
Central
Government
to provide
financial
assistance.
Definition.
5
10

2
4. For the purpose of providing financial assistance under section 3 the Central
Government shall conduct a survey to identify the number of families living below poverty
line and having two children below the age of fourteen years and prepare a list of such
families as may be covered under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf make available to the States and Union Territories the requisite funds for the
purpose of this Act.
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
The Central
Government
to conduct a
survey for
identification
of
beneficiaries.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Now that children upto the age of 14 years have been prohibited by law to undertake
any kind of employment, including work in fields, etc. a large number of poor families,
particularly, below poverty line have been hard hit and need assistance to substitute for the
income that their children in the age group of 10-14 years would have been able to earn if
employed.
In the circumstances, it is desirable that such families be provided financial assistance
for the loss suffered by them due to the operation of the law. However, such assistance, may
be limited up to and for two children only at the maximum, per family.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
RAJEEV  CHANDRASEKHAR

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide financial
assistance to the families living below poverty line and having two children. Clause 5 provides
the Central Government shall make available to the States and Union Territories funds for the
purpose of the Act. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two hundred crore may also involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill.
The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of legislative power is of
normal character.
5

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for social security to the families living below poverty line in the country
whose children upto the age of  fourteen years have been prohibited under the law to
undertake any kind of employment by extending financial assistance and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2530RS(S5)—03-07-2009.