AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 14TH MARCH, 2006
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (SECOND AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Second Amendment)
Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
2.  In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in section 29A, after sub-section 9,
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘10.  The registration of a Political Party shall be cancelled by the Commission,
if on the basis of report received by the Commission or otherwise, and after hearing
the political party, Commission comes to a conclusion that the activities of the
political party have become directly detrimental to the principles of socialism,
secularism and democracy and, have become a threat to the sovereignty, unity and
integrity of India.’’
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. XVII of 2006
Amendment of
section 29A of
Act No. 43 of
1951.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Political Parties are registered with the Election Commission under section 29A of the
Representation of Peoples Act 1951. Under the section, the Commission requires association
or bodies of individual citizens seeking registration as political parties to submit to the
Commission copies of their memorandum of rules and regulations. It is required that such
rules and regulations should contain a specific provision that the association or body shall
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, and to the
principles of socialism, secularism and democracy, and it would uphold the sovereignty,
unity and integrity of India. Some political parties, it is found, blatantly disregard this
provision. Some of them openly defy the principles of secularism enshrined in the Constitution.
Such open defiance cannot be tolerated, and those political parties defying vital provision
of Constitution should have no right of either registration or recognition.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM  LAXMAN  NAIK
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P . )
MGIPMRND—6494RS(S1)—16.03.2006.