1
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT)   BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to  amend the Companies Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.   In section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013, in sub-section (5) after the first proviso,
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely :—
"Provided further that the company shall spend, in every financial year, at least
twenty five per cent.  The amount earmarked for Corporate Social responsibility activities
on repair restoration, management, maintenance, upkeep etc. of ancient monuments
and archaeological sites and remains of national importance as declared under
section 3 of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958:
Amendment
of section
135.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XVII of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 12TH JULY, 2019
5
10
24 of 1958.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is an indispensible part of business today. CSR
mandates the company to operate in an ethical manner while finding sustainable ways to
contribute to the society at large. Companies in India are involved in women empowerment,
social upliftment, environment awareness, among other things, in the CSR activities as
required under section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013.
India as a nation has a rich history, culture and heritage. Our monuments have withstood
the test of time and braved repeated invasions and assaults. It is the duty of every Indian to
contribute into the maintenance and restoration of these monuments that showcase India's
architectural marvel, egineering brilliance and spirituality to the whole world. Every monument
mentioned under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958
has a story to tell. These are stories of not only peace and tolerance, but also of the bravery
and valour of those who fought protecting these ancient structures.
It is therefore desirable that, at least twenty five percent, of the two per cent of the
average net profits of the company made during the three immediately preceding financial
years, be spent on repair, restoration, management, maintenance, upkeep etc. of ancient
monuments and archaeological sites and remains of national importance as declared under
section 3 of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. VINAY  P. SAHASRABUDDHE
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE COMPANY ACT, 2013
135. (1)* * * * *
* * * * *
(5) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1) , shall ensure that the
company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent of the average net profits of
the company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of
its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy:
Provided that the company shall give preference to the local area and areas around it
where it operates, for spending the amount earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility
activities:
Provided further that if the company fails to spend such amount, the Board shall , in its
report made under clause (o) of sub-section (3) of section 134, specify the reasons for not
spending the amount.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section "average net profit" shall be
calculataed in accordance with the provisions of section 198.
* * * * *
Corporate
Social
Responsibility.

4
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to  amend the Companies Act, 2013.
—————
(Dr. Vinay P . Sahasrabuddhe, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1578RS(S3)—15-07-2019.