1
THE  ANDHRA  PRADESH  REORGANISATION  (AMENDMENT)
BILL,  2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment)
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Andhra Pradesh (Reorganisation) Act, 2014, (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), after section 90, the following section shall be inserted, namely,:—
Bill No. XVII of  2023
       AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER 2023
Short title
and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
90A.
6 of  2014.
5

2
"90A. (1) The Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project is hereby declared to be a
national project.
(2) In the interest of the public, the Central Government shall ensure the
execution of the project in an expedient manner.".
3. In the Thirteenth Schedule of the principal Act, under the heading "Infrastructure",
after entry 12, the following entries shall be inserted, namely,:—
"12A. The Government of India shall develop an Information Technology
Investment Zone at Hyderabad in the successor State of Telangana, which is to be
completed  in phases with Phase I by end-2026.
12B. The Government of India shall establish a Turmeric Board at Nizamabad
in the successor State of Telangana.".
Kaleshwaram
Lift Irrigation
Project to be
a  national
project.
Amendment
of the
Thirteenth
Schedule.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The objectives of this Bill are four-fold:
First, the Bill proposes to accord the Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project (KLIP) a
national project status. The KLIP, a multi-purpose irrigation project on the Godavari River in
Kaleshwaram, Telangana, is currently the world's largest multi-stage lift irrigation project.
The project envisages:
(a) the diversion of 195 thousand million cubic feet (TMC) of Godavari water to
the Sripada Rao Yellampally project and subsequently to Mid Manair Reservoir by
lifting it to higher contours to bring large extents of lands in the basin under irrigation;
(b) the irrigation of about 18.25 lakh acres of land in 13 districts in the successor
State of Telangana;
(c) the stabilisation of about 18.82 lakh acres of land in the successor State of
Telangana;
(d) The provision of 40 TMC of drinking water and 16 TMC of water for industrial
use;
(e) the stabilisation of shortfalls in the planned utilization of water under the
Sriram Sagar Project, the Singur Project, and the Nizam Sagar Project;
(f) the restoration of groundwater level to its original state by making surface
water available for irrigation.
Granting national project status to KLIP would alleviate the financial burden of the
successor State of Telangana, help in the project's timely completion, and provide water to
several lakh households in the successor State. In addition, the provision of water in the
drought-prone areas and backward districts would also help reduce labour migration from
the successor State of Telangana, prevent farmer suicides and develop and strengthen the
State's food security.
Second, the Bill proposes to create an obligation on the Central Government to establish
an Information Technology Investment Zone (ITIZ) in Hyderabad, Telangana. The creation
of an ITIZ in Hyderabad would result in:
(a) the generation of direct revenues of over three lakh crore rupees;
(b) the growth of IT exports to the tune of over two lakh crore rupeees;
(c) direct employment for nearly fifteen lakh people and indirect employment of
nearly fifty-three lakh people; and
(d) an increase in tax revenue to the successor State to the extent of about
thirty thousand crore rupees over twenty-five years.
Third, the Bill pr oposes to establish  a Turmeric Bo ard at Nizamabad, 
Telangana. Telangana is the country' largest turmeric-producing State, with Nizamabad 
producing about thirty percent of the country's total turmeric production. Turmeric is the 
only spice in India that can be exploited commercially  on multiple scale apart fr om its 
primary use as a flavouring agent in food. The spice is mainly used as a flavouring agent, 
medicine for stomach disorders and food poisoning, an Ayurvedic component in toothpaste, 
facial powers, and natural dye. To exploit the inherent natural advantages that our country 
possesses in the pr oduction of turmeric and to safeguard the interests of turmeric farmers, 
a nodal agency must be created.
3

4
The establishment of the Turmeric Board would help:—
(a) the export promotion of turmeric;
(b) the development and implementation of good agricultural practices, through
scientific, technological research and regulation of domestic marketing of
turmeric;
(c) provide a common platform for Indian exporters and international buyers
through international exhibitions and meetings;
(d) the promotion of organic production and certification of turmeric;
(e) the promotion of exports of organic turmeric and organic turmeric products;
(f) the formulation and implementation of various developmental schemes;
(g) rendering assistance for studies and research on better processing practices,
quality management systems, improvement of grading methods and effective packaging
techniques;
(h) the provision of inputs to the Government on policy matters relating to
import and export of turmeric;
(i) the registration and licensing of turmeric exporters;
(j) manage a comprehensive and updated information for exporters and importers;
and
(k) the collection and documentation of trade information.
Hence, this Bill.
K. R.  SURESH REDDY.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 provides for the declaration of Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project as a national
project. Clause 3 provides for the establishment of an Information Technology Investment
Zone at Hyderabad, and a Turmeric Board at Nizamabad, in the successor State of Telangana.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve a non-recurring expenditure of one lakh
two hundred eighteen thousand crore rupees, and a recurring expenditure of one hundred
crore rupees from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
————
(Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy, M.P.)
RS-P&PSPMB(E)0085-14.12.2023 