10

15

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAIYA SABHA

Bill No, XVM of 2001

THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2001
A
BILL

to provide for population control measures and for promoting small family norms and
for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second ~~ar of the Republic of India as
follows :—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless context otherwise requires, “appropriate Government” means in
the case of a State the Government of that State and in other cases the Central Government.

3. The appropriate Government shall make efforts to encourage and motivate every
tamily to adopt two child norm.

4. A married couple who have no child shall be provided with the facilities of free
medical treatment, food, pension, free house, etc. in their old age.

5. A married couple who have only one child shall be provided with the facilities of free
education and employment to such child.

6. A married couple who have only two children shall be provided with suitable jobs to
their children in Government, Public Sector, Autonomous Body and local authority etc.

Short title
extentand
‘commence-
ment

Definition.

Central
Government to
promote two
child norm.

Facilities for
those having
one child,

Facilities for
those having
one child.

Provision for
employment
for the
children


Overriding 7. The provision of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained to
effec ofthe the contrary in any other law for the time being in force.
Power to make 8. The appropriate Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules

rules. for carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

For the last 50 years Population of India has just doubled and the steps taken to curb
phenomenal growth of population so far have not yielded any concrete results.

Due to over population all major achievements in different fields have lost their
significance and the country is not progressing at the desired pace, therefore, the time has
come when some measures have become essential and if such measures are not taken at the
earliest the rapidly rising population witl engulf the entire prospects of development of the
country in a time to come.

Therefore, the Bill seeks to provide incentives to those who adopt family planning
methods.

Hence this Bill.

RUMANDLA RAMACHANDRAIAH


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clauses 4 to 6 of the Bill provides that certain benefits are to be given to those who
have no child or who have only child or who have two children. The Central Government
shall have to incur some expenditure for implementing the provisions of this Bill in re-
spect of their respective Consolidated Funds. The Bill, therefore, will involve an annual
recurting expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore out of the Consolidated Fund of
India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five lakhs is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame the rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules to be framed will relate to matters of detail only,
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for population control measures and for promoting small family
norms and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6432RAS—16.02.2001