1
THE PREVENTION OF HOARDING AND PROFITEERING
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of hoarding and profiteering of essential commodities of
daily use of citizens particularly of common man in the country and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Prevention of Hoarding and Profiteering Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “dealer” means any person, partnership or firm carrying on the business of
purchasing and selling any of the articles specified in the Schedule to this Act and
includes a producer, importer, wholesaler or retailer of such article;
(b) “hoarding” means accumulating essential goods or stocks intended for sale
to consumers with a view to cornering such goods so as to create their artificial
scarcity and to raise their selling prices thereafter;
(c) “importer” means any person who brings in any of the scheduled articles into
the State where he carries on his business from any other place outside the State for
sale purposes in the State;
Short title,
extent and
commence ment.
Bill No.  XVII of  2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010
5
10
Definitions

2
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “profiteering” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means
the sale by a dealer of any scheduled article at a price or rate higher than the rates fixed
under section 4 of this Act;
(f) “retailer” means a person who sells any scheduled article to a consumer not
being a dealer;
(g) “scheduled article” means any of the articles specified in the Scheduled to
this Act;
(h) "wholesaler" means a person, partnership or firm who sells any scheduled
article to any dealer and includes a broker, commission agent or any other agent
having authority to sell any scheduled article belonging to his principal.
3. Hoarding of and profiteering in the scheduled articles is hereby prohibited.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the maximum rates or
prices in respect of the scheduled articles which may be charged by a dealer or retailer in
respect of such articles from the consumers;
Provided that different prices may be fixed for different zones or States in the country.
5. (1) Whoever profiteers in any scheduled article shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment which may extend to seven years or with fine amounting to not less than two
lakh rupees or with both.
(2) The scheduled article or articles in respect of which the offence has been committed
or any part thereof, as the court may deem fit, shall be forfeited to the Government.
(3) Any person found deliberately hoarding any scheduled article or any other
commodity generally required for daily consumption of common man, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to seven years or with fine amounting to not less
than five lakh rupees or with both and the articles so hoarded by such person shall also be
confiscated by the Government.
6. (1) Any dealer, retailer or wholesaler, who without reasonable excuse,—
(a) refuses to sell any scheduled article; or
(b) refuses to sell any scheduled article at the price fixed in respect thereof under
section 4, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to
five years or with fine amounting to not less than one lakh rupees or with both.
(2) Any purchaser or consumer who purchases any scheduled article at a price more than
the maximum price fixed thereof under section 4 shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment
which may extend to two years or with fine amounting to not less than two lakh rupees or
with both.
7. When any police officer not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner has
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act, such officer may, after recording in writing the grounds of his belief, at all
reasonable hours, enter and search, without any warrant, any place where a dealer, retailer
or wholesaler keeps, or is for the time being keeping, any scheduled article, accounts,
registers or anything, such officer may deem fit and, if necessary, inspect, seize or retain all
or any of them for so long as they may be required for further investigation into any
offence under this Act.
Prohibition of
hoarding and
profiteering of
scheduled
articles.
Central
Government
to fix
maximum
prices for sale
of scheduled
articles.
Penalty for
hoarding and
profiteering.
Penalty for
refusal to sell
and purchase
scheduled
articles at
fixed price.
Power to
search and
seize of
scheduled
articles.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, all
offences punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
(2) Any police officer not below the rank of a Assistant Commissioner may arrest
without warrant any person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or credible
information has been received of his having been concerned in any of the offences punishable
under this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to the
Schedule any other article of daily use, and thereupon the schedule shall be deemed to have
been amended accordingly and the article so added shall be deemed to be the scheduled
article within the meaning of this Act.
10. If any order controlling the price of any essential commodity within the meaning of
the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 has been made before or after the commencement of this
Act and if such essential commodity is also a scheduled article within the meaning of this
Act, that order shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained
in this Act, or any order made thereunder.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Cognizance of
offence and
arrest without
warrant.
Powers to add
any other
article to the
schedule.
Effect of
orders
inconsistent
with the
provisions of
the Essential
Commodities
Act, 1955 or
orders made
thereunder.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

THE  SCHEDULE
[See Sections 2(f) and 9]
11. Wheat and Wheat products.
12. Rice and Rice in the husk.
13. Pulses.
14. Spices.
15. Edible oils including Vanaspati.
16. Sugar and raw sugar.
17. Baby food.
18. Paper and paper products.
19. Drugs and Medicines.
10. Skimmed Milk Powder.
11. Kerosene oil.
12. Janata Cloth.
13. Kerosene oil.
4

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
These days the common man is in the grip of steep rise in the prices of essential
commodities required for his daily use. The prices are rising so menacingly that it has
become impossible for the common man to have two time meals. The worst sufferers are daily
wage workers, rickshaw pullers, hawkers, domestic workers and others doing petty jobs. For
the ordinary households, managing monthly budget is becoming next to impossible. The
situation is further aggravated when the essential commodities are not available in the
market despite good harvests in the country. This is because some unscrupulous traders,
brokers and middlemen resort to hoarding of essential commodities to create artificial scarcity
and, thereafter, indulge in profiteering in these items for their own vested interests. As a
result hoarding and profiteering in foodgrains, medicines and several other commodities
which are essential to the daily life of the citizens have become common these days which is
adversely affecting the common man and the country as a whole. In the absence of deterrent
punishment under a specified Act for these offences, these cases are increasing. Therefore,
to curb this menace, it is felt that severe deterrent punishment should be prescribed.
Hence, this Bill.
R.C. SINGH
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Bill. It will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of legislative
power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—2358RS(S5)—03-05-2010.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of hoarding and profiteering of essential commodities of
daily use of citizens particularly of common man in the country and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri R.C. Singh, M.P.)