1
Short title
and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  For article 220 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
“220. No person who, after the commencement of this Constitution, has held office as
a permanent Judge or an Additional Judge of a High Court shall plead or act in any court or
before any authority in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts”.
3. After article 220 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“220A. No person who, after the commencement of this Constitution, has held office
as a permanent Judge or an Additional Judge of a High Court shall be eligible for further
office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any State after he
has ceased to hold office”.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 11TH MAY, 2012
Bill No. XVII of 2012
Substitution
of article
220.
5
Restriction
on practice
after being a
judge.
Insertion of
new article
220A.
Restriction
on holding of
offices after
being a Judge.
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our Constitution contained various safeguards to ensure the independence of High
Court judges when they are in office it does so for permanent judges even after their retirement
as proposed in Seventy-second Law Commission Report titled, "Restriction on Practice
After Being a Permanent Judge" under the Chairmanship of Shri H.R. Khanna but it provides
none for this very independence of Additional Judges of High Courts, in so far as it may be
affected by prospects after their retirement. Article 220 of the Constitution is only applicable
to persons who have been permanent judge of a High Court. It is essential that restriction on
practice and prohibition as to holding of offices after retirement should also apply to a
person who has worked as an Additional Judge of a High Court in India. It has happened that
a person working as an officiating Additional Judge of a High Court, started practicing in that
very High Court where he was once an Additional Judge even before his resignation was
accepted in conformity with article 217 (1) (a) of Constitution. Appropriate provisions exist in
the Constitution which debar the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the members
of the Union and State Public Service Commissions from employment by the Unions or the
State Governments after their retirement but such provision do not exist in case of Judges of
High Courts where similar considerations do not apply. The explanation to article 220 excludes
the High Court of Delhi from its purview, this amendment also aims to bring Delhi High Court
under the ambit of article 220.
The Law Commission has also testified that the existing provisions are not satisfactory
and can severely affect the independence of the judiciary. Therefore, the proposed
amendments are required to ensure and strengthen the judicial independence which is
absolutely necessary for enforcing the Rule of Law.
Hence, the Bill.
TARUN VIJAY
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
220. No person who, after the commencement of this Constitution, has held office as
a permanent Judge of a High Court shall plead or act in any court or before any authority in
India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.
Explanation.— In this article, the expression "High Court" does not include a
High Court for a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule as it existed before the
commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956.
* * * *
3
Restriction
on practice
after being a
permanent
Judge.

GMGIPMRND—1027RS (S3)—11.05.2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Tarun Vijay, M.P .)