An

10

As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XVII of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, —

(a) for sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 1 the following sub-paragraph shall be
substituted, namely:—

(b) “legislature party” in relation to a member of a House belonging to any
political party means the group consisting of all the members of that House for the
time being belonging to that political party.

Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment of
Tenth Sched-
ule.


2

(0) (i) In sub-paragraph (/) of paragraph 2, the words and figures "paragraphs 3,4
and" shall be omitted.

(ii) sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 2 shall be omitted.
(c) paragraph 3 and 4 shall be omitted.

(d) to sub-paragraph (/) of paragraph 6, the following second proviso shall be added
at the end, namely:—

“Provided further that the Chairman or the Speaker of such House, as the case
may be, shall decided the question within thirty days of the reference of the question
to him."

(e) paragraph 7 shall be omitted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Defections in Parliament and State Legislatures are a blot on our polity and a root
cause of corruption. Decline in moral values, thirst for power, blackmail, and all sorts of
pressures and pulls and horse trading in polity have posed serious threat to the political
institution of the country. It is also an irony that if a single member defects from his party he
is disqualified but if a group consisting of one third or more of a party defect they are not
disqualified. In other words, if an individual commits some crime, he will be punished but
if the same crime is committed by a group, it is not punishable. Defection should be treated
as defection whether by one, two or many and whoever defects from the party on whose
symbol he was elected should be disqualified. It has, therefore, become necessary to amend
the Constitution and its Tenth Schedule.

Hence this Bill.
SOLIPETA RAMACHANDRA REDDY


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
‘(TENTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
1, Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires, —

cry के कक

(0) “legislature party”, in relation to a member of a House belonging to any
political party in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 or paragraph 3 or, as.
the case may be, paragraph 4, means the group consisting of all the members of that
House for the time being belonging to that political party in accordance with the said
provisions;

+e +e +e

2. Disqualification on ground of defection.—(1) Subject to the provisions of
paragraphs 3, 4 and 5, a member of a House belonging to any political party shall be
disqualified for being a member of the House—

कक कक कक

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this paragraph,
a person who, on the commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act,
1985, is a member of a House (whether elected or nominated as such) shall,—

(i) where he was a member of political party immediately before such
commencement, be deemed, for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph,
to have been elected as a member of such House as a candidate set up by such political
Party;

(ii) in any other case, be deemed to be an elected member of the House who
has been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party
for the purposes of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph or, as the case may be, deemed
to be a nominated member of the House for the purposes of sub-paragraph (3) of this
paragraph.

3. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of split.—Where a
member of a House makes a claim that he and any other members of his legislature party
constitute the group representing a faction which has arisen as a result of a split in his
original pulitical party and such group consists of not less than one-third of the members of
such legislature party,—

(a) he shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 on the
ground—

(i that he has voluntarily given up his membership of his original political
party; or

(ii) that he has voted or abstained from voting in such House contrary to any
direction issued by such party or by any person or authority authorised by it in that
behalf without obtaining the prior permission of such party, person or authority and
such voting or abstention has not been condoned by such party, person or authority
within fifteen days from the date of such voting or abstention; and

(b) from the time of such split, such faction shall be deemed to be the political
party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and
to be his original political party for the purposes of this paragraph.

4


5

4. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of merger.—
(1) A member of a House shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2
where his original political party merges with another political party and he claims that he
and any other members of his original political party—

(a) have become members of such other political party or, as the case may be,
of a new political party formed by such merger; or

(5) have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a separate group,

and from the time of such merger, such other political party or new political party or group,
as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to which he belongs for the
purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original political party for the
purposes of this sub-paragraph.

(2) For the purposes of sub-pargaraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger of the original
political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and only if,
not less than two-thirds of the members of the legislature party concerned have agreed to
such merger.

ae कक कक

7. ‘Bar of Jurisidiction of courts—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,

no court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected with the disqualification
of a member of a House under this Schedule.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4072RS—02-03-2000.