Short title
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill  No.  XVIII  of  2009
THE DESTITUTE AND NEEDY SENIOR CITIZENS
(CARE, PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2009
A
 BILL
to provide for proper care of senior citizens who are destitute by their kith and kins and the
Government and for protection of lonely or old couples by way of appropriate
security measures by local police, and for other welfare measures and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute and Needy Senior Citizens (Care, Protection
and Welfare) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Govern-
ment of that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "destitute senior citizen" means an old person who has become infirm
due to old age or chronic ailment and who has no independent and adequate means of
livelihood for his subsistence;
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 31ST JULY, 2009

2
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "senior citizen" means any person who has completed sixty years of
age.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
it shall be the duty of the kith and kins of senior citizen to take care and support such citizen
in his old age.
(2) The kith and kins of a senior citizen who fail to comply with the provisions con-
tained in sub-section (1) shall forfeit their right to suceed the senior citizen in any manner
after the death of such a senior citizen.
Explanation—For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2) the kith and kins include
sons, daughters and other heirs and successors of the senior citizens.
4. (1) Every destitute senior citizen shall, on an application made in the prescribed
form to the appropriate Government be paid rupees one thousand per mensem as subsis-
tence allowance by such Government in whose jurisdiction such senior citizen perma-
nently resides.
(2) The subsistence allowance referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be subject to
alteration on the basis of the prevailing price index as may be determined by the Central
Government.
(3) The procedure to be followed in granting and payment of subsistence allowance
under this Act shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Senior Citizen
Homes at conspicuous places, as it may deem necessary for board and lodging of needy
senior citizens in such Homes.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide all necessary facilities of daily life in
each Senior Citizen Home for the benefit of senior citizens residing therein.
(3) The appropriate Government shall also provide free medical aid and means of
entertainment to the inhabitants of the Homes established under sub-section (1).
(4) The senior citizens lodged in Senior Citizen Homes shall not be entitled to subsis-
tence allowance referred to in section 4 of this Act.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the local police of every district headquarter shall keep a record of senior citizens residing
within its jurisdiction in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of the area Station House Officer of the local police to,—
(a) verify the character and antecedents of the domestic servant or any domes-
tic help engaged by any senior citizen or lonely old couple residing within his jurisdic-
tion in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) provide adequate security to every lonely senior citizen or lonely old couple
residing within his jurisdiction.
7. The Appropriate Government shall also undertake the following welfare measures
for the senior citizens, namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance at nil or least minimal interest to attain
financial freedom;
(b) to provide free medical and health care facilities;
(c) concessional travel by road, rail and air; and
(d) such other measures as may be prescribed.
Duty of kith
and kins of
senior citizen.
Subsistence
allowance to
destitute
senior
citizens.
Establishment
of Senior
Citizen
Homes.
Protection of
senior citizens
by local
police.
Other Welfare
measures to
be taken for
Senior
Citizens.
55
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this
behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
9. The provisions for this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect, notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith, contained in any other law for the time being in
force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to senior citizens.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not incon-
sistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds for the
purposes of
the Act.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With inflation and western influence in our country senior citizens are being neglected.
This is against our Indian culture and philosophy. We, as responsible citizens cannot keep
quiet. With the increase in life expectancy, the number of senior citizens is increasing regu-
larly. However, in many cities in the country thousands of old citizens living alone have been
target of criminals and many have lost their lives due to peoples' greed. It is our duty to
provide them with security both personal and financial for their welfare.
These are the people who have contributed everything for the family, the society and
the country. It is inhuman and immoral to neglect our senior citizens. They must be provided
complete financial security including 'Roti, Kapra and Makaan'. Not only this they should be
provided with mental and psychological support.
Hence this Bill.
SANTOSH  BAGRODIA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 (1) provides that appropriate Government shall give subsistence allowance to
every destitute senior citizen. Sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3) of clause 5 provide for the estab-
lishment of senior citizen homes and other facilities for the benefit of the destitute senior
citizens residing in it. Clause 7 also provides for the other welfare measures to be taken for
senior citizen by the appropriate Government. Provisions of clause 8 is related with the
appropriation made by Parliament in this behalf to provide adequate funds for the purpose of
the Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about one thousand five hun-
dred crore is likely to be involved from the consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring
expenditure of about one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the matters will relate to detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for proper care of senior citizens who are destitute by their kith and kins and the
Government and for protection of lonely or old couples by way of appropriate
security measures by local police, and for other welfare measures and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Santosh Bagrodia, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3558RS(S5)—31.07.2009.