1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. After clause (2) of article 151 of the Constitution, the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(3)  All reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India relating to the
Accounts of the Union submitted under clause (1) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament within one month from the date of submission to the President.
(4) All reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India relating to the
accounts of a State submitted under clause (2) shall be laid before the legislature of the
State within one month from the date of submission to the Governor.”
Bill No. XVIII  of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON
THE 8TH AUGUST, 2014
Short title
and
Commence-
ment.
5
Amendment
of article
151.
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 148 of the Constitution provides for appointment of the Comptroller and Auditor
General to audit and prevent misuse of public money in the country. Being the custodian of
the Consolidated Fund of India, he scrutinises the receipts and expenditure of the
Consolidated Fund of India. When the reports are submitted by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, it is supposed to be laid before the Legislature at the earliest. However, there
were occasions when the report submitted to the President, was delayed in laying  before
Parliament due to irregularities in the use of public money. This prevented the Legislature to
get the report examined by the Public Accounts Committee in a time bound manner. In order
to strengthen the mechanism to have control over the Executive by Parliament, it is felt that
once the report is submitted to the President, constitutional provision be made within one
month from the date of such submission to the President or Governor, as the case may be for
laying of such reports. This would facilitate expeditious examination by the Public Accounts
Committee of Parliament and the respective State Legislature.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
Hence, this Bill.
 T. SUBBARAMI  REDDY
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
151.  (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the
accounts of the Union shall be submitted to the President, who shall cause them to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
(2) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts
of a State shall be submitted to the Governor of the State, who shall cause them to be laid
before the Legislature of the State.
3
Audit reports.

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2132RS(S3)—08.08.2014.