5

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XVIII of 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.

2. In article 80 of the Constitution, for clause (4), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—

“(4). The representatives of each State in the Council of States shall be elected
in the following manner, namely:—

(a) each party shall nominate its representatives according to its nu-
merical strength in the Legislative Assembly concerned in proportion to total
number of seats allocated to that State in the Council of States;

(0) in case of any unfilled seat or seats remaining after nomination in
accordance with clause (a) in respect of that State, the representatives to fill
the unfilled seat shall be elected by elected memtbers of the Legislative As-
sembly of the State in accordance with the system of proportional representa-
tion by means of single transferable vote”.

Short utle

Amendment of
article 80


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In recent times we have witnessed a growing and alarming trend of ‘money power’
playing a decisive role in the elections to Rajya Sabha. Although we term it as an ‘elec-
tion’, in fact each party, ‘selects’, its representative to the Rajya Sabha, based on its nu-
merical strength in the respective State Assemblies.

Duc to the money power, often the official candidate of the party is cither defeated
or not elected in the first or second round as expected.

Thus a person who owes no allegiance to a party's political philosophy gets elected
to Rajya Sabha, to the detriment of the interests of a political party and its strength and
thus its political ideology in the Rajya Sabha.

With a view to curb this trend, it is suggested that—

(a) Based on its required numerical strength in the assembly, a party should be
entitled to ‘nominate’ its representative to the Rajya Sabha.

(b) If after, each party has ‘nominated’ its representative, if any further seat
remains unfilled, then an open voting election may take place, based on party's
direction on voting. This will prevent cross voting and ensure once again, the elec-
tion of the desired candidate.

The amendments are required urgently in view of forthcoming elections in
April, 2002.

Hence this Bill.
SATISH PRADHAN


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

80. (1) The Council of States shall consist of— ‘Composition of
the Council of
States.

* * * * * *

(4) The representatives of each State in the Council of States shall be elected by
the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the
system of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Satish Pradhan, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6453RS—16.02.2001.