1
Bill No. XVIII of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 12TH JULY, 2019
THE POPULATION REGULATION BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to revitalize efforts towards promoting the small family norms of up to two children per
eligible couple; to ensure healthy birth spacing through measures related to
augmenting the availability, accessibility and affordability of quality reproductive
health services, and other relevant inter-sectoral development instruments by the
Central and the State Governments; to achieve the goal of stabilization of population
commensurate with the emerging social, economic, health, nutritional,
epidemiological, environmental and other developmental needs of the national
economy; to recognize the implications of population momentum on the prospects of
national progress in the long run, propelled through its young and dynamic
population age-structure; to ameliorate and harness the demographic potential in
the sustainable manner and help to engulf the prevailing demographic and socio-
economic disparities across population groups and regions, and render equal
opportunities for all, irrespective of age, sex, religion, caste, class, race, residence,
language etc. to achieve the fullest development potential and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.

2
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Regulation Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "small family" means family or couple having up to two children.
3. It is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act are for the purposes of giving
effect to the policies of the State towards securing the principles laid down in clauses (1) &
(2) or article 38 of the Constitution of India.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, formulate a comprehensive Revised National Population Policy particularly for the
purposes of implementing the provision of adopting small family norm.
(2) Without pre judice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1)
the Central Government shall:
(a) make provisions for accessible, affordable and quality reproductive health
care Services across the public health system across the country;
(b) supplement these provisions with inter-sectoral and inter-ministerial synergies
towards strengthening the key areas of primary and secondary education, access to
safe drinking water and sanitation facilities in the household, housing for all, affordable
health care for all and economic/livelihood opportunities- particularly for women;
(c) make concerted efforts towards promoting the value of girl child at par with
male child, and ensure the equal participation of women in social, economic and political
spheres; and
(d) lay special stress on the Empowered Action Group States (EAG) and high
focus districts with Total Fertility Rate above three points to effectively implement and
benefit from the national policy.
5. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the employee of the Central Government or of a Public Sector enterprise under the
control of the Central Government who adopts small family norm by undergoing sterilization
operation himself or of the spouse shall be given:—
(a) one additional increment during the entire service;
(b) subsidy towards purchase of plot or house site or built house from Housing
Board or Development Authority of the Government as may be prescribed;
(c) loan for construction or purchasing a house from Banks or financial
institutions on nominal rate of interest;
(d) rebate on income tax, as may be prescribed;
(e) subsidy for travel by road, rail or air, as may be prescribed;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Declaration as
to giving effect
to the policies
of the State as
laid in article
38 of the
Constitution
of India.
Formulation
of Revised
National
Population
Policy.
Facilities to
Government
employee who
adopts small
family norm.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(f) rebate on charges for utilities such as electricity, water, house tax, vehicle
registration, telephone etc., as may be prescribed; and
(g) such other benefits and incentives, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall also provide additional incentives, including, but
not limited to—
(a) paternity leave of 12 weeks, with salary and allowances for upto two children;
(b) two percent. increase in the employer's contribution under pension scheme
for employees having up to two children;
(c) free healthcare facility and insurance coverage to parents;
(d) free healthcare facility to single child till he attains the age of twenty-five
years;
(e) preference to single child in admission in all educational institutions,
including, but not limited to AIIMS, IIT, NIT and IIM and in all government jobs; and
(f) free education up to graduation level and scholarship for higher studies
beyond graduation for single girl child.
6. The incentives and benefits referred to in section 5 shall be extended mutatis
mutandis to the general public in the manner provided therein.
7. Whoever in contravention of small family norm procreates more than two children,
shall be ineligible to avail incentives and benefits provided in this Act and in addition thereto
shall,—
(a) receive reduction in subsidies in matters of different loans extended to him;
(b) receive reduced benefits of Public Distribution System to be determined by
the appropriate Government;
(c) be eligible for loan from the Bank or financial institution at higher than the
existing interest rates;
(d) receive lower interest rates on saving instruments in Banks and investment
instruments in equity shall; and
(e) not be entitled for such other facilities as may be prescribed.
8. Any individual having more than two living children shall be provided maternity or
paternity leave but the emolument benefit of the maternity or paternity period shall stand
withdrawn:
Provided that if, such individual agrees to undergo sterilization operation after the
birth of the third child then he/she shall be provided with the requisite maternity or paternity
facilities forthwith.
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the election laws for the time
being in force, a citizen shall be disqualified for being chosen as a member of either House of
Parliament or of the legislature of a State or of any body of the local self government, if such
citizen has more than two living children:
Provided that this provision shall not apply in case of a citizen having more than two
living children on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every serving government employee shall give an undertaking not to procreate
more than two children:
Provided that this provision shall not apply to a government employee who has more
than two living children on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
No maternity
or paternity
facilities to be
given for
those having
more than
two living
children.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Extension of
benefits to
general public
Loss of benefits
whoever
contravenes
small family
norm.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
10. The provision of this Act shall not apply in case of birth of two or more children at
one time.
11. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) implement the Revised National Population Policy to achieve the goals
enumerated therein;
(b) establish maternity centers at all the primary health centers (PHCs) ;
(c) distribute contraceptive pills, condoms, IUDs through Healthcare Centres
and Non-Governmental Organisations;
(d) spread awareness about family planning methods through community health
workers such as auxiliary nurse midwife or accredited social health activist;
(e) ensure mandatory registration of pregnancy, deliveries, birth and death across
country;
(f) distribute iron and vitamin capsules and tablets amongst the expecting mothers;
(g) conduct regular vaccination and immunization drives to protect the children
from various health risks;
(h) undertake efforts to encourage the husband-wife communication and male
participation in family planning matters;
(i) organize massive information and education campaigns to generate public
awareness related to the benefits of having small families and healthy birth spacing;
(j) form village level societies to encourage/disseminate benefits of small family
norm, value of girl child and efforts to promote gender equality in all walks of life; and
(k) undertake such other measures as it may deem fit and expedient for the
purposes of this Act.
12. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act from time to
time.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act as may appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
14. The provisions of this Act and of any rules and orders made thereto under shall
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for
the time being in force.
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not, save as otherwise
expressly provided in this Act, in derogation of any other law for the time being in force in
any part of the country.
16. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effects.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
Act shall not
apply on birth
of two or
more children
at one time.
Duties of the
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India resembles a rich embodiment of diverse ethnic, linguistic, geographic, religious
and demographic characteristics, with more than 1.3 billion inhabitants, stands today as the
second most populous country in the world. In other words, close to 17 percent of global
population resides here, and every sixth global citizen is an Indian. The heterogeneous
demographic composition of India's population presents multitude of opportunities and
challenges with far reaching socio-economic, health, nutritional, and political implications
that deserves a systematic scrutiny. As per the latest United Nation Population Projections,
India is expected to surpass China by 2024 and shall become the most populous country with
a population of 1.6 billion populations by 2050. This gigantic population size with its inherent
diversities present eminent challenges before national leaders and policy makers to ensure
the provision of the basic necessities of human life including affordable food, safe drinking
water, decent housing, access to quality education, economic/livelihood opportunities, power/
electricity for domestic consumption, and a secure living. However, given the limited resources
ecological and economic resources at hand, it has become an urgent need to do objective
analysis and intervene to plan the process of demographic change for the coming generation
of future India. Recent records suggest that despite being emerging economic giants, and
rising wave of urbanization, India continues to remain predominantly rural in its characters
— where close of 69 per cent population lives across more than 600,000 villages as per the
Indian Census 2011. In addition, the urban centers have developed haphazardly and mega
cities seem to be growing out of proportion at the cost of small urban centers, leaving
millions of urban dwellers to live a life without basic human dignity and peace. At this
juncture, it may be intuitive to quickly recapitulate the trajectory of India's demographic
journey and learn about the future course corrections.
India's population has increased almost four folds during the post independence era
(from 361 million in 1951 to 1210 million in 2011). The dramatic increase in the total population
size between 1960's to 1990's also marked peak of the average population growth rate of
2 percent per year. Such rapid population growth has been attributed to gradual declining
mortality levels and relatively slow change in the fertility levels. Infant mortality rate declined
from 225 infant death per 1000 live births in early 1950's to 80 infant deaths per 100 live births
in 1990's, total fertility rate declined from 6.0 children per woman in 1966 to 3.8 children per
woman in 1992. Afterwards, the rate of population growth has been declining, though the
absolute population base has been widening. The overall life expectancy of the Indian
population- an important marker of population health- has improved by 31 years, from
37 years in 1950s to 68 years in 2013. However, the demographic transitions in the mortality
and fertility levels varied greatly across states and districts in India, with the southern states
of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh experiencing the demographic transition
well before the other parts of the country. This further led to widening regional inequalities
in the agricultural, industrial, social and economic progress across southern and northern
parts of India. On the one hand, efficient demographic transition, achieved through
implementation of effective family planning programs and set of education, economic and
inclusive social development policies, have helped to achieve higher degree of progress and
human development. On the other hand, most of the northern and eastern parts of the
country failed to implement the family planning programmes and development programs as
per the needs. This has now led to different population blocks in the country, where, southern
states with smarter demographic performance enjoy better quality of life and provide ample
employment opportunities. While, the northern and eastern states have not been able to
effectively support the right of education, health, nutrition, and economic/livelihood
opportunities, largely owing to the mismanagement of the growing population base. The
recent Annual Health Survey (2010-2013) conducted by the ORGI shows that more than
26 percent districts have TFR of 3.0 or above and they are clustered across the nine Empowered
5

6
Action Group (EAG) states (Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, Odisha, Assam). These nine states together account for close to
48 per cent of the total population, 59 per cent of births, 70 per cent of infant deaths,
75 per cent of under-five mortality, and 62 per cent of maternal deaths in India.
The above challenge is really formidable given remarkable heterogeneities in the
demographic composition of the population (in terms of age group, educational status,
economic groups, social and religious groups, health and nutritional status, occupational
pattern, and marital status) across regions, states, and districts of India that forms the key
benchmark to address the impending challenges related to improvising the socioeconomic
conditions, health and nutritional status, environmental security in the face of climate change,
and overall quality of life of the population. The recent demographic trends suggest that
India is certainly moving towards replacement level fertility, with total fertility rate of 2.1 or
below, with 174 districts out of 621 have already achieved replacement level fertility. Most of
these districts are clustered among the southern and western parts, except Punjab and
Himachal Pradesh from northern part of India (including Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Maharashtra etc.). On the other hand, close to 72 districts have TFR
more than four children per woman that is largely clustered in the north, central, eastern and
north-eastern parts of the country (including Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Meghalaya etc.). Most of these districts with relatively high TFR are
demographically and socioeconomically lagging behind, and therefore needs urgent
programmatic focus to help the people to achieve effective opportunities to realise their full
developmental potentials. Therefore, the uncertain future of the speed of fertility transition
in the districts spread across the EAG states between the Indo-Gangetic plains to the Deccan
plateau will determine the trajectory of the unfolding demographic transition and its related
developmental implications. Furthermore, there also persists widespread socio-economic
and regional variability in the access to quality family planning services that could delay the
process of fertility transition. For example, the access to the modern family planning methods
is inadequate and disproportionately varies across place of residence, educational groups,
religious affiliation, caste groups and across states in India. For instance, currently married
women living in the urban areas, educated up to high secondary or above, non-Muslims,
belonging to other caste groups, and living in the southern states (eg. Andhra Pradesh)
reported relatively higher use of modern contraceptive methods as compared to their
counterparts. These demographic changes will have bearing upon the changing age- structure
of population and will influence the prospects of future economic growth, educational
expansion, health, and nutritional status and the environmental security.
Given the need of the hour, it is imperative upon us to evolve a pragmatic and well
thought out strategy to address the emerging demographic and related development needs
of the 1.35 billion people today. As a quick starter, it may be appropriate to encourage the
Indian population to opt for small family norms of up to two children. This choice shall have
benefits on multiple scales- health of women and children will improve, burden in terms of
health costs and lost opportunity cost to work of the family will reduce, women will find time
to spend in school/college/universities, and become equipped to find employment/livelihood.
In this ways, smaller families shall go a long way to improve the economic and health
conditions of the households. If similar changes are adopted at a larger scale, it may lead to
enormous saving of healthcare cost, and potential human hours usually lost to work.
Therefore, these potential resources could be effectively invested into more productive
activities and help to power the growth story of the new India. Several countries from East
and South Asia (South Korea, Singapore, Vietnam, Bangladesh, Thailand etc.) have effectively
implemented the small family norms effectively and benefited from the demographic advantage
with effective macroeconomic policies and good governance.
This Bill seeks to empower the Indian population through rationing of the family size
(having up to two children per couple) and equally participate in the movement of progress
to path of self reliance, cohesive living, and sustainable peace.
Hence, this Bill.
RAKESH SINHA

7
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides certain benefits to government employee who adopted
small family norm. Clause 6 provides for extension of benefits to general public who adopt
small family norm. Clause 12 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite
funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore will be involved out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. No non-recurring expenditures is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 16 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to revitalize efforts towards promoting the small family norms of up to two children per
eligible couple; to ensure healthy birth spacing through measures related to augmenting
the availability, accessibility and affordability of quality reproductive health services,
and other relevant inter-sectoral development instruments by the Central and the State
Governments; to achieve the goal of stabilization of population commensurate with
the emerging social, economic, health, nutritional, epidemiological, environmental and
other developmental needs of the national economy; to recognize the implications of
population momentum on the prospects of national progress in the long run, propelled
through its young and dynamic population age-structure; to ameliorate and harness
the demographic potential in the sustainable manner and help to engulf the prevailing
demographic and socio-economic disparities across population groups and regions,
and render equal opportunities for all, irrespective of age, sex, religion, caste, class,
race, residence, language etc. to achieve the fullest development potential and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rakesh Sinha, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1582RS(S3)—15-07-2019.