1
Bill No. XVII of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It  shall come into force at once.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the Code), in section 326A,
for the words "shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and with fine",
the words "shall be punished with death or rigorous imprisonment for life, and with fine
which shall not exceed rupees fifteen lakh".
3. In the Code, in section 326B, for the words "shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine", the words "shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which
may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not exceed rupees
five lakh".
 45 of 1860. Amendment of
section 326A.
Amendment of
section 326B.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 13TH  MARCH, 2020

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Acid attacks are becoming a growing phenomena which has a specific gender dimension
in India. Laxmi's case is an example of what normally occurs in acid attack cases. The acid
throwing is an extremely violent crime by which the perpetrator of the crime seeks to inflict
servere physical and mental suffering on the victims. It is often motivated by deep seated
jealousy or feelings of revenge against women. An acid attack has long lasting consequences
on the life of the victim who faces a perpetual torture, permanent damage and other problems
for rest of her life. Victims normally feel worthless, afraid and mortified and become social
outcast because of their appearance.
Until 2013, there was no clear mechanism to ascertain the number of cases involving
acid attacks since the Indian Penal Code did not recognise it as a separate offence. The
offence of acid attack was tried under various sections of the Indian Penal Code and no
estimates of figures of such attacks were available. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
inserted new sections 326A and 326B in the Indian Penal Code and made specific offences of
grievous hurt by use of acid and throwing or attempting to throw acid etc.
It is contended that even if the victims are willing to pursue a normal life, there is no
guarantee that society itself will treat them as normal human beings given their appearance
and disability after and attack. Therefore, the penalties proposed in the Indian Penal Code is
insufficient and needs amendments for more rigorously punishing the perpetrators of these
attacks and for monetary and economic rehabilitation of the victim of the attack.
The Bill proposes to enhance the quantum of penalty for acid attacks under sections
326A and 326B of the Indian Penal Code. It is expected that such stringent measures will curb
acid attacks on women.
Hence this Bill.
MS. SAROJ  PANDEY
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
326 A. Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns or
V oluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc. maims or disfigures or disables, any
part of parts of the body of a person or causes grievous hurt by throwing acid on or by
administering acid to that person, or by using any other means with the intention of causing
or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such injury or hurt, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses of
the treatment of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.
326 B. Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on any person or attempts to
V oluntarily throwing or attempting to throw acid, administer acid to any person, or attempts
to use any other means, with the intention of causing permanent or partial damage or deformity
or burns or maiming or disfigurement or disability or grievous hurt to that person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than five
years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of section 326A and this section, "acid" includes
any substance which has acidic or corrosive character or burning nature, that is capable of
causing bodily injury leading to scars or disfigurement or temporary or permanent disability.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of section 326A and this section, permanent or
partial damage or deformity shall not be required to be irreversible.
* * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Ms. Saroj Pandey, M.P. )
MGIPMRND—6017RS(S3)—16-03-2020.