AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026 
        Bill No. XVIII of 2026 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
fur
ther to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it  enacted by Parliament in  the Seventy-seventh  Year of the Republic 
 of India as  follows:—  
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment 
of article 366.
2. In article 366 of the Constitution, after clause (15), the following shall be
inserted, namely: —
“(15A) "minority"  means  a community  whose  population, 
 whether based on religion or language, according to the latest official 
census, is two per cent or less of the total population of the country: 
Provided that where the percentage of population of any such 
community in any State or Union territory exceeds the percentage of 
its population in the country, that community shall not be deemed to 
be a minority in that State or Union territory:  
Provided further that within a State or Union territory, if the 
population of any such community in any district is more than its 
national average, it shall not be treated as a minority in that district;” 
 
5 
 
10 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The resolve of our Constitution, particularly under Articles 29 and 30, was to 
provide a 'sacred protective shield' to the numerically weaker sections. The primary 
objective was to ensure that their unique cultural and educational identity was not 
overshadowed by the influence of the majority society. However, for the past 
seventy-seven years, our Republic has been functioning with a serious 
constitutional vacuum as the word 'minority' has not been defined anywhere. In this 
constitutional vacuum, minority status has been determined by executive 
notifications of the Central Government rather than by objective criteria. This 
approach has created a deep divide between the constitutional intent and the 
demographic realities of 21st century India. 
The current system relies on a "national-level comprehensive standard" that 
generates serious statistical and social discrepancies. Under the current framework, 
communities that are numerically dominant and socially empowered in specific 
areas are also benefiting from those safeguards that were originally designed for 
the vulnerable groups. When a group is the majority locally, but continues to claim 
to be a minority group, it creates a situation of geographical inequality that 
inadvertently suppresses the rights and voice of those communities who are truly 
in the minority. 
The Bi ll seeks to replace political discretion with mathematical certainty by 
setting a clear national limit of 'two per cent.'. Any community which constitutes 
more than two per cent. of the population at the national level possesses sufficient 
collective power and social capital to preserve its heritage and does not require 
special intervention of Articles 29, 30, 350A and 350B. By focusing the definition 
of minority to a maximum limit of two per cent.,  it is ensured that the security 
apparatus of the state is fully focused on those communities which are evidently a 
minority at the national level.  
In addition, the Bill acknowledges that the minority status must be in 
accordance with the demographic context of the State, as suggested in the landmark 
11-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court judgment in T. M. A. Pai Foundation vs.
State of Karnataka. The Bill goes a step further by proposing a comprehensive
three-tier examination for the identification of the minorities.
First, the population of the community should be below the two per cent. limit 
at the national level. Secondly, even if a community fulfils this eligibility at the 
national level, it will not be treated as a minority in any state where the percentage 
of its population is higher than the national average. Thirdly, this principle of 
geographical neutrality is to be extended to the district level. If the population of a 
community in a particular district is more than the national percentage, it would 
lose its status as a minority within the jurisdiction of that particular district. 
The pur pose  of this amendment is not to strip away one’s rights, but to ensure 
that the rights benefit the right people.  The amendment also seeks to revive the 
very essence of the founding fathers of the Constitution to create a system where 
the constitutional safeguards are demographically accurate, regionally unbiased 
and honest to the ground realities of the Indian populace. 
Hence, this Bill. 
 BHIM SINGH. 

 RAJ YA SABHA 
 ______
________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
 _____
_________ 
 (D
r. Bhim Singh, M.P.) 
 RS-P&PS-PMB(E)— 155—16.03.2026