THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second  Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 324 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(5A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, no person who
has held the office of the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner, as
the case may be, shall be eligible for further office either under the Government of India
or under the Government of any State after he has ceased to hold his office”.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XX of  2011
Amendment
of article 324.
      5
      10

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 324 of the Constitution provides for an independent body in the form of
Election Commission for conducting free, fair and impartial elections in the country. Recently,
it has been observed that members of Election Commission after they ceased to hold office
were appointed on important posts under the Government. Such a step erodes the respect
and integrity of the office of the Election Commission in the public eye. In order to ensure
neutrality and dignity of the office of the Election Commission in its functions and to put a
check on this trend of appointment of members of the Election Commission to any political
posts, it is necessary to amend the Constitution of India.
The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to disqualifying a person who
has served as Chief Election Commissioner or Election Commissioner in the Election-
Commission from holding any other office under the control of the Central Government or
the State Government.
Hence,  this Bill.
MOHAN SINGH

GMGIPMRND—954RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)