Short title
and com-
mencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 341 of the Constitution, for clause ( 1), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(1) The President may, by public notification, specify the castes, races or tribes
or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the purposes of this
Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to the whole of the territory
of India”.
3.   In article 342 of the Constitution, for clause ( 1), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(1) The President may, by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal
communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for
the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to the
whole of the territory of India”.
Amendment
of article
342.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 7TH AUGUST, 2015
Bill No. XX of 2015
Amendment
of article
341.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The persons belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes are still under
privileged and are a neglected lot. There have been constant efforts to provide concessions
and facilities to these persons by successive Governments. But still much is required to be
done for improving their condition and for bringing them into the mainstream of the society.
At present, the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes are facing
some practical and genuine difficulties which need immediate solution. In every State, caste
certificates are issued by the district authority. These certificates are recognised for the
purpose of extending reservation benefits by the State Government concerned throughout
the State. The Union Government also recognizes the certificates issued by the State
Government for the purpose of jobs or appointments in services under the Union Government.
However, if a person belonging to a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe moves out of the
State, he originally belongs, the Caste certificate issued by the parent State is not recognised
for the purposes of giving benefits of reservation settles down permanently in another State,
when he though the same caste or tribe has been included in the list of Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes in that State.
Due to lack of employment opportunities, people migrate to other States in search of
employment and settle down there permanently. However, they become ineligible to enjoy
the benefits of reservation in the State they have settled down for the reason that they have
been issued certificates by the State from where they have migrated.
It is, therefore, necessary to amend the Constitution with a view to make provision that
a member of Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe in one State shall be treated as Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe for the purpose of availing benefits of reservation in whole of
India.
Hence this Bill.
VEER  SINGH
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
341. (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is
a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State or
Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) ****
342. (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is
a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the
tribes of tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which
shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to
that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) ****
Scheduled
Castes.
3
Scheduled
Tribes.

GMGIPMRND—2147RS (S3)—07.08.2015.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Veer Singh, M.P.)