1
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
(AS PASSED BY THE RAJYA SABHA)
A
BILL
to amend the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Council for Teacher Education (Amendment)
Act, 2011.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in the long title, after the words "in the teacher education system", the
words "including qualifications of school teachers" shall be inserted.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of long title.
73 of 1993.
AS PASSED BY THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 25TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XX-C of 2010
5

2
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to—
(a) institutions;
(b) students and teachers of the institutions;
(c) schools imparting pre-primary, primary, upper primary, secondary or
senior secondary education and colleges providing senior secondary or
intermediate education irrespective of the fact, by whatever names they may be
called; and
(d) teachers for schools and colleges referred  to in clause (c).".
4. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ea) "local authority" means a Municipal Corporation, Municipal
Committee, Municipal Council, Zila Parishad, District Board or Nagar Panchayat
or Panchayat, or other authority (by whatever name called), legally entitled to, or
entrusted by the Government with the control or management of a municipal or
local fund;';
(ii) after clause (k), insert—
'(ka) "school" means any recognised school imparting pre-primary, primary,
upper primary, secondary or senior secondary education, or a college imparting
senior secondary education, and includes—
(i) a school established, owned and controlled by the Central
Government, or the State Government or a local authority;
(ii) a school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its
expenses from the Central Government, the State Government or a local
authority;
(iii) a school not receiving any aid or grants to meet whole or part of
its expenses from the Central Government, the State Government or a local
authority;'.
5. In section 12 of the principal Act, in clause (d), the words "in schools or" shall be
omitted.
6.  After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"12A. For the purpose of maintaining standards of education in schools, the
Council may, by  regulations, determine the qualifications of persons for being recruited
as teachers in any pre-primary, primary, upper primary, secondary, senior secondary or
intermediate school or college, by whatever name called, established, run, aided or
recognised by the Central Government or a State Government or a local or other
authority:
Provided that nothing in this section shall adversely affect the continuance of
any person recruited in any pre-primary, primary, upper primary, secondary, senior
secondary or intermediate schools or colleges, under any rule, regulation or order
made by the Central Government, a State Government, a local or other authority,
immediately before the commencement of the National Council for Teacher Education
Insertion of
new section
12A.
Power of
Council to
determine
minimum
standards of
education of
school
teachers.
Amendment
of section 1.
5
10
15
20
25
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 12.
30
35
40

3
(Amendment) Act, 2011 solely on the ground of non-fulfilment of such qualifications
as may be specified by the Council:
Provided further that the minimum qualifications of a teacher referred to in the
first proviso shall be acquired within the period specified in this Act or under the Right
of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.".
7. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (d), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(dd) the qualifications of teachers under section 12A;”.
Amendment
of section 32.
35 of 2009. 5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993.
————
(As passed by the Rajya Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—1535RS(S-3)—25.08.2011.