1
 Bill  No. XX  of  2008
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After article 335 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘335A—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, there shall
be a reservation policy for the members of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,
the Other Backward Classes and Physically challenged citizens for being followed in
making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the
Union or of the States for the private sector and it shall be obligatory for the private
sector to implement the reservation policy in its totality.’’
Short title,
and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
335A.
Reservation
policy in the
private sector.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is severe unemployment amongst the youth of the nation and more so,
amongst the youth belonging to SCs, STs, OBCs and physically challenged ones
because they have remained oppressed for centuries in the society. Despite more than
five decades of our independence, the lot of  these classes has not improved to the
desired levels. There is fifteen per cent reservation for the SCs, seven and half per
cent for the STs and twenty-seven per cent for the OBCs and three per cent for
physically challenged in Government jobs, but, unfortunately, in this era of
globalisation, privatization and IT revolution, the job opportunities in public sector
are shrinking very fast. Instead of recruiting new hands, Public Sector is offering
voluntary retirements and golden handshake. On the other hand, employment
opportunities in the private sector are increasing. Shrinking job opportunities in public
sector is causing severe hardships for the youth belonging to SCs, STs, OBCs and
physically challenged ones because there is no reservation in the private sector. Since
private sector is also the part and parcel of our body polity, it should also respect and
implement the reservation policy.
Hence this Bill.
E.M. SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN
2

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4747RS(S-5)—29.12.2008.