1
Bill No. XX of 2018
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), after section 67B, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘67BA. Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted
in the electronic form, any material which is repugnant to well established cultural
ethos, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to two lakh
rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years and also with fine which
may extend to five lakh rupees:
Short title and
commence-
ment.
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 3RD AUGUST, 2018
Insertion of
new sections
67BA and
67BB.
Punishment
for publishing
or transmi-
tting material
repugnant to
cultural ethos.
5
10

2
Provided that any material shall not be deemed to be against cultural ethos
merely on the ground that it goes against or contradicts an established practice or
custom.’’
‘‘67BB. Whoever hosts any online gaming resource which induces users to
commit—
(a) dangerous acts which are harmful to such users or others; or
(b) acts which cause injury to themselves or others; or
(c) any illegal act;
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and
in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees.’’
3. In the principal Act, after Chapter XIIA, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely—
‘‘C
HAPTER XIIB
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ONLINE GAMING
‘‘79B. Whoever hosts an online gaming resource or produces any storage media
containing a gaming resource to be sold offline, shall ensure that—
(a) the game resource is categorised for use by appropriate age group on
the basis of game contents; and
(b) there is a suitable mechanism within the game resource to warn the
users against repeating the dangerous acts, if any, shown in the game in their
real lives.’’
5
Punishment
for hosting
dangerous
online gaming
resource.
Special
provisions for
gaming
resources.
Insertion of
new Chapter
XIIB.
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The information technology has been the biggest change that has been brought in
human life during the last few decades. It has touched every aspect of our lives and changed
the way we live. With the advent of smartphones, the information technology has reached
the hands of each and every individual. However, information technology is not an unmixed
blessing.
In the last few months, we witnessed a series  of incidents where children were doing
dangerous act just to complete task given in a game called Blue Whale Challenge. Soft minds
of children were completely captured by the game and they were tasked to do acts such as
carving figure on arm, inflicting injury on self and eventually committing a suicidal act. Not
just worldwide, in India too a number of children lost their lives while attempting Blue Whale
tasks. Mindful of the dangers posed by this trend, the Central Government did sensitise
administration and schools. As a result, we were able to rescue a number of children from the
clutches of this fatal game.
Still, there are many games in public domain which involve a lot of violent and pernicious
acts. Therefore, it is necessary that adequate safeguards are placed in law to protect players
of such games, especially children, from any undesirable effects of these games.
Another worrisome aspect about what is being offered over internet is that it militates
against the cultural ethos of the country which we have valued and preserved for centuries.
Today, our children and youth are exposed to all kinds of literature, videos, etc. that are
repugnant to our cultural values and tend to undermine them. If we are to protect our great
cultural ethos, we msut act now to protect our children and youth from all kinds of cultural
invasions over the internet.
With the above objects in consideration, the Bill seeks to amend the Information
Technology Act, 2000 to provide adequate safeguards against dangerous gaming resources
and online material that militate against our cultural values and ethos.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NARAY AN LAL PANCHARIYA
3

MGIPMRND—1449RS(S3)—06-08-2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
————
(Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya, M.P.)