Short title
extent and
commencement.
THE SPECIAL COURTS FOR SCHEDULED CASTES AND
SCHEDULED TRIBES BILL. 2016
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of special courts for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Courts for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XX of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 29TH APRIL, 2016
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) 'appropriate Government' means in the case of a State, the State Government
and in all other cases the Central Government.
(b) 'offence' means any offence committed against a member of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes.
(c) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
(d)  'Scheduled Castes' means the castes included in the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) Order 1950.
(e) 'special court' means special court constituted under section 3 of this Act.
(f) 'Scheduled Tribes' means the tribes included in the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order 1950.
3. (1)   The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazettes, set
up adequate number of special courts  at district level to deal exclusively with matters
arising out of crimes or offences committed against Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes
in the country.
(2) Every special court established under sub-section (1) shall be headed by a
Chief Judge who shall be qualified to be appointed as District Judge and shall have such
number of other Judges as the appropriate Government may prescribe keeping in view the
Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes population in the district.
4. The qualification and salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chief Judge and other Judges shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chief Judge by
reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior most judge of that court shall
discharge his functions until a new Chief Judge, appointed in accordance with the provisions
of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chief Judge is unable to discharge his functions owing to his absence
from duty due to any reason, the senior most judge of that special court shall discharge
functions of the Chief Judge until the Chief Judge resumes his duties.
6. Every Chief Judge shall exercise such financial and administrative powers as may be
vested in him in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall appoint sufficient number of officers and staff to
assist the special court in the discharge of its functions on such terms and conditions of
service as may be prescribed.
8. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every special court shall exercise
all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all
courts except the concerned High Court and the Supreme Court in relation to all matters
offences or atrocities committee, against Scheduled castes and Scheduled Tribes  under the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any other law for the time being in force in relation to Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
9. Every case or other proceedings relating to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
pending before any other court or any authority shall stand transferred to such special court
on the commencement of this Act:
Definitions.
Establishment
of special
courts for
Scheduled
Castes &
Scheduled
Tribes.
Qualification
for appoint-
ment as Chief
Judge and
other Judges
of special
court.
Senior most
Judge to act as
a Chief Judge or
to discharge his
functions in
certain circum-
stances.
Financial and
other powers
of the Chief
Judge.
Staff of the
special court.
Jurisdiction
power and
authority of
special courts.
Transfer of
pending cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a case or other proceedings
pending in a High Court or the Supreme Court.
10. The appropriate Government shall make necessary arrangements for free legal
aid to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for meeting the cost of litigation in special
court.
11. Every case in a special court shall be disposed of as early as possible and in any
case not later than one year from the date of filing the case in the court.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Free legal aid
to Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.
Disposal of
cases by
special courts.
Power to
make rules.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes still continue to be the oppressed classes of
our society. They have suffered for centuries. Although with the institution of the democratic
form of government in the country, many steps have been taken to improve their status in the
society yet this change is limited only in the urban areas. In the rural areas, the position at
some places, is still the same as it used to be many years ago. They have never received
justice from the persons who were at the helm of affairs of their fate. In a welfare state like
ours it is a bounden duty of the state to ensure that the members of the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes receive speedy justice at their door steps. These classes are unable to
fight long litigations in the normal courts. In view of their financial position they also need
free legal aid for meeting the cost of litigation. In view of their disadvantageous position in
the society, especially at district level in the rural areas, there is an urgent need that a
separate and parallel system of justice for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes should be
established. It is, therefore, proposed that special courts at district level may be established
for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the country.
Hence this Bill.
VIJAY JAWAHARLAL DARDA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that Government and Union territory administration shall
set up sufficient number of special courts to deal exclusively with matters arising out of
atrocities committed against Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Clause 4 provides for
payment of salaries and allowances to the Chief Judge and other Judges. Clause 7 provides
for appointment of officers and staff required for special courts. Clause 10 provides for free
legal aid to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The expenditure in respect of special
courts for Union territories shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that
an amount of rupees one thousand crore will be involved for setting up special courts in
Union territories per annum. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore
is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of special courts for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—678RS(S3)—03.05.2016.