1
Bill No. XX of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE ACCIDENT AFFECTED PERSONS (EQUAL
COMPENSATION) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for equal compensation to persons affected by accidents by the appropriate
Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Accident Affected Person (Equal Compensation) Act,
2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “accident” means an unexpected and undesirable event causing injury to
death of a person during travel (road, railway, aircraft), natural disasters, terrorist and
extremists activites and stampede;
Definitions.
5

2
(b)  “affected person,’’ means person killed or injured in the accidents;
(c) “apppropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(d) “compensation” means financial assistance provided by the Central
Government to the accident affected persons under this Act;
(e) “dependent” means the parents, spouse, children and siblings of the affected
person;
(f) "Fund" means 'Accident Affected Persons Compensation Fund' established
under section 4 of this Act;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) “qualified medical practitioner” means any person declared by the Central or
State Government by notification in the Official Gazette to be a qualified medical
practitioner for the purpose of this Act.
 3. (1) The Central Government shall in accordance with the loss or injury sustained,
provide equal amount as compensation to every accident affected person.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, amount of compensation shall be as follows:
(i) where death results from the accident, the dependents of the deceased shall
be given rupees twenty lakhs;
(ii) where permanent disability results from the accident, the injured shall be
given rupees ten lakh;
(iii) where temporary disability results from the accident, the injured shall be
given rupees four lakh; and
(iv) where ordinary injury results from the accident, the injured shall be given
rupees one lakh.
(3)  The nature of injury from accident, shall be examined and reported by a qualified
medical practitioner, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The compensation amount shall be disbursed to the affected persons or to his
dependent within one week from the date of receipt of report of the qualified medical
practitioner.
4. (1) The Central Government shall establish an Accident Affected Persons
Compensation Fund for the purposes of this  Act.
(2) The State Governments shall contribute to this Fund in such proportion as may be
prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution for assistance
both from domestic and international institutions shall also be credited to the fund.
(4) The fund shall be managed by a Board which shall comprise of the following
persons:—
(i) the Prime Minister — Ex-officio Chairman;
(ii) the Chief Ministers of every State and Lieutenant Governer or Chief
Administrators of Union Territories;
(iii
) ten retired judges of High Court /Administrative Officers whose nomination
shall be done by the Central Government in such manners as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government may require a State Government to furnish for the purposes
of this Act, such statistical and other information as may be necessary for implementation of
the provision of  this Act, in such form and within such period as may be prescribed.
Equal
compensation
to accident
affected
person.
Establishment
of Accident
Affected
Persons
Compensation
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a special team to effectively
implement the provisions of this Act within their jurisdiction.
(2) The special team shall consist of ten members of which five shall be appointed by
the Central Government and five by the State Government.
(3) The   functions of the special team shall be to,—
(i) visit the accident site and collect information relating to the victims;
(ii) submit the accident related information to the Accident Affected Persons
Compensation Fund Board;
(iii) ensure that the victims receive the compensation within the time limit
prescribed under this Act;
(iv) any other works that may be assigned by the Accident Affected Persons
Compensation Fund Board constituted under section 4 of this Act.
 6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this
behalf by law, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the  time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt within this Act.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Constitution
of a special
team by the
appropriate
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Constitution of India provides right of equality to every citizen under the
Fundamental Rights. There is a provision for equality and non-discrimination before law
under articles 14 to 16 and for social equality under articles 17 and 18 of the Constitution. The
right to equality provided by the Constitution provides that all persons within the territories
of India should get equal protection under the law and should be treated equally before all in
similar situations. In case of accident affected person financial assistance is provided as
compensation to them. However at time the relatives of the deceased have to go to court for
justice which is unfortunate. Thousands of suits are filed in courts for similar compensation
in similar situations. In many cases, courts have also given decisions to provide for equal
amounts. Despite this, there is no clear policy regarding this at the Government level.
Everything depends on the administrative decision. Now, the time has come to formulate a
clear cut law for providing fixed amounts as, compensation to the dead and injured in accidents.
Hence, this Bill.
PRABHAT  JHA

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for compensation of rupees twenty lakh for the person
deceased in the accident, rupees ten lakh in case of permanent disability, rupees four lakh in
case of temporary disability and rupees one lakh for ordinary injury. Clause 4 provides for
establishment of an Accident Affected Persons Compensation Fund. Clause 6 provides for
adequate funds to carry out provisions of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. At present, it is not possible to determine the quantum
of funds. But it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees twenty five thousand crore
per year will be involved.
In order to create infrastructure, a non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand
crore from the Consolidated Fund of India may also be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of this Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for equal compensation to persons affected by accidents by the appropriate
Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3776RS(S3)—18-12-2014.