THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy first Year of Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2020.
2. In article 12 of the Constitution, after the words, ''Government of India'' the words,
''but does not include any religious institution administered or funded wholly or partly by
the State'' shall be inserted.
3. After article 12 of the Constitution, the following articles shall be inserted,
namely:—
''12A. All the rights enumerated in this Part shall be read harmoniously, and no
right shall be so interpreted as to extinguish or abridge any other right.
Short title.
Bill No.  XX of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021
Amendment of
article 12.
Insertion of
new articles
12A and 12B.
Harmonious
coexistence of
rights.
5

2
''12B. The enumeration in this Part of certain rights, shall not be construed to
deny or abridge other rights retained by the people''.
4. In article 25 of the Constitution,
(a) for the marginal heading, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
''Freedom of religion and the practice thereof by means of rituals, rites
festivals, customs, traditions etc.’’
(b) for sub-clause (b) of clause (2) the following shall be substituted, namely:—
''(b) providing for:
(i) the access to the Hindu religious institutions of public character
to call classes and sections of Hindus with due regard to the religious
customs of each such institution;
(ii) the management of the Hindu religious institutions and
administration of their properties through a body consisting of religious
persons and representatives of Hindus, elected for the purpose for each
such institution or for a group of such institutions, as may be prescribed
in that behalf by or under any law made by parliament, with the State
exercising no control over the management of such institutions or
administration of their properties;
(iii) the appropriation of the funds, properties and all resources of
the Hindu religious institutions only for the purposes of maintenance and
development  of the Hindu religious institutions; for the general religious
well being of the Hindus and Hindu community and for the preservation,
promotion and propagation of Hindusism;
(iv) the prohibition of non-Hindus from taking part in the
management, administration or any other activity whatsoever, of the Hindu
religious institutions and their properties;
(v) the protection by the State of all Hindu religious institutions and
their properties from encorachment of illegal destruction;
(vi) the creation of national, state, regional, district and local level
Hindu Dharma Sabhas consisting of both religious and elected
representatives of Hindu religious institutions as may be prescribed in
that behalf by or under any Law made by Parliament, for the purposes of
guidance, preservation, promotion and propagation of Hinduism;’’
(c) after clause (2) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
''(3) Subject to public order, all persons shall have the right to celebrate
religious festivals, observe cultural practices and take part in sporting activities.''
5. In the Constitution, the existing article 26 shall be renumbered as clause (1) thereof
and after clause (1) so renumbered, the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
''(2) The State shall not control, administer or manage, whatsoever, any institution
including its properties, established or maintained of religious or charitable purposes
by a religion or any section thereof.
(3) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any property
of a religious or charitable institution established or maintained by a religion or any
section thereof, referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by
or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as would
not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.''
Residual rights
of the people.
Amendment of
article 25.
Amendment of
article 26.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Amendment of article 12, insertion of a new articles 12A and 12B, and a new clause (3)
in article 25 aims to protect indigenous religious festivals, customs and practices from undue
denial, curtailment or interference. The indigenous religious, spiritual and cultural practices
of Hinduism have evolved over several millennia with no one founder, no specific set of
binding scriptures and no central ecclesiastical organisation. Hindu customs and  rituls
while subtly conveying ethical, metaphysical and philosophical values also bind families
and communities together. Hinduism acknowledges vast diversity within humans and
accordingly evolved a system which allowed diversity in forms of devotions, worship and
traditions. These ancestral traditions do not necessarily find justification in any particular
scripture but from the lifeblood of popular amorphous religions and spiritual traditions
collectively known as Hinduism. Hindu religious and cultural  practices are a result of the
collective wisdom and experience of thousands of generations of people of this sacred land.
2.  However, there are some aspects of the Constitution that give space to forces to
deracinate people from their indigenous religious and cultural moorings,—
Firstly, by subjecting indigenous traditions and costoms that have come into being
over several millennia of unbroken and unwritten practice to the test of 'essential practice' of
religion, which would lead to Hinduism falling woefully short as opposed to the religions of
the Book, where the Book defines the essentials etc.
Secondly, since Hindu religious and charitable  endowments have been taken over by
Governments, they are regarded as effectively being part of 'the State' as defined by
article 12 of the Constitution, and as a result any Hindu religious custom or practice can be
challenged as violative of one or other fundamental rights.
Thirdly, article 25(2) (b) which provides for 'social welfare and reform' was intended by
the framers of the Constitution as an antidote to certain untenable social discrimination in
the Hindu society but was never meant to be an enabler for legislative or judicial interference
or destruction of ancient religious customs, festivals and practices of Hindus.
Fourthly, the Constitution gives a buquet of fundamental rights and freedoms, all of
which have been designed to harmoniously co-exist. Therefore, it is anathema to interpret
one set of fundamental rights and freedoms in a manner that extinguishes or abridges the
other set of fundamental rights and freedoms.
Fifthly, the 'morality' that the framers of the Constitution envisaged in articles 19, 25
and 26 was the societal morality which is entirely different from the construct of ‘constitutional
morality'. The unwarrnated interference in the age old indigenous festivals, customs and
practices not only disrupts social and cultural cohesion and fabric but also generates
avoidable social strife as happened  in the cases of Jallikattu, Dahi Handi, Sabarimala, Shani
Mandir, Kambala etc.
3. Fundamental rights as enumerated in Part-III of the Constitution, are essentially
restrictions imposed on the State from unduly interfering in the lives and activities of the
people. The people possess all freedoms and rights, only a certain of which are enumerated
in the Constitution. The enumeration of certain rights and freedoms in our Constitution does
not mean that the people do not possess or can be deprived of those that are not mentioned
therein.
4. United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples-2007 (UNDRIP) to
which India is a signatory, imposes certain obligations on Member-States to Protect, preserve,
nurture and promote indigenous religious, spiritual, cultural, traditional and knowledge
systems by suitable legislative, governance and public policy interventions. Article 253
empowers Parliament to make laws for the whole of India on any subject to implement
international conventions etc.
3

4
5. Amendment of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) of articles 25 and insertion of two new
clauses in article 26 aims to prohibit State control and management of Hindu temples and
religious institutions, and to facilitate their management by Hindu society in a democratic
manner.
6. Article 26 bestows fundamental right on all religions, irrespective of majority or
minority, to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes, to
manage their own affairs, and to own, acquire and administer property thereof. In a catena of
judgements, the Supreme Court  reiterated the same.
7. A secular State by definition cannot control and manage religious institutions that
too of only one religion. However, most of the Hindu charitable and religious institutions
have long been and are regularly being taiken over by the secular State Governments. This
completely cripples the resource ability of Hindu communities in being self-sufficient and in
presenting a unified front to address and find solutions to the religious problems of the
Hindu community.
8. Despite the constitutional provisions and judicial decisions, Hindu temples are
routinely taken over by the State Governments. The State control of Hindu religious
institutions is doubly disadvantageous for Hindus in that they have not only lost control of
their religious institutions to the Government but because of that very reason of their religious
institutions beign under the control of Government their centuries-old religious customs,
festivals and practices also get challenged and interfered.
9. Further, the State Government have been diverting properties of Hindu religious
institutions for secular purposes without paying adequate compensation. For full enjoyment
of the right guaranteed by article 26, it is necessary to ensure payment of adequate
compensation, if, any property of a religious or charitable institution established or maintained
by a religion or any section thereof, is acquired by the State.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Y .S. CHOWDARY

ANNEXURE
EXRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
PART III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General
12. Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, ''the State'' includes
the Governmnent and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of
the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control
of the Government of India.
* * * * * *
Right to Freedom of Religion
25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of
religion. — (1) Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions of
this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to
profess, practise and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing  in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the
State from making any law—
(a) regulating or restricting  any economic, financial, political or other secular
activity which may be associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious
institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.
Explanation I. —The wearing and carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to be inclued
in the profession of the Sikh religion.
Explanation II. —In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the reference to Hindus shall be
construed as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina of Buddhist religion,
and the refernce to Hindu religious institutions shall be construed accordingly.
 26. Freedom to manage religious affairs.—Subject to public order, morality and
health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall have the right—
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes;
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
(d) to administer such property in accordance with law.
* * * * * *
5

RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Y. S. Chowdary, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1351RS(S3)—07.12.2021.