AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAIYA SABHA

Bill No. XX of 2001

THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (CONVERSION OF LOANS
TO COMPANIES INTO EQUITY SHARE CAPITAL)
BILL, 2001

A
BILL

to provide for conversion of the entire loan aniount given by the public financial institu-
tions to the companies into equity share capital to give powers to the financial
institutions to exercise control over the companies taking loan from them and mat-
ters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Public Financial Institutions (Conversion of Loans
to Companies into Equity Share Capital) Act, 2001.

5 (2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “company” means a company formed, incorporated and registered under
1 of 1956 the Companies Act, 1956;

Short title and
commence-
ment -

Definitions


Conversion of
loan amount of
companies into
equity share
capital in cer-
tain cases.

Savings

2

(0) “public financial institutions” means the financial institutions specified in
section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act or 1n any other Jaw for
the time being in force, the entire amount of loan given by any public financial institution
to any company shall be deemed to have been converted into equity share capital of the
Company if the loan so advanced exceeds fifty per cent. of the total equity capital of the
Company.

4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956,

1 of 1956


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In our country almost all the Companies, big or small, mainly exist on loans taken
from the Public Financial Institutions such as the Industrial Credit and Investment
Corporation of India, Industrial Finance Corporation of India, Industrial Development
Bank of India, Life Insurance Corporation of India and Unit Trust of India. Apart from
taking loans from the Public Financial Institutions the Companies particularly owned by
big industrial houses take huge loans from the Banking sector also. In most of the cases
the loan amount exceeds more than fifty per cent. of the total capital of the companies.
Thus the moneys are de facto invested in such companies by the public financial institutions
and Banks but all the benefits derived therefrom accrue to the owners of these companies
and industrial houses. As a result, the industrialists and business houses in our country are
prospering on the money of Public Financial Institutions and Banks. It has also been the
practice with the industrial sector that after taking huge loans the companies do not bother
to return the money and the interest accrued thereon and often resort to creating legal
hurdles deliberately in the recovery process initiated by such Public Financial Institutions.
As a result, huge public funds are lying blocked with the companies in the private sector.
Some times it happens with the connivance of the greedy elements in the public financial
institutions but in most of the cases the companies default deliberately. It has also been
noticed that after taking, loans the companies declare themselves sick and force the
Government to take them over and the Government has to write-off the loans and also pay
compensation to the owners of the companies. Such cases are clear instances of frauds
committed by the owners of the companies but unfortunately these frauds are legalised in
one way or the other.

If it is made mandatory that where the loan amount is more than 50 per cent. of the
total equity capital of company, the entire loan should be converted into equity share
capital of the company held by the Public Financial Institution advancing the loan to the
company so that the Institution can have a strong say in the affairs of the company for
taking due care of the repayment of loans with interest in the national interest. Moreover,
in such circumstances, the owners will also not be in a position to cripple the company
deliberately and declare it sick. It will put a check on the financial management of the
Company.

This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

' S. S. AHLUWALIA


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for conversion of the entire loan amount given by the public financial institu-
tions to the companies into equity share capital to give powers to the financial insti-
tutions to exercise control over the companies taking loan from them and matters
connected therewith.

(Shri S. S. Ahluwalia, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6645RS—23.02.2001.

61