THE PRIV A TELY FINANCED INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
(REGULATION OF SWISS CHALLENGE METHOD OF
PROCUREMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to regulate the acceptance of unsolicited proposals from the private sector through
Swiss Challenge method of procurement in respect of infrastructure project in the
country and for matters connected herewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS it is essential to adhere to general principles of transparency, economy and
fairness in the award of contracts for infrastructure projects by public authorities;
AND WHEREAS the Constitution guarantees the Equality before law under article 14 to
all persons and the right to carry on any occupation, trade or business under
article 19 (1)(g) to all its citizens;
A
ND WHEREAS  the Swiss challenge method of procurement creates information
asymmetry and bidding asymmetry between original proponent and its competitors thus
violating Fundamental Rights under article 14 and article 19 (1)(g) of the Constitution;
Bill No. XX of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JULY, 2017

2
AND WHEREAS the Committee on Revisiting and Revitalising Public Private Partnership
Model of Infrastructure has also recommended that Swiss Challenge method of procurement
should be actively discouraged;
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Privately Financed Infrastructure Projects (Regulation
of Swiss Challenge Method of Procurement) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act and in any rules made thereunder, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "contracting authority" means the public authority having power to enter
into a concession contract for the implementation of an infrastructure project;
(c) "developer" means any private sector participant who has entered into a
contract for the infrastructure project with the appropriate Government or a local
Authority;
(d) "infrastructure facility" means public work relating to infrastructure for utilising
the natural resources and providing services by either public works of physical structure
or systems for facilities or commodities or utilisation of resources or provision of
services;
(e) "infrastructure project" means the design, construction, development and
operation of new infrastructure facilities and includes the rehabilitation, modernisation,
expansion or operation of existing infrastructure facilities;
(f) "Swiss challenge method" means processing of an unsolicited proposal
submitted by a private sector participant (whereby called original project proponent)
for undertaking an infrastructure project not initiated by the appropriate Government
or a local authority having following characteristics:—
(i) The appropriate Government or the local authority invites competitive
counter proposals on the proposal submitted by original project proponent;
(ii) The applicants submitting counter proposals are having opportunities
to better the proposal of the original project proponent;
(iii) The appropriate Government a Committee, if finds one of the competitive
counter proposal better than proposal of the original project proponent, the
original project proponent is given opportunity to match that counter proposal
to win the project; and
(iv) If the original project proponent does not match that counter proposal,
the project is awarded to applicant submitting that counter proposal.
(g) "unsolicited proposal" means any proposal relating to the implementation of
an infrastructure project that is not submitted in response to a request or solicitation
issued by the contracting authority within the context of a selection procedure and
which is submitted by any private sector participant to the appropriate Government or
a Local Authority in respect of any infrastructure in the State supported by project
specifications, technical, commercial and financial viability and prima facie evidence
of the financial and technical ability of such private sector participant to undertake
such project with full details of composition of the private sector participant and his
financial and business background.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
3. The contracting authority shall, in relation to an infrastructure project, have the
responsibility and accountability to,—
(a) ensure efficiency, economy and transparency;
(b) provide fair and equitable treatment to bidders;
(c) promote competition;
(d) ensure that the price of successful bid is reasonable and consistent with the
quality required; and
(e) evolve mechanisms to prevent corrupt practices.
4. The contracting authority shall ensure adequate competition in the developer
selection process for any infrastructure project.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
but save as hereinafter provided no contracting authority shall adopt the procedure of Swiss
challenge method for any infrastructure project:
Provided that the contracting authority may notify the projects which may be awarded
under Swiss challenge method and no case, such project shall exceed an amount of rupees
one hundred crore.
(2) The appropriate Government shall frame rules regarding in general and not being
limited to the following:—
(a) the nature of Swiss challenge method and its particulars;
(b) the nature of projects that may come under such method;
(c) the authorities to be approached with respect to the project plans;
(d) the various fields of the projects that may be considered under the method;
(e) time limits on the approval of the project and respective bidding:
Provided that no such project shall be proposed for Swiss challenge method unless
such project is approved by a Committee duly constituted for the purpose as may be prescribed
with such public notice as is necessary for the project.
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Basic norms
for
infrastructure
projects.
Developer
selection
process.
Regulation of
Swiss
challenge
method of
procurement.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The role of private sector in the development and management of infrastructure projects
has increased manifold in the recent years. This has created the challenge of ensuring
economy, transparency and fairness in awarding of contracts for infrastructure projects in
order to uphold democratic functioning of the country.
The Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court of India in Natural Resource Allocation,
in Re, Special Reference No. 1 of 2012 held that the allocation of any resources of a country
should meet the twin constitutional tests, viz. the natural resources that vest in the State
should be allocated to sub-serve the common good; and the allocation should not be
considered arbitrary and thus be violative of article 14 of the Constitution. The Constitutional
bench also held that auction is the preferable method for allocation of projects and any
deviation from auction must be justified by compelling reasons and not just by convenience.
However, Governments have been increasingly using the Swiss challenge procurement
method for infrastructure projects under this method, the original project proponent submits
an unsolicited proposal for undertaking the project and then the Government invites
competitive counter proposals. The Swiss challenge procurement route creates informational
asymmetry and biding asymmetry between the original proponent and its competitors, thus
creating avenues for rent seeking. While the world over, modern tools of disposal of public
authority have increasingly been adopted, having regard to the fact that a level-playing field
is to be ensured for all citizens to participate in projects involving private participation, it is
necessary that except in exigency, or projects requiring performance of highly advanced
technological process, Swiss-challenge method of awarding projects ought to be done away
with. It is also necessary that a detailed prior study is undertaken by a designated authority
to lay down parameters on the basis of which a State or State undertaking can be legitimately
enabled to resort to such process with in-built safeguards against any favouritism against
any entity.
Therefore in order to ensure transparency, economy and fairness in the awarding of
contracts for infrastructural projects, the Swiss challenge method should be regulated.
Hence this Bill.
V. VIJAYASAI  REDDY
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purposes
of this Bill. The rules relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—1316RS(S3)—21.07.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the acceptance of unsolicited proposals from the private sector through Swiss
challenge method of procurement in respect of infrastructure projects in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P.)