AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XX of 2025 
THE RIGHT TO HEALTH CARE SERVICES BILL, 2025 
A 
 BIL L 
 to provide for the right to health care services for 
 all citizens and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
        BE  it enacted  by Parliament  in the  Seventy-sixth  Year of  the  Republic 
 of  India as follows:― 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Health Care Services Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, – 
(a) “appropriate Government” means, in respect of matters 
relating to, —  
(i) a Union Territory without legislature, the Central 
Government;  
(ii) Union Territories with legislature, the Government of such 
Union Territories;  
(iii) a State, the State Government. 
(b) “Authority” means the National Health Care Services Authority 
constituted under section 9 of this Act; 
(c) "citizen" means a person who is a citizen of India within the 
meaning of Part II of the Constitution of India and the provisions of 
the Citizenship Act, 1955, and includes such other persons a s may be 
declared as citizens of India under any law for the time being in force; 
(d) “emergency medical care” means immediate and necessary 
medical attention required to prevent death or serious health 
consequences; 
(e) “essential medicines” means medicines included in the National 
List of Essential Medicines (NLEM), as notified by the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare; 
(f) “genetic disorder” means any disease or condition caused by an 
abnormality in an individual’s DNA, including inherited disorders a nd 
conditions such as cancer; 
(g) “government-funded health care services” means health care 
services funded and provided directly by the Government or services 
provided by non -governmental entities for which the Government 
funds part or all of the costs of care for some or all patients; 
(h) “health care service” means testing, treatment, care, procedures, 
or any other service or intervention aimed at preventative, promotive, 
therapeutic, diagnostic, nursing, rehabilitative, palliative, convalescent, 
research, or other health -related purposes, including combinations 
thereof; and shall also include reproductive health care and emergency 
medical care arising from participation in a medical  research 
programme; 
(i) “health care establishment” means the wh ole or any part of a 
public or private institution, facility, building, or place, set up, 
financed, controlled, or managed by the Government or privately 
owned, whether for profit or not, to provide inpatient or outpatient 
health care including treatment, diagnostic or therapeutic 
interventions, nursing, rehabilitative, palliative, convalescent, 
preventative, promotive, or research -based health services to the 
general public;  
(j) “health care provider” means a medical doctor, nurse, 
paramedical professiona l, social worker, or any other appropriately 
trained and qualified individual possessing specific skills relevant to 
health care, nursing, rehabilitation, palliative care, convalescent care, 
preventative care, or other health services;   
(k) “informed consent” means consent that is specific to a proposed 
health care intervention, given voluntarily without force, undue 
influence, fraud, threat, mistake, or misrepresentation, and obtained 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 of 1955. 
 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
after disclosing to the person giving consent, whether for themselves 
or in a representative capacity where necessary, all material 
information, including costs, risks, benefits, significant implications, 
and alternatives to the proposed health care, in a language and manner 
understood by such person; 
(l) “One District, One M edical Institution” means a scheme or 
initiative undertaken by the appropriate Government to ensure the 
establishment of at least one tertiary medical institution, with requisite 
health care facilities in each district to ensure equitable access to 
health care for the population, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(n) “public health” means the health of the population as a whole, 
especially as monitored, regulated, and promoted by the appropriate 
Government; 
(o) “public health care establishment” means a health care 
establishment as defined under clause (i) of section 2 of this Act, set 
up, financed, controlled, or managed by the Government; 
(p) “rare diseases” refers to diseases that a ffect a small percentage 
of the population, as defined and notified by the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare; 
(q) “social audit” means an audit conducted by the community or 
stakeholders to evaluate the social, economic, and health -related 
dimensions of a policy, program, or institution or establishment; 
(r) “telemedicine” means the delivery of health care services, 
including consultation, diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring, through 
the use of information and communication technologies, in alignment 
with the Telemedicine Practice Guidelines, 2020, issued by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and as updated from time to 
time by the Ministry; and  
(s) “vulnerable groups” includes individuals or populations 
requiring special attention due to factor s such as age, health 
conditions, socio -economic status, disability, or other marginalized 
circumstances, as may be notified by the appropriate Government in 
the Official Gazette. 
 
 
 
 35 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
  3. (1) With respect to health care services and other matters related thereto, 
every citizen shall have the,— 
(i) right to information, — which shall include the following, 
namely–– 
(a) right to obtain adequate and relevant information regarding 
the nature and cause of illness, proposed investigations, treatment 
plans, expected outcomes, potential complications, and the 
associated costs of treatment and care; and 
(b) right to be informed of the rates or charges for each type of 
service and the facilities available at any health care establishment, 
including public and private institutions. 
(ii) right to free health care services, which shall include the 
following, namely― 
(a) right to avail free Out -Patient Department (OPD) and 
In-Patient Department (IPD) services provided by public 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rights to 
healthcare 
services and 
other matters 
related thereto. 

4 
health care establishments  according to their level of care, 
including consultation, diagnostics, emergency transport, 
essential medicines, medical procedures, and emergency care, 
in such manner as may be prescribed; and 
Explanation.– For the purposes of this clause— 
(i) Out-Patient Department (OPD) services means medical
consultations, diagnostic tests, minor medical procedures, 
and treatments that do not require hospital admission; and 
(ii) In-Patient Department (IPD) services  means medical
treatments, surgeries, and procedures that necessitate 
hospital admission and in-patient care. 
(b) right to immediate medical attention and critical care, in the
event of a health emergency, without prepayment of requisite fees 
or charges, includin g but not limited to emergency obstetric care 
and treatment of medico- legal cases, provided by any health care 
provider, establishment, or facility, whether public or private; 
Explanation.– For the purposes of this clause, "medico-legal case" refers to 
any medical case with legal implications, civil or criminal in nature, 
including but not limited to cases of accidents, assault, sexual assault, 
suicide attempts, poisoning, injuries due to domestic violence, injuries at 
workplaces, and similar incidents; 
    Provided that health care providers and establishments shall not delay  
 treatment in such cases due to pending police clearance or reports. 
(iii) right to access  medical records, either by the patients
themselves or by the authorised representatives of such patients, who 
are bedridden or incapacitated, either physically or mentally, including 
investigation reports, detailed itemized bills, treatment summaries, and 
other health-related documentation as may be maintained by the health 
care establishment, in such form and manner as may be prescribed; 
(iv) right to confidentiality, human dignity, and privacy during
diagnosis, treatment, and care, in accordance with the standards, as 
may be prescribed by rules made under this Act or in accor dance with 
the provisions of any law in this regard for the time being in force; 
(v) right to gender -sensitive care, which shall entitle a female
patient to request and avail the presence of a female health care 
professional or attendant during any physica l examination conducted 
by any health care establishment; 
(vi) right to alternative and safe care, including the right to—
(a)  choose alternative treatment options available at any
health care establishment, in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(b) sa fe, quality, and standard -compliant health care in
accordance with the prescribed regulations.
(vii) right to second opinion, including the right to obtain treatment
records and information from the health care establishment in which 
treatment is being und ertaken for the purpose of seeking a second 
opinion from another health care provider or establishment; 
(viii) right to emergency support, including the right to  free
transportation,   free   treatment,   and   free   insurance   coverage 
for    injuries    sustained    in    road    accidents ,    in    accordance 
 
5 
 
10 
15 
20 
 
25 
30 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 

5 
5 
 10 
    15 
   20 
    25 
  30 
 35 
40 
45 
 with the rules prescribed under this Act: 
Provided that the health care establishments shall provide referral 
transport for patients requiring transfer to another health care facility 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(ix) right to refuse treatment, including the right to choose whether
to consent to medical treatment, to refuse it, or to choose from 
amongst the available tr eatments being offered, provided that such 
refusal does not endanger public health or violate the provision of any 
other law in this regard for the time being in force; 
(x) right to health standards, including  the right to access and
receive health care se rvices conforming to the highest attainable 
standard of physical and mental health as guaranteed under this Act; 
(xi) right to leave against medical advice, which shall entitle
patients leaving a health care establishment against medical advice 
with the right to receive a treatment summary and discharge records, in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed;  
(xii) right to access, including the right to have timely and quality
access to facilities, goods, and services necessary to achieve the best 
health outcomes; and 
Explanation.— For the purpose of this clause, access includes the 
components of coverage, quality and timeliness as may be prescribed. 
(xiii) right to informed consent, which shall entitle every patient or
authorised representative(s) of such  patients, who are bedridden or 
incapacitated, either physically or mentally, with   the right to full 
disclosure of information regarding the following, but not limited to: 
(a) the condition, disorder, and disease that the individual is
having or suffering from; 
(b) the necessity for further diagnostic test(s);
(c) the natural course of the condition and possible
complications; 
(d) consequences of non-treatment;
(e) available treatment options;
(f) potential risks and benefits of treatment options;
(g) duration and approximate cost of treatment; and
(h) expected outcome;
so as to enable them to give their informed consent to avail the line of 
treatment suggested by the health car e provider or establishment, in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that such information shall not jeopardize the patient's 
physical, mental, or emotional health. 
(2) No person shall be denied access to health care services, facilities,
resources, goods, or information on any grounds of sex, class,
economic status, place of birth, age, marital status, health status,
sexual orientation, disability, occupation, religion, race, caste, soci al
origin, or on any other ground that is unreasonable or arbitrary.
(3) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary measures to
ensure equal access to health care services and facilities to all citizens,
and that, no citizen is discriminated against on any ground referred to
in sub-section (2).

6 
Special 
provisions for 
specific 
vulnerable 
groups. 
4. The appropriate Government shall take all  necessary measures to
ensure that the health care needs of vulnerable groups including but
not limited to the following, are met effectively and equitably:—
(a) women and children, with a focus  on maternal and chil d
he
alth care, reproductive health, nutrition, and immunization 
services; 
(b )persons with disabilities, by ensuring accessible health care 
services, specialized treatments, and assistive technologies as per 
their specific needs; 
(c) senior citizens and economicall y weaker sections, by
providing subsidized or free health care services, geriatric care, 
and community-based health programs; and 
(d) individuals with rare diseases or genetic disorders, through
the establishment of dedicated programs, access to affordable 
treatments, and  
research initiatives aimed at prevention and 
management of such diseases. 
5 
10 
15 
Responsibilities 
of the Central 
Government. 
5. The Central Government shall, within such time intervals as may be
prescribed, take necessary measures to enhance health care resources
so as to ensure the health and well -being of every citizen, and for the
said purpose shall,―
(a) formulate, in consultation with the National Health Care
Services Authority, established under section  9 of this Act and 
implement a National Human Resource Policy for Health to 
ensure equitable distribution and availability of health 
professionals at all levels; 
(b) establish quality audit and grievance redressal mechanisms;
(c) align health services and schemes to empower citizens with
preventive, promotive and protective health care; 
(d) prescribe standards for the quality, accessibility and safety
of health care at all levels;
(e) ensure the availability of government -funded health care
services taking into account factors such as distance, population
density, and geographical area;
(f) guarantee access to government-funded health care services
without any discrimination; 
(g) mobilize financial and human resources and formulate
policies for the implementation of the obligations under this Act. 
(h) es tablish coordination mechanism  among departments
and/or concerned authorities to ensure provision of adequate 
nutrition, safe drinking water, and sanitation to patients in 
healthcare establishments;  
(i) undertake measures to inform, educate, and empower
citizens about health issues; 
(j) formulate and implement a National Health Policy to ensure
the realization of the righ t to health care services guaranteed 
under this Act; 
(k) provide financial and technical support to State
Governments for health care development; and 
20 
25 
30 
35 
 
40 
 
45 

7 
(l) formulate guidelines for quality assurance in health car e
services provided by health care establishments. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
 
30 
6. Without prejudice to the responsibilities specified under other provisions
of this Act, every State Government shall take all necessary measures for
the effective implementation, administration, and regulation of health care
services within its jurisdiction, including the urban local bodies and
panchayati raj institutions under it and for this purpose shall,—
(a) establish, as soon as may be after commencement of this Act,
by notification in the Official Gazette, State Health Care Services 
Authorities, with such composition and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed, to work in coordination with the National Health Care 
Services Authority and to oversee the implementation of health care 
policies and services,  ensure effective implementation by the heath 
care establishments in the State and to perform such other functions, as 
may be prescribed; 
(b) ensure the equitable distribution of health care resources,
particularly in rural and remote areas, in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(c) formulate and implement state -specific health care programs
that addresses local health needs and priorities; 
(d) collaborate with urban local bodies and panchayati  raj
institutions to strengthen local health governance, decision -making 
and implementation of health care services at the grassroot level; 
(e) promote awareness of health care rights amon g citizens to
ensure their informed participation in health care services; 
(f) facilitate access to Government health schemes and ensure their
effective implementation to eligible beneficiaries;  
(g) conduct social audits of health care services to assess  their
effectiveness, transparency, and accountability and take remedial 
measures in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Responsibilities 
of the State  
Governments. 
35 
40 
45 
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary measures to
strengthen health infrastructure across the country and for
development of human resources in the health care field, with focus on
equitable access and quality healthcare services to all citizens.
(2) For the furtherance of this objective, the appropriate Government
shall —
(a) build and upgrade healthcare facilities in underserved
areas, under the "One District, One Medical Institution" initiative 
to ensure district-level access to comprehensive medical care; 
(b) ensure the availability of free essential medicines,
diagnostics, and other necessary healthcare services at public 
health care establishments in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(c) provide referral transport services for patients requiring
specialized or emergency medical care at higher -level health care 
facilities; 
(d) establish specialized centres for the treatment of rare
diseases, genetic disorders, cancer and such other medical 
conditions in major public hospitals  by notification in the Official 
Gazette;  
Appropriate 
Government to 
strengthen health 
infrastructure 
and for human 
resource 
development in 
the health care 
field. 

8 
(e) set up telemedicine centres in rural and remote areas to
ensure universal healthcare access through digital connectivity 
and consultation services, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(f) formulate and implement policies to address the shortage of
health care professionals and ancillary health workers;
(g) provide regular training and organise capacity -building
programs for health care workers at all levels; 
(h) ensure equitable distribution of medical professionals and
health care workers at all levels  across all regions of the country, 
with priority given to underserved and remote areas, in 
accordance with the National Human Resource Policy for Health 
formulated and implemented by the Central Government under 
clause (a) of section 5; and 
(i) promote and support research and development in critical
areas, including genetics, oncology, mental health, and other 
emerging health care fields. 
 
5 
 
10 
15 
National and 
Regional 
Centres for rare 
and life-
th
reatening 
diseases and 
genetic 
disorders. 
 8. The appropriate Government shall, in such manner and  within such
time as may be prescribed, establish national and regional centres fo r
rare and life-threatening diseases and genetic disorders, which shall––
(a) provide financial assistance for the treatment of rare and
life-threatening diseases and genetic disorders, to such needy 
patients, as may be determined in accordance with the prescribed 
norms; 
(b) promote research, innovation, and development of geneti c
therapies and for rare disease management; 
© ensure availability of specialized medical professionals, 
diagnostic facilities, and requi site medical equipment for the 
treatment of rare and life- threatening diseases and genetic 
disorders; and 
(d) undertake public awareness and capacity -building
programs for early detection, prevention, and management of 
genetic disorders. 
20 
25 
30 
Constitution of 
National Health 
Care Services 
Authority. 
9. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute an independent body to be known as the National
Health Care Services Authority, to exercise the powers conferred on,
and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, bot h
movable and immovable, and to contract, and sha ll, by the said name, su e
or be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi  and the
Authority may with the prior approval of the Central Government,
establish offices at such other places in the country, as it may dee m
necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) Th e  Authority shall consist of the following, namely—
(a) the Prime Minister of India, who shall be the Chairman, ex-
officio; 
35 
40 
45 

9 
5 
10 
15 
(b) the Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Government of
India – Member, ex-officio. 
© the Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare, 
Government of India – Member, ex-officio; 
(d) the Secretary to the  Government of India in the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare – Member, ex-officio; and 
(e) three persons to be nominated by the President of India
from amongst persons having specialized knowledge or 
professional experience in public health, public policy, or  health 
administration, or allied disciplines, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(5) The Authority shall meet at least once every three months to carry out
its functions effectively.
(6) The salaries, or allowances, and other terms and conditions of
service, of the Members of the Authority, shall be such as may b e
prescribed.
(7) The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
10. (1) The Members of the Authority, other than the ex-officio Members, may,
by writing given under their hand to the Central Government, resign from
their office at any time.
(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office, an y
Member, other than the ex -officio Members of the Authority, if such
Member—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or 
(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable
of acting in his official capacity; or 
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority,
absent from three consecutive meetings of the Authority; or 
(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his
office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the interest 
of office or the public interest: 
        Provided that no person shall be removed from office  under this 
clause, unless that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter. 
(3) A vacancy caused under sub-sections (1) and (2) or otherwise shall be
filled by fre sh  nomination:
 P rovided that any Member nominated against a casual vacancy in the 
Authority shall hold office only for the remainder of the term of the 
Member in whose place he has been nominated. 
Resignation and 
removal. 
45 
11. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be questioned or shall be
invalidated merely by reason of:
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
Authority; or 
Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
the proce edings 
of the Authority. 

10 
(b) any defect in the nomination of a person as Member of the
Authority; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affectin g
the merits of the case. 
Officers and 
staff of the 
Authority. 
 12. (1) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers
and staff to the Authority, as may be necessary for the efficient
discharge of its functions under this Act, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, t he officers and staff, s o
appointed for the purpose of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5 
10 
Functions of the  
Authority. 
13. (1) The Authority shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely,–
(a) advise the appropriate Government on matters related to public
health, including preventive, promotive, curative, and rehabilitative 
health measures, as well as occupational, environmental, and socio -
economic health determinants; 
(b) formulate health goals and recommend measures to ensur e
integration of the goals into the mandates of panchayati raj institutions 
and urban local bodies; 
(c) develop strategic plans at the central level for the
implementation of the rights guaranteed und er this Act, including 
action on determinants such as access to healthy food, clean water, and 
sanitation; 
(d) establish mechanisms and systems for conducting regular
medical, clinical, and social audits to ensure the delivery of good 
quality healthcare services at all levels; 
(e) constitute committees, scientific panels, or technical panels
as may be deemed necessary for the effective discharge of its 
functions; 
(f) ensure provision of quality and cost -effective health and
diagnostic services by private he althcare providers in accordance with 
the prescribed standards; 
(g) investigate and provide satisfactory resolution to complaints
and grievances escalated to it under the Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism established under section 16 this Act, in such manner a nd 
within such time, as may be prescribed; 
(h) investigate cases of contravention of any of the provisions of
the Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder and take 
necessary action thereon in such manner and within such time, as may 
be prescribed; 
(i) conduct periodic evaluations of health care services to assess
their compliance with the provisions of this Act; 
(j) monitor the implementation and performance of the "One
District, One Medical Institution" initiative; 
(k) prepare an annual report giv ing a full account of its activities
and including therein the progress made and challenges encountered in 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

11 
 
5 
the implementation of the  provisions of this Act, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed and forward a copy of the same to the 
Central Government; and 
(l) any other function for the furtherance of the objectives of this
Act or as may be assigned to it by the Central Government. 
(2) The Authority, while discharging the functions under clauses (g) and
(h) of sub -section (1), shall have the power to summon and examine
witnesses, review documents, and issue orders for compliance, correction,
or imposing penalty, as deemed necessary.
46 of 2023. 10 
15 
20 
14. (1) The Authority shall have the powers of a civil court under the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, while discharging its functions under
clauses (g) and (h) of section 13, specifically to:
(a) s ummon and enforce the attendance of any person;
(b) require the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receive evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisition any public record or copy thereof from any court or
office; 
(e) issue commissions for the examination of witnesses or
documents; and 
( f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The Authority shall have the power to initiate proceedings for non-
compliance of its orders.
Powers of the 
Authority.  
25 
30 
15. (1) Any person aggrieved by a decision or an order of the Authority ma y
file an appeal to the Supreme Court within a period of sixty days from the
date of such decision or order:
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after th e
expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant
was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time.
(2) The decision of the Supreme Court on the appeal shall be final an d
binding.
Appeal. 
35 
40 
45 
16. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within a period of three
months from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in
the Official Gazette, establish a Grievance Redressal Mechanism, in
such form and manner, as may be prescribed,  for the expedit ious
resolution of complaints relating to the denial of health care services or
the violation of the rights guaranteed under this Act or contraventio n
of any of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Grievance Redressal Mechanism shall comprise a dedicated
web portal and helpline centre to receive complaints and registration
of grievances, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The web portal and helpline centre referred to in sub -section (2), shall
forward the complaints and grievances received by  them to the designate d
officer, as notified, and within twenty-four hours of the time of receipt a nd
the designated officer shall respond to the complainant within   twenty-four
hours of the time of receipt of the complaint or grievance by him, in such
form and manner as may be prescribed:
Grievance 
redressal 
mechanism. 

12 
Provided that if the complaint or grievance remains unresolved by the 
designated officer within the stipulated - twenty-four-hour period, the 
complaint or grievance shall be immediately escalated to the National or 
the State Health Authority, as the case may be, for resolution. 
Penalties. 17. (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules and
regulations made thereunder shall be punishable for the first contravention
with fine which may extend to twenty- five thousand rupees and for
repeated contravention or default, with fine of five hundred rupees per day
for each day of such contravention or default which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees.
5 
10 
Offences by 
companies. 
 18. (1) Where an Offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
every person who, at the time, the offence was committed was in charge of,
or was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section, shall render any
such person liable to any punishment under this Act if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where an
offence under this Act has been committed by a company, and it  is proved
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or
is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall a lso be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,— 
(a) “company” means any  body corporate and includes a firm, or
other association of individuals; and 
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
15 
20 
25 
 30 
Crediting sums 
realised by way 
of penalties to 
the 
Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
19. All sums realized, by way of penalties, imposed by the Authority, shall be
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
Sharing of 
financial 
responsibilities. 
20. (1) The Central Government and the State Governments shall have
concurrent responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and
recurring expenditure for the implementation of the provisions of the
Act.
(3) The Central Govern ment shall provide funds to the State
Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to meet such percentage of 
expenditure referred to in sub -section (2), as it may determine, from 
time to time, in consultation with the State Governments, to enable 
them to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(4) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
35 
40 
45

13 
 5 
Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the 
Authority, as it may think fit, for the effective implementation and 
enforcement of the provisions of this Act. 
(5) The State Governments shall, after taking into consideration, the
sums provided by the Central Government and its other resources, be 
responsible to provide funds for implementation of the provisions of 
this Act. 
 
10 
15 
21. (1) The Central Government shall cause the annual reports of th e
Authority referred to in clause(k) of sub-section(1) of section 13, to be laid,
as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of
Parliament.
(2) Where any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter wit h
which any State Government is concerned, the Authority shall forward a
copy of such report or part thereof to such State Government, who shal l
cause it to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each
House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where
such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Central 
Government to 
lay Report. 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
35 
22. (1) The Authority shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner and at
such time of each financial year, as may be prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act
shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has i n
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, sha ll
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers a nd to inspect any of the offices
of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government by the Authority. 
Accounts and 
audit. 
40 
45 
23. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may be
necessary to remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of
Parliament, as soon as possible after it is made.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
24. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to make 
rules and 
regulations. 

14 
(2) The Authority may, with the previous sanction of the Centra l
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder,
to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for
the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every rule and every regulation made by the Central Government under
this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament, as soon as may
be after it is made, for a total period of thirty days, which may be
composed in one session or in two or more successiv e sessions. If, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree to modify or annul th e
rule, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
stand annulled, as t he case may be, without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
(4) Every rule and every regulation made by a State Government or the
Union territory, as the case may be and every notification issued by the 
State Government o r the Union territory, as the case may be, under this 
Act, shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made, before the State 
Legislature, or the Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, where it 
consists of two Houses, or where such legislature c onsists of one House, 
before that House. 
 
5 
10 
 
15 
 
20 

15 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
      The Right to Health Care Services Bill, 2025, aims to establish a 
comprehensive legal framework ensuring equitable access to healthcare 
for all citizens of India. Despite significant advancements in healthcare, 
disparities in accessibility, affordability, and quality persist, particularly 
amongst marginalized communities. According to the National Health 
Accounts (NHA) Report 2021, out-of-pocket expenditure constitutes 48.2 
per-cent. of the total health expenditure, leading to catastrophic health 
expenditures for millions. The Global Burden of Disease Study (2020) 
also highlights that India ranks 145 th among 195 countries in healthcare 
access and quality, necessitating immediate legislative intervention. 
This Bill seeks to recognize healthcare as a fundamental right, 
aligning with Article 21 of the Constitution, which guarantees the right to 
life and personal liberty. By providing a statutory framework, it mandates 
universal access to essential healthcare services, ensuring financial 
protection through state-funded schemes. The Economic Survey 2022 -23 
revealed that government health expenditure remains at 2.1 per-cent of 
GDP, which is inadequate compared to the global average of 6  per-cent. 
Strengthening legal provisions through this Bill will enhance public 
healthcare infrastructure and reduce dependency on private sector 
healthcare, where 66 per-cent of India's population seeks treatment due to 
poor public health services (NSS 75thRound). 
The provisions proposed under this Bill focus on prohibiting 
discriminatory practices, ensuring accountability of private healthcare 
providers, and introducing a grievance redressal mechanism. Reports 
from NITI Aayog (20 21) indicate that 27  per-cent of urban households 
and 55  per-cent of rural households do not have health insurance 
coverage, necessitating a framework for affordable healthcare. 
Additionally, the Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health (2018) 
found that environmental factors contribute to 1.7 million deaths annually 
in India, justifying the need for preventive healthcare policies. 
By integrating public health, digital health, and environmental health 
regulations, this Bill aligns with India’s commitments un der the National 
Health Policy, 2017, and Sustainable Development Goals (SDG 3: Good 
Health and Well -
being). It also strengthens the implementation of 
Ayushman Bharat, ensuring seamless healthcare services to the 
economically weaker sections. The proposed Bill promotes transparent 
regulation of private healthcare institutions, enhanced penalties for 
medical negligence, and expands health insurance coverage, safeguarding 
citizens from financial distress. 
Given the urgency of healthcare reforms, this Bill aim s to create a 
robust, accessible, and accountable healthcare system, prioritizing citizen 
welfare over commercial interests. By enacting the Right to Health Care 
Services Bill, 2025, the Government will reaffirm its commitment to 
universal health coverage,  ensuring that every individual receives 
affordable, quality healthcare without discrimination. 
Hence, this Bill. 
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL. 

16 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill inter alia  guarantees the right to health care 
services and emergency support to every citizen and provides that no 
citizen shall be discriminated against on any ground and that the 
Government shall ensure equal access to health care services and 
facilities to all c itizens. Clause 4 provides that the appropriate 
Government shall make special provisions for ensuring the healthcare 
needs of specific vulnerable groups. Clause 5 stipulates the 
responsibilities of the Central Government to enhance health care 
resources an d ensure the health and wellbeing of every citizen as 
guaranteed under the Bill. Clause 7 provides that the appropriate 
Government shall take all necessary measures to strengthen health 
infrastructure across the country and for development of human resources 
in the health care field. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment 
of national and regional centres for the treatment of rare, life- threatening 
diseases and genetic disorders and to provide financial assistance for the 
treatment of such disea
ses. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the 
constitution of the National Health Care Services Authority and for the 
salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Members of the Authority. Clause 12 provides for the 
officers and staff of the Authority and the salaries and allowances payable 
to them as well as their terms and conditions of service. Clause 13 
provides for the functions of the Authority and inter alia specifies that the 
Authority shall constitute committees,  scientific panels, or technical 
panels for the effective discharge of its functions. Clause 16 provides for 
the establishment of a Grievance Redressal Mechanism for the 
expeditious resolution of complaints relating to the denial of health care 
services or  
the violation of the rights guaranteed under this Act or 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act.  Clause 20 of the Bill 
provides that the Central and State Government shall have concurrent 
responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill 
and that the Central Government shall provide funds to the State 
Governments, to meet such percentage of expenditure, as may be 
determined, from time to time, in consultation with the State 
Governments, as grants -in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out 
the purposes of this Bill. The said clause also provides that the Central 
Government shall grant such sums of money to the Authority for the 
effective implementation and enforcement of the provisions of the Bill.  
The Bill, ther efore, if enacted, would involve both non -recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at 
this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be 
involved. 

17 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
provisions by an order to remove any difficulties that might arise in giving 
effect to any of the provisions thereof. Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the 
appropriate Governm ent to make rules and regulations and the National 
Health Care Services Authority to make regulations for carrying out the 
purposes of this Bill. As the rules, regulations and order(s) will relate to 
matters of details only, the delegation of legislative p ower is of a normal 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______
 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the right to health care services for 
 all citizens and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
_______
 
(Dr.
 Ashok Kumar Mittal, M.P.) 
    RS-P&PS-PMB(E)―285―08.12.2025 