Bill No.  XX  of  2013
THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Child Marriage (Amendment)
 Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for clause (a) of section 2, the following shall be substituted, namely,—
"(a) Child means a person who, if a male, has not completed eighteen years of
age and if a female, has not completed fifteen years of age."
Amendment
of section 2.
Short title and
commencement.
6 of 2007.
5
[AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 11TH JULY, 2014]

2
3. In section 3 of the principal Act for sub-section (1), the following be substituted,
namely,—
“3. (1) Every child marriage whether solemnized before or after the commencement of
the Act, shall be valid:
Provided that a petition for annulling a child marriage may be filed in the district court
by a female who was child at the time of marriage.”
Amendment
of section 3.
Child marriage
to be valid at
the option of
the female
child.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Child marriage or marriage of girls under eighteen, is rampant in India. As per the
United Nations Children's Fund report, forty-seven per cent. of women in India, married
before eighteen years of age and about forty per cent. of the child marriages take place in
India. It is also a fact that most the countries with majority of muslims have legal age limits for
female ranging from fifteen to seventeen years for marriage, as comparable to western countries.
The age for boys is either the same or slightly higher. India has also set the legal age limit of
eighteen for girls and the same is the case in many other countries. The law is difficult to
enforce in rural areas where historical, cultural and economic factors often outweigh legal
restrictions. Communities, irrespective of their religions feel that with the implementation of
the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, a large number of marriages in the country are fit
to be annulled, and will have natural consequences on the lives of women ranging from
inheritance of property to maintenance of families and children.
In Islam, intellectual and physical maturity and a women's credible permission are
prerequisites for a marriage to be valid. The section 2 of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat)
Application Act, 1937 provides that in all questions regarding 'marriage' the rule of decision
in cases where the parties are Muslims shall be the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat). Even the
Muslim Personal Law would be in conformity with making the age of marriage for girls under
eighteen. The Delhi High Court has also upheld the right of a Muslim girl to contract marriage
at the age of fifteen on the basis of the Mohammedan law. Therefore, there is a need to amend
the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 to give effect to the Muslim Personal Law or the
Shariat and the  judgement pronounced by the Delhi High Court.
Hence this Bill.
MOHAMMED  ADEEB
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE ACT, 2006
(6 OF 2007)
* * * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "child" means a person who, if a male, has not completed twenty-one years
of age, and if a female, has not completed eighteen years of age;
* * * * * *
3. (1) Every child marriage, whether solemnised before or after the commencement of
this Act, shall be voidable at the option of the contracting party who was a child at the time
of the marriage:
Provided that a petition for annulling a child marriage by a decree of nullity may be filed
in the district court only by a contracting party to the marriage who was a child at the time of
the marriage.
* * * * * *
Definitions.
Child
marriages to
be voidable at
the option of
contracting
party being a
child.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Mohammed Adeeb, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1067RS(S4)—11.07.2014.