THE DELIMITATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Delimitation Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delimitation (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Delimitation Act, 2002, in section 5, after sub-section (3), following sub-
sections shall be inserted namely:—
"(3A) The Commission shall refer back to the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
or to the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be, the names of the
associate members nominated and informed to the Commission by the Speakers of the
respective Houses, if in the opinion of the Commission the number of associate members
of a House recommended by the Speaker of a House, is not in consonance with the
composition of that House, upon which, the concerned Speaker of the House shall,
after giving due regards to the opinion of the Commission, send the names back with
or without modifications.
(3B) The Commission shall associate with itself one representative of every
recognized National Party and State Party, in respect of  each State and the person to
be associated as representative of Political Party, shall be nominated by the Commission
after obtaining the name from such political Party, for the purpose."
Bill No.  XX  of 2006
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 14TH MARCH, 2006
Amendment
of Section 5
of Act 33 of
2002.
5
10
15

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Delimitation of Constituencies is a vital process in a democracy. As the ratio of
population increases, the delimitation has to be resorted to with respect to Parliamentary and
Assembly Constituencies. The Delimitation Act, 2002 contains a mechanism for the purpose.
However, there are certain deficiencies in the legislation, which are proposed to be cured by
this amendment Bill.
For instance, the Act does not provide for representation of political parties to act as
associate members. As a result, political parties have to depend upon Members of Parliament
and Members of State Legislatures of their parties for presenting their views before the
Commission. Members of Parliament and Members of State Legislatures of respective political
parties remain engrossed and, are primarily interested in their respective Constituencies.
They do not necessarily make required effort to present the views of the party which covers
Assembly and Parliamentary Constituencies of an entire State. Further, the view of the Party
may differ from the view of an M.L.A. or an M.P. with respect to the delimitation of a
Constituency, in which case, the M.L.A. or the M.P. may convey only his or her views with
respect to the delimitation of the concerned Constituency, and may not present the views of
the Party in that matter at all. Hence, representation of political parties is absolutely essential
for a just and fair delimitation.
Secondly, although Speaker of a Legislature and Speaker of the House of People are
authorized by section 5 of the Act to make nominations of  M.L.As and M.Ps in the Commission,
as Associate Members, there is no provision for seeking remedy if the Speaker of the House,
inadvertently or otherwise, commits an error in nominating Associate Members by
disregarding composition of the House or otherwise. A provision, therefore, has been
incorporated under which the Commission can draw the attention of the concerned Speaker
and the Speaker can consider the views of the Commission. The supremacy of the House,
however, has been kept intact, while proposing the amendment.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Delimitation Act, 2002.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—6488RS(S4)—16-03-2006.