1
THE  SUSTAINABLE  AGRICULTURE  (BAN  ON  HARMFUL
CHEMICALS)   BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to provide for sustainable agriculture by banning the use of harmful chemicals in
farming and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sustainable Agriculture (Ban on Harmful Cehmicals)
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XX of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. The Central Government shall, within a period of one year from the date of coming
into force of this Act, take such comprehensive measures for taking India on the path of
sustainable agriculture by permanently banning the use of harmful agriculture chemicals
including pesticides, herbicides, weedicides and other formulations specified in the Schedule
to this Act in farming and such other practices in such manner as may be prescribed by rules
made under this Act.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force.
4. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately followng the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previsously
done under that rule.
Power to
make
rules.
Sustainable
agriculture by
banning the
use
of harmful
chemicals in
farming
practices.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for
the time being
in force.
5
10
15

THE  SCHEDULE
[See section 2]
1. 2, 4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid 33. Iprodione
2. Acephate 34. Kasugamycin
3. Aluminium Phosphide 35. Lindane (Gamma HCH)
4. Atrazine 36. Linuron
5. Benfuracarb 37. Malathion
6. Bifenthrin 38. Mancozeb
7. Butachlor 39. Mepiquat Chloride
8. Captafol 40. Metaldehyde
9. Captan 41. Methomyl
10. Carbendazim 42. Methyl Bromide
11. Carbofuron 43. Monocrotophos
12. Carbosulfan 44. Nickel Chloride
13. Chlorefenapyr 45. Oxyfluorfen
14. Chlorothalonil 46. Paradiclorobenzene (PDCB)
15. Chlorpyriphos 47. Paraquat Dichloride
16. Cypermethrin 48. Pendimethalin
17. Dalapon 49. Phosphamidon
18. Deltamethrin 50. Pretilachlor
19. Dezomet 51. Profenophos
20. Dichloro Diphenyl 52. Propargite
Trichloroethane (DDT) 53. Propineb
21. Dicofol 54. Quninolphos
22. Diflubenzuron 55. Simazine
23. Dimethoate 56. Sulfosulfurone
24. Dinocap 57. Thiodicarb
25. Diuron 58. Thiophanate Methyl
26. Etofenprox 59. Thiram
27. Fenitrothion 60. Triazophos
28. Fenpropathrin 61. Warfarin
29. Ferbam 62. Zinc Phosphate
30. Formothion 63. Zineb
31. Glyphosate 64. Ziram
32. Glufosinate
3

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The problem of pests, insects, weeds, plant pathogens in agriculture, which has resulted
in the decline of production of various crops and sometime even destruction of the entire
crop, has been addressed, to a great extent, by the use of chemical pesticides, insecticides,
fungicides and weedicides. However, the use of thse agricultural chemicals has a detrimental
effect on non-targeted organisms and humans, including the environment. This threat to
humans, environment and non-trargeted species by the use of these agricultural chemicals
needs our serious attentions because the harmful effects of these chemicals come to the fore
after a time lag which may be a few years or even longer.
A number of studies found that those who work closely with pesticides (such as
farmers, farm labourers, pesticide applicators) suffer an increased risk of a variety of diseases
relating to the neurological, behavioural, reproductive and developmental system due to
prolonged exposure to chemical pesticides. These illnesses include leukaemia, lung cancer
and non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma besides obesity, diabetes, Alzheimer's dementia, Parkinson's,
asthma, chronic bronchitis, autism, hormonal dysfunction and psychological disorders. As
a direct result, 20,000 people die of pesticide poisoning annually in India. Even those who are
not directly involved in the agricultural industry are exposed to dangerous pesticides through
run-off that contaminates water sources, including drinking water. Further, the use of these
chemicals and exposure to them may also stunt the mental and physical health of children
thereby affecting the future generations of the country even before they are born.
Some of these agrichemicals like glyphosate and glufosinate are quite deadly and are
capable of triggering a number of acute and chronic health issues in human beings and
animals. Evidence suggests decrease of male fertility and, in particular, of sperm quality upon
exposure. Risk of cancer, adverse effects on reproduction and development are the major
concerns based on the evidence from animal studies.
India needs to have a clear roadmap for sustainable agriculture, and in order to achieve
this, there is an urgent necessity to permanently ban the use of such agricultural chemicals
(pesticides, insecticides, fungicides and weedicides) which are severely harmful to humans,
environment and other species. Moreover, the permanent ban on these agrochemicals will
open up more avenues for export of chemical free agricultural produce to countries where
these chemicals are already banned.
It is also important to highlight here that many harmful chemical pesticides, insecticides,
fungicides and weedicides, which have been banned internationally, are not banned in India.
In view of the fact stated above and in order to make our agriculture completely organic and
sustainable, this Bill seeks to permanently ban the use of these harmful agricultural chemicals
in India's farms and farming.
Hence, this Bill.
ANEEL  PRASAD  HEGDE.
4

MEMORANDUM  OF  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for sustainable agriculture by banning the use of harmful chemicals in
farming and for matters connected therwith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—059—08-12-2023.