RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to repeal the Indian Power Aicohol Act, 1948.

(Shri Suresh P. Prabhu, Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—4362RS—13.03.2000.


AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XX of 2000

THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the National Housing Bank Act, 1987.

Ba it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Housing Bank (Amendment) Act, 2000. _ Short title and

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica- ment. है
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.


2

Amendment of 2. In section 2 of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the
section 2. principal Act), in clause (व), for the words “its principal object”, the words “one of its
principal objects” shall be substituted.

Substitution of 3. For section # of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
new section for namely:—

section 4.

Capital. “4. (1 The authorised and paid up capital of the National Housing Bank shall

be three nunarea and fifty crores of rupees:

Provided that the Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve
Bank, by notification, increase the authorised capital up to two thousand crores of
rupees.

(2) The Board may, on such terms and conditions, as determined by it from
time to time, issue the increased authorised capital to Reserve Bank, the Central
Government, scheduled banks, public financial institutions, housing finance instituions
or such other institutions, as may be approved by the Central Government:

Provided that no increase in the issued capital shall be made in such manner
that the Reserve Bank, the Central Government, public sector banks, public financial
institutions or other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government,
hold in aggregate at any time, less than fifty one per cent. of the issued capital of the
National Housing Bank.”.

Amendment of 4, In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for clauses (a) and (b), the
section 5. following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-—

“(a) the Chairman, if he is a whole-time director or if he is holding offices both
as the Chairman and the Managing Director, or

(b) the Managing Director, if the Chairman is not a whole-time director, or if
the Chairman being a whole-time director, is absent.”.
Amendment of 5. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
section 6.
(a) in sub-section (J),—
(i) in clause (6), for the words “three directors”, the words “two direc-
tors” shall be substituted;

(ii) for clause (c), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—

“(c) two directors, who shall be persons with experience in the
working of institutions involved in providing funds for housing or en-
gaged in housing development or have experience in the working of fi-
nancial institutions or scheduled banks;

(ca) two directors elected in such manner as may be prescribed by
shareholders other than the Reserve Bank, the Central Government and
other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government;”;

(b) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and letter “excluding the direc-
tors referred to in clause (d)”, the words, brackets and letters excluding the directors
referred to in clauses (ca) and (d) shall be substituted.

Amendment of 6. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and
section 7. letters “clauses (b) and (c)”, the words, brackets and letters “clauses (b), (c) and (ca) shall
be substituted.

Amendment of 7. In section 14 of the principal Act,—
section 14, (i) for clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—

“(b) making of loans and advances or rendering any other form of finan-
cial'assistance whatsoever for housing activities to housing finance institutions,

53 of 1987.


RAJYA SABHA

ERRATA
TO
THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000.
(To be/as introduced in Rajya Sabha)

Page 2-

0) line 12, add “the” before Reserve Bank.

(0). 11633, for “offinancial” read “of financial”.

Page 3, line 11, delete “the” before “securities”.

Page 12, line 37, for “Provision” read “Provisions”.

Page 13, line 16, for “notificatio” read “notification”.

Page 17 -

(0) line 3, for “agains” read “against”.

(1). Line 15, insert in the margin “5 of 1908” against the proviso to clause
36T. _

Pge 18, line 36, for “any” read “Any”.

Page 19, line 32; marginal heading should be read as “Application” instead of
“Aplication”.

Page 29, line 6, from below for “empower” read “empowers”.

Page 28, line 20, add “twelve” before “months”.


w

scheduled banks, state co-operative agricultural and rural development banks
or any other institution or class of institutions as may be notified by the Central
Government;

(ba) making of loans and advances for housing or residential township-
cum-housing development or slum clearance projects;”;

(ii) after clause (९), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: —

“(ea) buying, selling or otherwise dealing in any loans or advances se-
cured by mortgage or charge of the immovable property relating to scheduled
banks or housing finance institutions;

(eb) creating one or more trusts and transferring loans or advances to-
gether with or without the sectrities therefor to such trusts for a consideration;

(ec) setting aside loans or advances held by the National Housing Bank
and issuing and selling securities based upon such loans or advances so set
aside in the form of debt obligations, trust certficates of beneficial interest or
other insturments, by whatever name called, and to act as trustee for the hold-
ers of such securities;

(ed) setting up of onc or more mutual funds for undertaking housing fi-
nance activities;
(ee) undertaking or participating in housing mortgage insurance;”;
(iii) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —
“(f)promoting, forming, conducting or. associating in the promotion, for-
mation or conduct of companies, mortgage banks, subsidiaries, societies, trusts
or such other association of persons as it may deem fit for carrying out all or
any of its functions under this Act;”.
8. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— Amendment of

section 15.
(a) in clause (b), for the words “the Central Government”, the words “the
Central Government, scheduled banks, financial institutions, mutual funds” shall be
substituted;

(b) in clause (c), for the words “a period which shall not be less than twelve
months from the date of the making of the deposit”, the words “such period and”
shall be substituted;

(c) in clause (d), for sub-clause (i), the following sub-clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:— ,

“(i) by way of loans and advances and generally obtain financial assist-
ance in such manner or on such terms and conditions as may be specified by

the Reserve Bank;”.
9. After section 16 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, Insertion of
namely:— new sections
16A and 16B.

“16A. (1) Where any person or institution seeks any financial assistance from Assistance to
the National Housing Bank on the security of any immovable property belonging to the borrower
him or to that institution or on the security of the property of some other person eta in
whose property is offered as a collateral security for such assistance, such person Or the property
institution or, as the case may be, such other person may execute a written declara- offered as.
tion in the form set out in the Third Schedule to this Act stating therein the particulars security.
of the immovable property which is proposed to be offered as security, or as the case
may be, collateral security, for such assistance and agreeing that the dues relating to
the assistance, if granted, shall be a charge on such immovable property and, if on


Amount and
security to be
held in trust.

Amendment of
section 18.

Insertion of
new sections
18A and 18B.

Exemption
from registra-
tion

Recovery of
dues as arrears
of land revenue.

receipt of such declaration, the National Housing Bank grants any financial assist-
ance to the person or institution aforesaid, the dues relating to such assistance shall,
without prejudice to the rights of any other creditor holding any prior charge or mort-
gage in respect of the immovable property so specified, be, by virtue of the provi-
sions of this section, a charge on the property specified in the declaration aforesaid.

(2) Where any further immovable property is offered by a person or an institu-
tion as security for the financial assistance referred to in sub-section (/), such person
or institution may execute a fresh declaration, as far as may be in the form set out in
the Third Schedule to this Act, whereupon the dues relating to such assistance shall,
by virtue of the provisions of this section, also be a charge on the property specified
in such fresh declaration.

(3) A declaration made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may be varied
or revoked at any time by the person or institution as aforesaid, with the prior ap-
proval of the National Housing Bank.

(4) Every declaration made under sub-section (J) or sub-section (2), shall be
deemed to be a document registrable as an agreement under the provisions of the
Registration Act, 1908 and no such declaration shall have effect unless it is so regis-
tered.

16B.(1) Any sums received by a borrowing institution in repayment or realisa-
tion of loans and advances financed or refinanced either wholly or partly by the
National Housing Bank shall, to the extent of the accommodation granted by the
National Housing Bank and remaining outstanding, be deemed to have been received
by the borrowing institution in trust for the National Housing Bank, and shall accord-
ingly be paid by such institution to the National Housing Bank.

(2) Where any accommodation has been granted by the National Housing Bank
to a borrowing institution, all securities held, or which may be held, by such borrow-
ing institution on account of any transaction in respect of which such‘accommodation
has been granted, shall be held by such institution in trust for the National Housing
Bank.”.

10. In section 18 of the principal Act, for the words “housing finance institution”, the

word “institution” shall be substituted.

11. After section 18 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,

namely:—

“184, Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7) of section 17 of
the Registration Act, 1908,—

(a) any instrument in the form of debt obligations or trust certificate of
beneficial interest or other instruments, by whatever name called, issued by the
National Housing Bank to securitise the loans granted by the housing finance
institutions and scheduled banks, and not creating, declaring, assigning, limit-
ing or extinguishing any right, title or interest, to or in immovable property
except in so far as it entitles the holder to an undivided interest afforded by a
registered instrument, whereby the National Housing Bank has acquired the
rights and interests in relation to such loans and in securities therefor; or

(b) any transfer of such instruments referred to in clause (a),
shall not require compulsory registration.

18B. Where any amount is due under an agreement to the National Housifig
Bank, whether acting as a trustee or otherwise, in respect of securitisation of loans of
housing finance institutions and scheduled banks, the National Housing Bank may
without prejudice to any other mode of recovery make an application to the State

16 of 1908.

16 of 1908.


Government for the recovery of the amount due to it, and if the State Government or
such authority, as that Government may specify in this behalf, is satisfied that any
amount is due, it may issue a certificate for the amount to the Collector and the
Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in the same manner as arrears of land
revenue.”,

12. In sections 19 to 25 of the principal Act, for the words “housing finance institu- Amendment of

tions”, wherever they occur, the word “institutions” shall be substituted. so 19 to

13. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, Insertion of new

namely:— sections 29A to
29८.

“294A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter or in any other Requirement of
law for the time being in force, no housing finance institution which is a company gtstration and
shall commence or carry on the business of a housing finance institution without— "et owned fund

(a) obtaining a certificate of registration issued under this Chapter; and

(b) having the net owned fund of twenty five lakh rupees or such other
higher amount, as the National Housing Bank may, by notification, specify.

(2) Every such housing finance institution shall make an application for regis-
tration to the National Housing Bank in such form as may be specified by the Na-
tional Housing Bank:

Provided that a housing finance institution which is a company in existence on
the commencement of the National Housing Bank (Amendment) Act, 2000, shall
make an application for registration’to the National Housing Bank before the expiry
of six months from such commencement and notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (7), may continue to carry on the business of housing finance institution
until a certificate of registration is issued to it or rejection of application for registra-
tion is communicated to it.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a housing finance
institution which is a company in existence on the commencement of the National
Housing Bank (Amendment) Act, 2000, and having a net owned fund of less than
twenty five lakh rupees, may, for the purpose of enabling such institution to fulfil the
requirement of the net owned fund, continue to carry on the business of a housing
finance institution—

(i) for a period of three years from such commencement; or

(ii) for such further period as the National Housing Bank may, after re-
cording the reasons in writing for so doing, extend,

subject to the conditions that such institution shall, within three months of fulfilling
the requirement of the net owned fund, inform the National Housing Bank about such
fulfilment:

Provided that the period allowed to continue business under this sub-section
shall in no case exceed six years in the aggregate.

(4) The National Housing Bank, for the purpose of considering the application
for registration, may require to be satisfied by an inspection of the books of such
housing finance institution or otherwise that the following conditions are fulfilled:—

(a) that housing finance institution is or shall be in a position to pay its
present or future depositors in full as and when their claims accrue;

(b) that the affairs of the housing finance institution are not being or are
not likely to be conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of its present
or future depositors;


(c) that the general character of the management or the proposed man-
agement of the housing finance institution shall not be prejudicial to the public
interest or the interests of its depositors;

(d) that the housing finance institution has adequate capital structure and
earning prospects;

(e) that the public interest shall be served by the grant of certificate of
registration to the housing finance institution to commence or to carry on the
business in India;

(f) that the grant of certificate of registration shall not be prejudicial to
the operation and growth of the housing finance sector of the country; and

(g) any other condition, fulfilment of which in the opinion of the Na-
tional Housing Bank, shall be necessary to ensure that the commencement of
or carrying on the business in India by a housing finance institution shall not be
prejudicial to the public interest or in the interests of the depositors.

(5) The National Housing Bank may, after being satisfied that the conditions
specified in sub-section (4) are fulfilled, grant a certificate of registration subject to
such conditions which it may consider fit to impose.

(6) the National Housing Bank may cancel a certificate of registration granted
to a housing finance institution under this section if such institution—

(i) ceases to carry on the business of a housing finance institution in
India; or

(i) has failed to comply with any condition subject to which the certifi-
cate of registration had been issued to it; or

(iii) at any time fails to fulfil any of the conditions referred to in clauses
(a) to (g) of sub-section (4); or

(iv) fails—-

(a) to comply with any direction issued by the National Housing
Bank under the provisions of this Chapter; or

(b)to maintain accounts in accordance with the requirement of any
law or any direction or order issued by the National Housing Bank under
the provisions of this Chapter; or

(c) to submit or offer for inspection its books of account and other
relevant documents when so demanded by an inspecting authority of the
National Housing Bank; or

(v) has been prohibited from accepting deposit by an order made by the
National Housing Bank under the provisions of this Chapter and such order
has been in force for a period of not less than three months:

Provided that before cancelling a certificate of registration on the ground that
the housing finance institution has failed to comply with the provisions of clause (ii)
or has failed to fulfil aay of the conditions referred to in clauses (a) to (g) of sub-
section (4) the National Housing Bank, unless it is of the opinion that the delay in
cancelling the certificate of registration shall be prejudicial to public interest or the
interest of the depositors or the housing finance institution, shall give an opportunity
to such institution on such terms as the National Housing Bank may specify for tak-
ing necessary steps to comply with such provision or fulfilment of such condition:

Provided further that before making any order of cancellation of certificate of
registration, such institution shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.


(7) A housing finance institution aggrieved by the order or rejection of appli-
cation for registration or cancellation of certificate of registration may prefer au ap-
peal, within a period of thirty days from the date on whici such order of rejection or
cancellation is communicated to it, to the Central Government and the decision of the
Central Government where an apppeal has been preferred to it, or of the National
Housing Bank where no appeal has been preferred, shall be final:

Provided that before making any order of rejection of appeal, such institution
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, —
(1) “net owned fund” means—

(a) the aggregate of the paid-up equity capital and free reserves as
disclosed in the latest balance-sheet of the housing finance institution
after deducting thereform—

(i) accumulated balance of loss;
(ii) deferred revenue expenditure; and
(iii) other intangible assets; and
(b) further reduced by the amounts representing—
(1) investments of such instituion in shares of—
(i) its subsidiaries;
(ii) compaines in the same group:

(iii) all other housing finance institutions which are com-
panies; and

(2) the book value of debentures, bonds, outstanding loans
and advances (including hire-purchase and lease finance) made to,
and deposits with,—

(i) subsidiaries of such company; and

(ii) companies in the same group, to the extent such
amount excceds ten per cent. of (a) above;

(il) “subsidiaries” and “companies in the same group” shall have the same
1 of 1956. meanings assigned to them in’the Companies Act, 1956.

29B. (1) Every housing finance institution shall invest and continue to invest in
India in unencumbered approved securities, valued at a price not exceeding the cur-
rent market price of such securities, an amount which, at the close of business on any
day, shall not be less than five per cent. or such higher percentage not exceeding
twenty-five per cent. as the National Housing bank may, from time to time and by
notification, specify, of the deposits outstanding at the close of business on the last
working day of the second preceding quarter.

(2) Every housing finance institution shal] maintain in India in an account with
a scheduled bank in term deposits or certificate of deposits (free of ¢harge or lien) or
in deposits with the national Housing Bank or by way of subscription to the bonds
issued by the National Housing Bank, or partly in such an account or in such deposit
or partly by way of such subscription, a sum which, at the close of business on any
day,,together with the investment made under sub-section (J) shall not be less than ten
per cent. or such higher percentage not exceeding twenty-five per cent., as the Na-
tional Housing Bank may, from time to time and by notification specify, of the depos-
its qatstanding in the books of the housing finance institution at the close of business
on the last working day of the second preceding quarter.

Maintenance of
Percentage of
assets.


Reserve fund.

(3) For the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section,
the National Housing Bank may require every such housing finance institution to
furnish a return to it in such form, in such a manner and for such period as may be
specified by the National Housing Bank.

(4) If the amount invested by a housing finance institution at the close of busi-
ness on any day is less than the rate specified under sub-section (/) or sub-section
(2), such housing finance institution shall be liable to pay to the National Housing
Bank, in respect of such shortfall, a penal interest at a rate of three per cent. per
annum above the bank rate on such amount by which the amount actually maintained
or invested falls short of the specified percentage, and where the shortfall continues
in the subsequent quarters, the rate of penal interest shall be five per cent. per annum
above the bank rate on such shortfall for eagh subsequent quarter.

(5) (a) The penal interest payable under sub-section (4) shall be payable within
a period of fourteen days from the date on which a notice issued by the National
Housing Bank demanding payment of the same is served on the housing finance
institution and, in the event of a failure of the housing finance institution to pay the
same within such period, may be levied by 4 direction of the principal civil court
having jurisdiction in the area where an office of the defaulting housing finance insti-
tution is situated and such direction shall be made only upon and application made in
this behalf to the court by the National Housing Bank; and

(b) when the court makes a direction under clause (a), it shall issue a certificate
specifying the sum payable by the housing finance institution and every such certifi-
cate shall-be enforceable in the manner as if it were a decree made by the court in a
suit.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the National Housing
Bank is satisfied that the defaulting housing finance institution had sufficient cause
for its failure to comply with the provisions of sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), it
may not demand the payment of the penal interest,

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—

(i) approved securities means securities of any State Government or of
the Central Government and such bonds, both the principal whereof and the
interest whereon shall have been fully and unconditionally guaranteed by any
such Government;

(ii) “unencumbered approved securities” includes the gpproved securi-
ties lodged by the housing finance institution with another institution for an
advance or any other arrangement to the extent to which such securities have
not been drawn against or availed of or encumbered in any manner;

(iii) “quarter” means the period of three months ending on the last day of
March, June, September or December.

29९, (1) Every housing finance institution which is a company shall create a
reserve fund and transfer therein a sum not less than twenty per cent. of its net profit
every year as disclosed in the profit and loss account and before any dividend is 06-
clared.

Explanation.—A housing finance institution creating and maintaining any spe-
cial reserve in terms of clause (viii) of sub-section (1) of section 36 of the Income-tax
Act, 1961, may take into account any sum transferred by it for the year to such special
reserve for the purposes of this sub-section.

(2) No appropriation of any sum from the reserve fund including any sum in the
special reserve which has been taken into account for the purposes of reserve fund in
terms of sub-section (7), shall be made by such housing finance institution except for

43 of 1961.


the purpose as may be specified by the National Housing Bank from time to time and
every such appropriation shall be reported to the National Housing Bank within twenty-
one days from the date of such withdrawal:

Provided that the National Heusing Bank may, in any particular case ahd for
sufficient cause being shown, extend the period of twenty-one days by such further
period as it thinks fit or condone any delay in making such report.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the Central Govern-
ment may, on the recommendation of the National Housing Bank and having regard to
the adequacy of the paid-up capital and reserves of a housing finance institution which
is a company in relation to its deposit liabilities, declare by order in writing that the
provisions of sub-section (/) shall not be applicable to such housing finance institu-
tion for such period as may be specified in the order:

Provided that no such order shall be made unless the amount in.the reserve fund
under sub-section (/), together with the amount in the share premium account, is not
less than the paid-up capital of the housing finance institution.".
14. After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, _ Insertionofnew
namely:— section 30A.

"30A. (1) Ifthe National Housing Bank is satisfied that, in the public interest or _ Power of the
to regulate the housing finance system of the country to its advantage or to prevent the National
affairs of any housing finance institution being conducted in a manner detrimental to Howsing Bas ing Bank
the interest of the depositors or in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the housing policy and
finance institutions, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may subject to the provi- issue
sions of sub-section (5) of section 5, determine the policy and give directions to all or directions.
any of the housing finance institution relating to income recognition, accounting stand-
ards, making of proper provision for bad and doubtful debts, capital adequacy based
on risk weights for assets and credit conversion factors for offbalance-sheet items and
also relating to deployment of funds by a housing finance institution or a group of
housing finance institutions or housing finance institutions generally, as the case may
be, and such housing finance institutions shall be bound to follow the policy so deter-
mined and the direction so issued.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers vested under sub-section
(J), the National Housing Bank may give directions to housing finance institutions
generally or to a group of housing finance institutions or to any housing finance insti-
tution in particular as to—

(व) the purpose for which advances or other fund-based or non-fund-based
accommodation may not be made; and

(6) the maximum amount of advances or other financial accommodation
or investment in shares and other securities which, having regard to the paid-up
capital, reserves and deposits of the housing finance institution and other rel-
evant considerations, may be made by that housing finance institution to any
person or a company or to a group of companies.”.

15. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the word "including", Amendment of
the words “credit rating of the housing finance institution accepting deposits” shall be in- section 31.
serted.
16. In section 33 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 33.
(a)-after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(74) The National Housing Bank may, on being satisfied that it is neces-
sary so to do, in the public interest or in the interest of the depositors or for the
purpose of proper assessment of the books of account, issue directions to any


10

housing finance institution or any group of housing finance institutions or hous-
ing finance companies generally or to the auditors of such housing finance insti-
tution or institutions relating to balance-sheet, profit and loss account, disclo-
sure of liabilities in the books of account or any matter relating thereto.”;

(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

"(3) Where the National Housing Bank is of the opinion that it is neces-
sary so to do in the public interest or in the interest of the housing finance insti-
tution or in the interest of the depositors of such institution, it may at any time by
order, direct that a special audjt of the accounts of the housing finance institu-
tion in relation to any such transaction or class of transactions or for such period
or periods, as may be specified in the order, shall be conducted and the National
Housing Bank may appoint an auditor or auditors to conduct such special audit
and direct the auditor or the auditors to submit the report to it.

(4) The remuneration of the auditors as may be fixed by the National
Housing Bank, having regard to the nature and volume of work involved in the
audit and the expenses of or incidental to the audit, shall be borne by the hous-
ing finance institution so audited.".

Insertion of new 17. After section 33 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
sections 33A namely: — .

and 33B.

Power of "33A. (1) If any housing finance institution violates the provisions of any sec- ,
National tion or fails to comply with any direction or order given by the National Housing Bank
Hiei tall under any of the provisions of this Chapter, the National Housing Bank may prohibit
acceptance of the housing finance institution from accepting any deposit.

deposit and

alienation of (2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any agreement or
assets. instrument or any law for the time being in force, the National Housing Bank on being
satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the public interest or in the interest of the
depositors, may direct, the housing finance institution against which an order prohi-
biting from accepting deposit has been issued, not to sell, transfer, create charge or
mortgage or deal in any manner with its property and assets without prior written
permission of the National Housing Bank for such period not exceeding six months

from the date of the order.
Power of 33B. (/) The National Housing Bank, on being satisfied that a housing finance
National institution which is a company,—
Housing Bank
to file winding (a) is unable to pay its debt; or
up petition.

(b) has by virtue of the provisions of section 29A become disqualified to
carry on the business of a housing finance institution; or

(c) has been prohibited by the National Housing Bank from receiving
deposit by an order and such order has been in force for a period of not less than
three months; or

(d) the continuance of the housing finance institution is detrimental to the
public interest or to the interest of depositors of the company,

may file an application for winding up of such housing finance institution under the
Companies Act, 1956.

(2) A housing finance institution which is a company shall be deemed to be
unable to pay its debt if it has refused or has failed to meet within five working days
any lawful demand made at any of its offices or branches and the National Housing
Bank certifies in writing that such company is unable to pay its debt.

1 of 1956.


1 of 1956.

u

(3) A copy of every application made by the National Housing Bank under sub-
section (1) shall be sent to the Registrar of Companies.

(4) All the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 relating to winding up of a
company shall apply to a winding up proceeding initiated on the application made by
the National Housing Bank under this provision.".

18, After section 35 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,

namely:—

"35A. (1) Any information relating to a housing finance institution,—

(a) contained in any statement or return submitted by such institution un-
der the provisions of this Chapter; or

(0) obtained through audit or inspection or otherwise by the National
Housing Bank,

shall be treated as confidential and shall not, except otherwise provided in this sec-
tion, be disclosed.

(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to—

(q) the disclosure by any housing finance institution, with the previous
permission of the National Housing Bank, of any information furnished to the
National Housing Bank under sub-section (/);

(b) the publication by the National Housing Bank, if it considers neces-
sary in the public interest so to do, of any information collected by it under sub-
section (J) in such consolidated form as it may think fit without disclosing the
name of any housing finance institution or its borrowers;

(०) the disclosure by the housing finance institution or by the National
Housing Bank of any such information to any other housing finance institution
or in accordance with the practice and usage customary amongst such institu-
tions or as permitted or required under any other law:

Provided that any such information received by a housing finance institution
under this clause shall not be published except in accordance with the practice and
usage customary amongst institutions or as permitted or required under any other law.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the
time being in force, the National Housing Bank, if it is satisfied that, in the public
interest or in the interest of the depositors or the housing finance institution or to
prevent the affairs of any housing finance institution being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the interest of the depositors, it is expedient so to do, may, either on its
own motion or on being requested, furnish or communicate any information relating
to the conduct of business by any housing finance institution to any authority consti-
tuted under any law.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, no court or tribunal or other authority shall compel the National Housing Bank
to produce or to give inspection of any statement or other material obtained by the
National Housing Bank under any provision of this Chapter.

35B. The National Housing Bank on being satisfied that it is necessary so to do,
may, declare by notification that any or all the provisions of this Chapter shall not
apply to a housing finance institution or a group of housing finance institutions either
generally or for such period as may be specified, subject to such conditions, limita-
tions or restrictions as it may think fit to impose.".

Insertion of
new sections
35A and 358.

Disclosure of
information.

Power of
National
Housing Bank
to exempt any


Insertion of
new sections
36A and 368.

Power to order
repayment of
deposit.

Nomination by
depositors

2

19. After section 36 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,

namely:—

“36A. (1) Every deposit accepted by a housing finance institution which is a
company unless renewed, shall be repaid in accordance with the terms and conditions
of such deposit.

(2) Where a housing finance institution which is a company has failed to repay
any deposit or part thereof in accordance with the terms and conditions of such de-
posit, such officer of the National Housing Bank, as may be authorised by the Central
Government for the purpose of this section (hereinafter referred to as the “authorised
officer”) may, if he is satisfied, either on his own motion or on any application of the
depositor, that it is necessary so to do to safeguard the interests of the housing finance
institution, the depositors or in the public interest, direct, by order, such housing fi-
nance institution to make repayment of such deposit or part thereof forthwith or within
such time and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order:

Provided that the authorised officer may, before making any order under this
sub-section, give a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the housing finance insti-
tution and the other persons interested in the matter.

36B. (7) Where a deposit is held by a housing finance institution to the credit of
one or more persons, the depositor or, as the.case may be, all the depositors together

smay nominate, in the manner prescribed by rules made by the Central Government

under section 45ZA of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 one person to whom in the
event of the death of the sole depositor or the death of all the depositors, the amount of
deposit may be returned by the housing finance institution.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, or in any deposition, whether testamentary or otherwise, in respect of such
deposit, where a nomination made purports to confer on any person the right to re-
ceive the amount of deposit from the housing finance institution, the nominee shall, on
the death of the sole depositor or, as the case may be, on the death of all the depositors,
become entitled to all the right of the sole depositor or, as the case may be, of the
depositors, in relation to such deposit to the exclusion of all other persons, unless the
nomination is varied or cancelled in the manner prescribed by rules made by the Cen-
tral Government under section 45ZA of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.

(3) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the depositor making the
nomination to appoint, in the manner prescribed by rules made by the Central Govern-
ment under section 45ZA of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, any person to receive
the amount of deposit in the event of his death during the minority of the nominee.

(4) Payment by a housing finance institution in accordance with the provision of
this section shall constitute a full discharge to the housing finance institution of its
liability in respect of the deposit:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect the right or claim
which any person may have againstthe person to whom any payment is made under
this section.

(5) No notice of the claim of any person, other ihan the person or persons in
whose natne a deposit is held by the housing finance institution, shall be receivable by
the housing finance institution, nor shall the housing finance institution be bound by
any such notice even though expressly given to‘it:

Provided that where any decree, order, certificate of other authority from a court
of competent jurisdiction relating to such deposit is produced before a housing fi-
nance institution, the housing finance institution shall take due note of such decree,
order, certificate or other authority.”.

10 of 1949,

10 of 1949.

10 of 1949,

10 of 1949.


4 of 1882

13

20. After Chapter V of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,

namely:—

“CHAPTER VA
OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO HoUuSING FINANCE INSTITUTIONS
36C. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal established under
section 36-I;

(0) “approved institution” means—

(i ahousing finance institution which has been granted a certificate
of registration under sub-section (5) of section 29A;

(ii)a scheduled bank;

(ii) National Housing Bank acting as trustee or othérwise in a trans-
action of securitisation of housing mortgages undertaken by the National
Housing Bank;

(iv) such other institutions as the Central Government may, on the
recommendation of the National Housing Bank, by notification, specify;

(©) “assistance” means any direct or indirect financial assistance granted,
by an approved institution during the course of any housing finance activity
undertaken by it;

(d) “borrower” means any person to whom any assistance has been given
by an approved institution for the purposes of purchase, construction, repairs,
extension or renovation of a residential house;

(e) “dues” means any liability which is claimed as due from any person by
an approved institution and includes interest, costs, charges and other amount
payable in relation thereto;

() “recovery officer” means an officer apppinted under section 36D.

36D. (7) The Central Government may, in consultation with the National Hous-
ing Bank, by notification appoint such persons being the officers of the approved
institution, as it may deem fit, to be recovery officers for the purpose of this Chapter
who shall have such qualifications as the Central Government may by rules made
under this Act specify.

(2) The local limits within which the recovery officer shall exercise the powers
conferred and perform the duties imposed on by or under this Chapter shall be such as
may be specified by the Central Government by notification.

36E. (1) Where any borrower, who is under a liability to an approved institution
under an agreement, makes any default in repayment of any assistance or any instal-
ment thereof or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of said agreement, then,
without prejudice to the provisions of section 69 of the Transfer of Property Act,
1882, the approved institution may apply, to the recovery officer within the limits of
whose jurisdiction the borrower actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on busi-
ness, or personally works for gain, or the cause of action wholly or in part arises, for
the sale of the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the approved
institution as security for the dues.

(2) Where an approved institution, which has to recover its dues from any bor-
rower, has filed an application to the recovery officer under sub-section (1) and the
same property is also pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to another

Insertion of
new Chapter
vA.

Definitions.

Appointment
of. recovery
officer.

Application to
the recovery
officer.


Procedure in
respect of
application
under section
365.

of order of

officer

4

approved institution or person, the other approved institution or person may join the
approved institution at any stage of the proceedings, before the final order is passed,
by making an application to that recovery officer.

(3) In the application under sub-section (7) or sub-section (2) the nature and
extent of the liability of the borrower to the approved institution or person, the grounds
on which it is made shall be stated and it be in such form and be accompanied by such
documents or other evidence as may be prescribed.

36F. (1) On receipt of an application under section 36E, if the revovery officer
is of opinion that the borrower is under a liability to an approved institution under an
agreement, or has made default in repayment of the assistance or any instalment thereof
or has otherwise failed to comply wjth the terms of said agreement, he shall cause a
written notice of demand in such form as may be prescribed to be served on the bor-
rower, calling upon him to pay the amount specified in the notice within a period of
ninety days from the date of service thereof or to show cause as to why the relief
prayed for should not be granted.

(2) The recovery officer may after giving the applicant and the borrower an
opportunity of being heard, pass such interim or final order, including the order for
payment of interest from the date on or before which payment of the amount is found
due up to the date of realisation or actual payment, on the application as it thinks fit to
meet the ends of justice.

(3) The recovery officer may also consider and if satisfied, allow any claim of
set-off or counter-claim set up by the borrower against the approved institution or
person.

(4) The recovery officer shall supply a copy of every order passed by it to the
approved institution and the borrower.

(5) The recovery officer may make an interim order (whether by way of injunc-
tion or stay or attachment) against the borrower to debar him from transferring, alien-
ating or otherwise dealing with or disposing of, any property which is pledged, mort-
gaged, hypothecated or assigned to the approved institution as security for the dues.

(6) The application made to the recovery officer under section 36E shall be
dealt with by him as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by him to
dispose of the application finally within six months from the date of receipt of the
application.

36G. (1) Where the borrower refuses or fails to comply with the order within
the time specified therein the recovery officer may, take possession of any property
pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the approved institution as security
for any assistance in respect of which default has been made and transfer by way of
sale, lease or otherwise such property:.

(2) Any transfer by way of sale, lease or otherwise under this section shall be
conducted in such manner as may be prescribed.

(3) Any transfer of property made by the recovery officer, in exercise of its
powers under sub-section (1), shall vest in the transferee all rights in or to the property
transferred, as if the transfer has been made by the owner of the property.

(4) Where any action has been taken against the borrower under the provisions
of sub-section (7), all costs, charges, expenses which in the opinion of the recovery
officer have been properly incurred by him as incidental thereto, shall be recoverable
from the borrower and the money which is received by it shall, in the absence of any
contract to the-contrary, be held by it in trust to be applied firstly, in payment of such
costs, charges and expenses and secondly, in discharge of debt, due to the approved
institution, and the residue of the money so received shall be paid to the person enti-
tled thereto.


15

(5) If the dues of the approved institution, together with all costs, charges and
expenses incurred by the recovery officer, are tendered to the approved institution or
to the recovery officer at any time before the date fixed for sale or transfer, the pro-
perty shall not be sold or transferred, and no further steps shall be taken for transfer or
sale of that property.

36H. (1) Where any property is sold or leased in pursuance of any power con-
ferred by section 36E, the recovery officer may, for the purpose of taking into custody
or under control any such property, request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magis-
trate or the District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction any such property or other
documents relating thereto may be situated or found to take possession thereof, and
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or as the case may be, the District Magistrate shall,
on such request being made to him,—

@ take possession of such property and documents relating thereto; and
(b) forward them to the recovery officer.

(2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of sub-section
(J), the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate may take or cause to
be taken such steps and use, or cause to be used, such force, as may, in his opinion, be
necessary.

(3) No act of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate done
in pursuance of this section shall be called in question in any court or before any
authority.

36-1. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish one or more
Appellate Tribunals, to be known as the Housing Finance Institutions Debt Recovery
Appellate Tribunals, to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on
such Tribunal by or under this Act.

(2) The Central Government shall also specify in the notification referred to in
sub-section (/), the areas in relation to which the Appellate Tribunal may exercise
jurisdiction.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (7) and (2), the Central
Government may authorise the Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal to discharge
also the functions of the Presiding Officer of other Appellate Tribunal.

36J. An Appellate Tribunal shall consist of one person only (hereinafter re-
ferred to as the Presiding Officer of the Appellate Tribunal) to be appointed, by noti-
fication, by the Central Government.

36K. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Presiding Officer
of an Appellate Tribunal, unless he—

(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be a District Judge;
(b) has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in
Grade II of that Service for at least three years.

36L. The Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal shall hold office for aterm
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age
of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.

36M. (7) The Central Government shall provide the Appellate Tribunal with
such officers and other employees as that Government may think fit.”

(2) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge
their functions under the general superintendence of the Presiding Officer.

Chief Metro-
politan Magis-
trate and
District Magis-
trate to assist
recovery officer
in taking charge
of property.

Establishment
of Appellate
Tribunal.

Composition
of Appellate
Tribunal.

Qualifications
for appoint-
ment as Pre-
siding Officer
of Appellate
Tribunal.

‘Term of Office.

Staff of

Appellate
Tribunal.


Salaries and
allowances
and other
terms and
conditions of
service of
Officers.
Filling up of
‘vacancies.

Resignation
and removal.

Orders consti-
tuting Appel-
Jate Tribunal to
be final and not
to invalidate its
proceedings.
Jurisdiction,
powers and
authority of
Appellate
Tribunal.

Appeal to the

Appellate
Tribunal.

16

(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the offic-
ers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as the Central
Government may by rules made under this Act specify.

36N. The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and condi-
tions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the
Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal shall be such as the Central Govern-
ment may by rules made under this Act specify:

Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and condi-
tions of a Presiding Officer shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.

360. If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in
the office of the Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal, then the Central Govern-
ment shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill
the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Appellate Tribunal
from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.

36P. (1) The Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal may, by notice in writ-
ing under his hand addressed to the Centrtal Government, resign his office:

Provided that the said Presiding Officer shall, unless he is permitted by the
Central Government, to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the
expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly
appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of
office, whichever is earliest.

(2) The Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed from
his office except by an order made by the Central Government on the ground of proved
misbehaviour or incapacity after enquiry made by a Judge of a High Court in which
the Presiding Officer concerned has been informed of the charges against him and
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the charges.

(3) The Central Government may, by rules made under this Act, regulate the
procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the aforesaid Presid-
ing Officer.

36Q. No order of the Central Government appointing any person as the Presid-
ing Officer of an Appellate Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner, and no
act or proceeding before an Appellate Tribunal shall be called in question in any
manner on the ground merely of any defect in the establishment of an Appellate Tribu-
nal.

36R. An Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and author-
ity to entertain appeals against any order made or deemed to have been made by the
recovery officer under this Act.

36S. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made or deemed to have been made
by the recovery officer under this Chapter, may prefer an appeal to an Appellate Tri-
bunal having jurisdiction in the matter.

(2) Bvery appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty-
five days from the date on which a copy of the order made or deemed to have been
made by the recovery officer is received by him and it shall be in such form and be
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:

Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of
the said period of forty- five days if itis satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing it within that period.


5 of 1908.

45 of 1860.

2 of 1974.

36 of 1963.

45 of 1860.

17

(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal may,
after giving the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders
thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.

(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the
parties to the appeal and to the concerned recovery officer.

(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-seciton (/) shall
be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to
dispose of the appeal finally within six months from the date of the receipt of the
appeal.

36T. Where an appeal is preferred by a borrower, such appeal shall not be enter-
tained by the Appellate Tribunal unless such person has deposited with the Appellate
Tribunal seventy-five per cent. of the amount due from him as determined by the
recovery officer:

Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, for the reasons to be recorded in
writing, waive or reduce the amount to be deposited under this section.

36U. (1) The recovery officer and the Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by
the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by
the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of
any regulations, the recovery officer and the Appellate Tribunal shall have powers to
regulate their own procedure including the places at which they shall have their sittings.

(2) The recovery officer and the Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes
of discharging their functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a Civil
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the
following matters, namely:—

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examin-
ing him on oath;

(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;

(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;

(0 dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte;

(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or
any order passed by it ex parte; and

(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.

(3) Any proceeding before the recovery officer or the Appellate Tribunal shall
be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228,
and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code, and the recovery officer
or the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

36V. The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 shall, as far as may be, apply to
an applicaiton made to recovery officer.

36W. The Presiding Officer, other officers and employees of an Appellate
Tribunal and the recovery officer shall be deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

Deposit of
amount due, जा
filing appeal.

Procedure and
powers of
recovery
officer and
Appellate
Tribunal.

Limitation.

Presiding Offi-
cer, recovery
officer, other
officers and
employees to
be public
servant,


Protection of
action taken in
good faith

Bar of
junsdiction:

Transitional
Provisions

Amendment of
section 40

Insertion of
new sectron
BA

Delegation of
powers

Insertion of
new section
454

Arrangement
with National
Housing Bank
on appoint-
ment of
directors to
prevail

Insertion of

18

36X. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
Central Government or against the Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal or against
the recovery officer for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of the provisions of this Act or any rule or regulation or order made there-
under,

36Y. No Court or other authority shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any juris-
diction, powers or authority (except the Supreme Court, and a High Court exercising
Jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) in relation to the matters
specified in this Chapter.

36Z. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, till the establishment of
the Appellate Tribunal under section 36-I for any area, the Appellate Tribunal estab-
lished under section 8 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institu-
tions Act, 1993 and which is functioning in that area shall exercise the jurisdiction,
powers and authority conferred on the Appellate Tribunal under this Act.'.

21. In section 40 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words ""three months",

the words ""four months", shall be substituted.

22. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

namely:—

“43A. The Board may, by general or special order delegate to an officer or
officers of the National Housing Bank, subject to such conditions and limitations, 'if
any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it
may deem necessary.".

23. After section 45 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

namely:—

"45A. (1) Where any arrangement entered into by the National Housing Bank
with a housing finance institution which is a company provides for the appointment by
the National Housing Bank of one or more directors of such housing finance institu-
tion, such provision and any appointment of directors made in pursuance thereof shall
be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Com-
panies Act, 1956 or in any other law for the time being in force or in the memorandum,
articles of association or any other instrument relating to that housing finance institu-
ton, or any provision regarding share qualificaiton, age limit, number of director-
ships, removal from office of directors and such like conditions contained in any such
Jaw or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by the National
Housing Bank in pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid.

(2) any director appointed as aforesaid shall—

(a) hold office during the pleasure of the National Housing Bank and
may be removed or substituted by any person by order in writing of the National
Housing Bank;

(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reasons only of his being a
director or for anything done or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge
of his duties as a director or anything in relation thereto;

(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into ac-
‘count for computing the number of directors liable to such retirement "५

24, After section 47 of the prineipal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

new section pamely:—

472.

51 of 1993.

1 of 1956.


19

"47A, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time Nomination in
being in force, where a nomination in respect of any deposit, bonds or other securities ‘Tespect of
is made with the National Housing Bank in the prescribed manner, the amount due on (दाम bonds
such deposits, bonds or securities shall, on the death of the depositor or holder thereof, है
vest in, and be payable to, the nominee subject to any right, title or interest of any
other person to such deposits, bonds or securities.

(2) Any payment made by the National Housing Bank in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (7) shall be a full discharge of its liability in respect of such
deposits, bonds or securities.”.

25. In section 49 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 49,
(a) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— "

"(2A) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub-section (7) of sec-
tion 29A, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than one year but whigh may extend to five years and with fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.

(2B) If any auditor fails to comply with any direction given or order made
by the National Housing Bank under section 33, he shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees.

(2C) Whoever fails to comply with any order made by the authorised
officer under sub-section (2) of section 36A, shall be punishable with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable toa fine
of not less than rupees fifty for every day during which such non-compliance
continues;

(0) in sub-section (3),—

(i after the words "If any person", the words "other than an auditor" shall
be inserted;

(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(aa) fails to comply with any direction given or order made by the
National Housing Bank under any of the provisions of Chapter V; or”.

26. For section 52 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, Substitution of

namely:— new sections
ly for section 52.
"52. A court imposing fine under the Act may direct that the fine, if realised Aplication of

shall be applied— fine.

(a) firstly in, of towards payment of, the cost of the proceedings, and

(b) secondly for repayment of the deposit to the person to whom repay-
ment of the deposit was to be made, and on such payment, the liability of the
housing finance institution to make repayment of the deposit shall, to the extent
of the amount paid by the Court, stand discharged.

52A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 49, ifthe contravention Power of
or default of the nature referred to in section 49 is committed by a housing finance National
institution which is a company, the National Housing Bank may impose on such insti- Housing Bank

tuti to impose fine.
jon—
(a) a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees; or

(b) where the contravention or default is under sub-section (2A) or clause
(a) or clause (aa) of sub-section (3) of section 49, a penalty not exceeding five
lakh rupees or twice the amount involved in such contravention or default, where


Insertion of
new section
544.

Power to make

Amendment of
section 55.

20

the amount is quantifiable, whichever is more; and where such contravention or
default is a continuning one, further penalty which may extend to twenty-five
thousand rupees for every day, after the first, during which the contravention or
default continues,

(2) For the purpose of imposing penalty under sub-section (/), the National
Housing Bank shall serve a notice on the housing finance institution requiring it to
show cause why the amount specified in the notice should not be imposed as a penalty
and a reasonable opportunity of being heard shall also be given to such housing fi-
nance institution. .

(3) Any penalty imposed by the National Housing Bank under this section shall
be payable within a period of thirty days from the date on which notice issued by the
National Housing Bank demanding payment of the sum is served on the housing fi-
nance institution and, in the event of failure of the housing finance institution to pay
the sum within such period, may be levied on a direction made by the principal civil
court having jurisdiction in the area where the registered office or the head office of
the housing finance institution is situated:

Provided that no such direction shall be made, except on an application made by
an officer of the National Housing Bank authorised in this behalf, to the principal civil
court.

(4) The court which makes a direction under sub-section (3), shall issue a cer-
tificate specifying the sum payable by the housing finance institution and every such
certificate shall be enforceable in the same manner as if it were a decree made by the
court in a civil suit.

(5) No complaint shall be filed against any housing finance institution in any
court of law pertaining to any contravention or default in respect of which any penalty
has been imposed by the National Housing Bank under this section.

(6) Where any complaint has been filed against a housing finance institution in
acourt in respect of contravention or default of the nature referred to in section 49, no
proceedings for imposition of penalty against the housing finance institution shall be
taken under this section.”.

27. After section 54 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

namely:-—

"54A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) qualifications for appointment as a recovery officer under sub-section
(J) of section 36D; .
(b) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of the officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section
(3) of section 36M;

(2) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of the Presiding Officers of the Appellate Tribunal under section 36N; and

(@ the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of
the Presiding Officers of the Appellate Tribunals under sub-section (3) of sec-
tion 36P.".

28. In section 55 of the principal Act,—
(A) in sub-section (2),—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be mserted, namely:—

"(aqa) the manner in which directors shall be elected under clause
(ca) of sub-section (7) of section 6;";


21

(ii) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: —

"(fa) the form of application to be made under section 36E and the
documents to be annexed to such application;

(fb) the form in which notice of demand is required to be served on
the borrower under sub-section (/) of section 36F;

(fc) the manner in which the property shall be transferred under
sub- section (2) of section 36G;

(fd). the form in which the appeal can be filed with the Appellate
Tribunal under section 36S and the amount of fee required to be depos-
ited with such appeal;"; .

(iii) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

"(Qa) the manner in which nomination may be made under sub-
section (1) of section 47A.";

(B) in sub-section (5), for the words "regulation or scheme", wherever they occur,
the words “rules, regulation or scheme" shall be substituted.

29. After the Second Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be
added at the end, namely:—
"THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 16A)

DECLARATION REFERRED TO IN SECTION 16A OF THE NATIONAL HousiNG BANk Act, 1987

Place

Date:

Vwe hereby declare that in consideration
of the assistance sanctioned by the National Housing Bank to me/us at my/our request, as
specified in the Annexure hereto, I/we agree that the immovable property specified in the
said Annexure shall constitute security for the said assistance and I/we further agree that the
dues relating to the assistance mentioned above, shall, on and from the date of these presents,
be a charge on the said immovable property.

1. Signed and delivered by

(Borrower)
2. Signed and delivered by

(Surety)

ANNEXURE,

I. Details of assistance.
Il. Particulars of immovable property.”

Addition of
new Schedule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The National Housing Bank was established in July, 1988 under the National Housing
Bank Act, 1987 to operate as a principal agency to promote housing finance institutions
both at local and regional levels and to provide financial and other support to such institutions
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. To meet the objectives aforesaid,
the National housing Bank was also conferred powers to regulate the deposit acceptance
activities of the housing finance institutions similar to those available to Reserve Bank of
India in respect of non-banking financial companies. The powers of the Reserve Bank of
India to control the activities of non-banking financial companies were further strengthened
by the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1997. The housing finance companies
which are sub-set of non-banking financial companies were exempted from the provisions
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, as amended in 1997, for the reason that such companies
fall under the regulatory frame work of the National Housing Bank. Thus there arose the
necessity to confer powers on the National Housing Bank similar to those available to the
Reserve Bank of India after the above amendment. These proposed provisions will enable
the National Housing Bank to safeguard the interest of depositors and promote healthy and
universal growth of housing finance companies in the country.

2. Housing loans are generally of long term duration and consequently the funds of
housing finance institutions get locked up in mortgages. There is a need to augment their
capacity to provide more finance by adopting asset securitisation and development of a
secondary mortgage market in the country. The National Housing Bank, being the principal
agency in the field of housing finance, is being entrusted with the responsibility to develop
such market in housing mortgages in the country.

3. There has been a long standing demand from the housing finance institutions for
a speedier method of recovery of dues from the defaulting borrowers. It is proposed to
provide for a simple, speedy and cost effective method of recovery of overdues by the
housing finance institutions by providing for the sale of property charged as security for the
assistance granted by such institutions through recovery officers. A provision is also being
made for establishment of Appellate Tribunal to hear appeal against the decision of recovery
officer.

4. With the introduction of economic reforms, it has been considered necessary to
enlarge the capital and shareholders’ base of the National Housing Bank. Consequently, it
is proposed to provide for enhancement of the authorised capital of the National Housing
Bank to rupees three hundred fifty crores with an enabling provision for further increase up
to rupees two thousand crores. It is also proposed that the National Housing Bank may
offer its shareholding to institutions, besides the Reserve Bank of India, in such manner
that the Reserve Bank of India, the Central Government, public sector banks, public financial
institutions or other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government, shall in
aggregate at any time hold not less that fifty-one per cent. of the issued capital of the
National Housing Bank. It is also proposed to provide for restructuring of the Board of
Director of the National Housing Bank.

5. In the light of the experience gained in the operations of the National Housing
Bank since its establishment, it is felt necessary to bring certain amendments to the said Act
for the smooth working of the National Housing Bank and to authorise it to undertake
certain additional business of financing of agricultural and rural development banks, making
of loans and advances for residential township-cum-housing development projects,
undertaking securitisation of loans, setting up of mutual fund and undertaking or participating
in housing mortgage insurance business.

6. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object.

New Dewi; YASHWANT SINHA.

The 10th March, 2000.
22


Notes on clauses

Clause 2 seeks to amend the definition of the “housing finance institution” so as to
bring more such institutions within the ambit of the housing finance institutions.

Clause 3 seeks to substitute section 4 of the principal Act with a view to provide for
enhancement of the authorised capital of the National housing Bank and to enlarge the
shareholders base.

Clause 4 provides for amendment of section 5 of the principal Act so as to specify
the powers of the Chairman when he is appointed as a whole time director.

Clause 5 seeks to amend section 6 of the principal Act with a view to provide for
election of two directors from the shareholders and restructuring of the Board of Directors.

Clause 7 provides for amer.dment of section 14 of the principal Act so as to enable
the National Housing Bank to undertake certain additional business by way of financing
the agricultural and rural development banks, make loans and advances for projects of
residential township, to undertake securitisation of housing loans, to set-up mutual funds
and to undertake or participate in the housing mortgage insurance business.

Clause 8 seeks to amend section 15 of the principal Act with a view to provide
flexibility in the matters of borrowing and acceptance of deposits by the National Housing
Bank.

Clause 9 seeks to insert new sections 16A and 16B which provides for creation of
charge by an institution or a person borrowing from the National Housing Bank by executing
a written declaration and hold amounts and securities in trust in certain cases.

Clause 10 seeks to amend section 18 of the principal Act with a view to empower the
National Housing Bank to acquire rights in relation to all the Institutions involved in housing
finance.

Clause 11 seeks to insert new sections 18A and 18B which Jays down that the
instruments issued by the National Housing Bank in a transaction of securitisation to the
investors and subsequent transfers by such investors shall not require compulsory registration
and the amounts due shall be recoverable as the arrears of land revenue.

Clasue 12 seeks to amend sections 19 to 25 of the principal Act with a view to
empower the National Housing Bank to have certain rights not only in relation to housing
finance institutions but also in relation to all institutions involved in housing finance.

Clause 13 seeks to insert new sections 29A, 29B and 29C with a view to provide for
registration of housing finance company with the National Housing Bank for commencement
or carrying on of such business by that company, to provide for requirement of investment
of certain percentage of assets by a housing finance institution in unencumbered approved
securities and in term deposits to afford protection to the depositors, and to provide for
creation of reserve fund by a housing finance institution out of its net profits.

Clause 14 seeks to insert new section 30A with a view to confer on the National
Housing Bank the power to determine the policy arid issue directions to housing finance
institutions.

Clause 15 seeks to amend section 31 of the principal Act with a view to enable the
National Housing Bank to give directions requiring housing finance institutions to have
credit ratings for accepting deposits.

Clause 16 seeks to amend section 33 of the principal Act with a view to empower the
National Housing Bank to issue directions in public interest to housing finance institutions
or to their auditors to order special audit of the housing finance institutions.

Clause 17 seeks to insert new sections 33A and 33B with a view to empowre the
Nationa#Housing Bank to prohibit acceptance of deposit and alienation of assets by housing

23


24

finance institutions and to file winding up petition against housing finance institution under
certain circumstances.

Clause 18 seeks to insert new sections 35A and 35B with a view to provide for
disclosure of information obtained by the National Housing Bank from a housing finance
institution and to empower the National Housing Bank to exempt any housing finance
institution.

Clause 19 seeks to insert new sections 36A and 36B with a view to empower an
officer of the National Housing Bank to order repayment of deposits by a housing finance
institution and to provide for the facility of nomination to depositors of a housing finance
institution.

Clause 20 seeks to provide for insertion of a new Chapter VA in the principal Act so
as to provide for appointment of recovery officer, establishment of Appellate Tribunal,
appointment of officers and other employees and to provide for a mechanism for the recovery
of dues of housing finance institution from the defaulters.

Clause 21 seeks to amend section 40 of the principal Act to enhance the period of
submission of annual accounts to the Central Government.

Clause 22 seeks to insert new section 43A so as to provide for delegation of powers
by the Board of the National Housing Bank to the officers of the Bank.

Clause 23 seeks to insert new section 45A with a view to provide that the arrangement
entered into by the housing finance institutions with the National Housing Bank for
appointment of directors shall prevail and such appointment shall be valid and effective.

Clause 24 seeks to insert new section 47A which provide for the facility of nomination
to the depositors, holders of bonds or other securities of the National Housing Bank.

Clause 25 seeks to amend section 49 of the principal Act with a view to enhance the
penalties for contravention of the provisions of the Act.

Clause 26 seeks to substitute section 52 with a view to provide for the application of
fine imposed under the Act and insert new section 52A which empower the National Housing
Bank for imposing fine on contravention or default by housing finance institution.

Clause 27 seeks to insert new section 54A which empower the Central Government
to make rules under the Act.

Clause 28 seeks to amend section 55 of the principal Act so as to empower the Board
to make regulations.

Clause 29 seeks to add a new Schedule to the principal Act which prescribe the form
of declaration regarding creation of charge.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 20 of the Bill proposes to insert a new section 36-M which lays down that the
Central Government may provide the Appellate Tribunal with such officers and other
employees as that Government may think fit. Sub-section (3) of said section provides that
the officers and other employces of the Appellate Tribunals shall be paid such salaries and
allowances as may be specified by the Central Government.

2. Said clause also proposes to insert a new section 36-N which provides that the
Presiding Officers of the Appellate Tribunal shall be paid such salaries and allowances as
may be specified by the Central Government.

3. It is estimated that on account of the salary and allowances of the Presiding Officer,
officers and other employees of an Appellate Tribunal and other miscellaneous expenses
there will be per annum a recurring expenditure of rupees forty lakh and non-recurring
expenditure of rupees forty-five lakh from the Consolidated Fund of India.

4. The Bill does not involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section for section 4 of the principal Act.
The proposed new section fix the limit of the authorised and paid up capital of the National
Housing Bank to rupees three hundred and fifty crores, But the Central Government have
been empowered to increase the authorised capital of the National Housing Bank by
notification up to rupees two thousand crores.

Caluse 7 seeks to amend section 14 of the principal Act thereby empowering the
Central Government to specify by notification other institutions to whom the National Housing
Bank may make loans and advances.

Caluse 13 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 29A which provide for compulsory
registration of housing finance companies having net owned fund of rupees twenty-five
lakh. The National Housing Bank is being empowered to increase from time to time by
notification this limit of net owned fund for registration purposes.

A new section 29B is also proposed to be inserted by the said clause. The provisions
of this section require a housing finance company to maintain certain percentage of its assets
in unencumbered securities and specified term deposits, The National Housing Bank is being
empowered to increase by notification the limit of such investment.

Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 35B which empowers the National
Housing Bank to exempt by notification any housing finance institution from the provisions
of Chapter V of the principal Act.

Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter VA which provides for simple
machanism for the recovery of dues. Clause (b) of proposed new section 36C defines ‘approved
institutions' and also empowers the Central Government to specify by notification other
institutions as approved institutions.

Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 54A which empowers the Central
Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of the principal Act. These rules may
provide for qualifications for appointment of recovery officers under sub-section (1) of
section 36D, the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the
officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section
36M, the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Presiding
Officers of the Appellate Tribunals under section 36N and the procedure for investigation of
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Presiding Officers of the Appellate Tribunals under sub-
section (3) of section 36P.

Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to amend section 55 of the principal Act so as to empower
the Board to make regulations which inter alia may provide for the manner of election of
directors under clause (ca) of sub-section (1) of section 6, the form of application to be made
to the recovery officer under section 36E and the documents to be annexed with such
application, the form of notice of demand under sub-section (1) of section 36F, the manner
of transfer of property under sub-section (2) of section 36G, the form of appeal to be filed
under section 36S and the amount of fees to be deposited at the time of making appeal and
the manner of making nomination under sub-section (1) of section 47A.

These matters of detail are essential for effective administration of the provisions of
the Bill. It is difficult to provide for all the situations in the Bill itself and the delegation of
these legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.


ANNEXURE,
EXTRACTS FROM THE NATIONAL Housine BANK Act, 1987
(53 oF 1987)

* * * * * *

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * * *
(व) “housing finance institution” includes every institution, whether incorporated or
not, which primarily transacts or has as its principal object, the transacting of the business
of providing finance for housing, whether directly or indirectly;
* * * * * *
4, The authorised and paid up capital of the National Housing Bank shall be one
hundred crores of rupees and shall be subscribed by the Reserve Bank:
Provided that the Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank
by notification, increase the said capital up to five hundred crores of rupees and the capital
so increased shall also be subscribed by the Reserve Bank.

CHAPTER III
‘MANAGEMENT OF THE NATIONAL Housina BANK
5. (7) * * * * *

(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) and save as otherwise provided in the
regulations made under this Act,—
(a) the Chairman, if he is holding offices both as the Chairman and the Managing
Director, or
(6) the Managing Director, if the Chairman is absent,
shall also have powers of general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs
and business of the National Housing Bank and may also exercise all powers and do all acts
and things which may be exercised or done by the National Housing Bank and shall act on
business principles with due regard to public interest.
* * * * *

6. (7) The Board of Directors of the National Housing Bank shall consist of the
following, namely:—
* * * * *

(6) three directors from amongst the experts in the field of housing, architecture,
engineering, sociology, finance, law, management and corporate planning or in any
other field, special knowledge of which is considered useful to the National Housing
Bank;

(c) three directors, who shall be persons with experience in the working of
institutions involved in providing funds for housing or engaged in housing
development;

* * * * *

(2) The Chairman, the Managing Director and other directors excluding the directors
referred to in clause (d), shall be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with
the Reserve Bank and directors referred to in clause (६) shall be nominated by the Reserve
Bank.

7 (72) * * * * *

27

Definitions.

Capital.

‘Term of Office
of Chairman,
Managing
Director and
other directors,

service
conditions, etc.


Business of
the National

Housing Bank.

Borrowings
and accept-
ance of

deposits by

National

Housing Bank.

Power to
acquire rights.

Power to
‘impose
conditions for
accommoda-
tion.

28

(2) The directors referred to in clauses (७) and(c) of sub-section (1) of section 6 shall
hold office for a term of three years:

Provided that any such director shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term,
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
* * * * *

CHAPTER IV
BusINEss oF THE NATIONAL HousiNG BANK

14, Subject to the provisions of this Act, the National Housing Bank may transact all
or any of the fotlowing kinds of business, namely:——

* * * * *

(b) making of loans and advances or rendering any other form of financial assistance
whatsoever to housing finance institutions and scheduled banks or to any authority
established by or under any Central, State or Provincial Act and engaged in slum clearance;

* * * * *

(f) forming, promoting and managing subsidiaries for carrying out all-or any of its
functions under this Act;

* * * * *

15. (1) The National Housing Bank may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions
under this Act—

* * * * *

(b) borrow money from the Central Government and from any other authority or
organisation or institution approved by that Government on such terms and conditions as
may be agreed upon; .

(c) accept deposits repayable after the expiry of a period which shall not be less than
.elve months from the date of the making of the deposit on such terms as may generally or
specially be approved by the Reserve Bank:

Providing that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to deposits accepted
under the scheme formulated by the Bank in pursuance of clause (hh) of section 14;

(d) borrow money from the Reserve Bank-—

(i) repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding eighteen
months from the date of the making of loan or advance, on such terms and conditions
including the terms relating to security and purpose as may be specified by the Reserve
Bank;

* * * * *

18. The National Housing Bank shall have the right to acquire, by transfer or
assignment, the rights and interests of any housing finance institution (including any other
rights incidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advance made, or any amount recoverable
by such institution, either in whole or in part, by the execution or issue of any instrument or
by the transfer of any instrument or in any other manner in which the rights and interets in
relation to such loan or advance may be lawfully transferred.

19. In entering into any transaction under this Chapter with any borrowing housing
finance institution, the National Housing Bank may impose such conditions as it may think
necessary or expedient for protecting the interests of the National Housing Bank.


29

20. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any agreement, the National
Housing Bank may, by notice in writing, require any borrowing housing finance institution
to discharge forthwith in full its liabilities to the National Housing Bank—

(a) if it appears to the Board that false or misleading information in any material
particular was given in the application for the loan or advance; or

(b) if the borrowing housing finance institution has failed to comply with any
of the terms of the agreement with the National Housing Bank in the matter of the
loan or advance; or

(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the borrowing housing finance
institution is unable to pay its debts or that proceedings for liquidation may be
commenced in respect thereof; or

(d) if for any reason, it is necessary so to do to protect the interests of the
National Housing Bank.

21. (1) The National Houssing Bank shall have free access to all such records 9 any
housing finance institution which seeks to avail of any credit facilities from the national
Housing Bank and to all such records of any person who seeks to avail of any credit facilities
from such housing finance institution the perusal of which may appear to the Nattonal
Housing Bank to be necessary in connection with the providing of finance or other assistance
to such housing finance institution or the refinancing of any loan or advance made to such
person by that housing finance instituton.

(2) The National Housing Bank may require any institution or person referred to in
sub-section (7), to furnish to it copies of any of the records referred to in that sub-section
and the institution or the person, as the case may be, shall be bound to comply with such
requisition.

22, Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the validity of any loan or advance made by the National Housing Bank in
pursuance of the provisions of this Act shall not be called in question merely on the ground
of non-compliance with the requirements of such other law or of any resolution, contract,
or any instrument regulating the constitution of the borrowing housing finance institution:

Provided that nothing in this section shall enable any company or co-operative society
to obtain any loan or advance where the instrument relating to the constitution of such
company or co-operative society does not empower such company or co-operative society
so to do.

23. The National Housing Bank shall not make any loan or advance on the security of
its own bonds or debentures.

24. (1) The National Housing Bank may at any time and shall, on being directed so to
do by the Reserve Bank, cause an inspection to be made by one or more of its officers of
any housing finance institution to which the National Housing Bank has made any loan or
advance or granted any other financial assistance, and its books, accounts and other
documenis; and the National Housing Bank shall supply to the housing finance institution
a copy of its report on such inspection.

(2) It shall be the duty of every officer, employee or other person or persons incharge
of the whole ot part of the affairs of the housing finance institution to produce to any officer
making an inspection under sub-section (/), all such books, accounts and other documents
in his custody or power and to furnish within such time as the said officer may specify, any
statements, information relating to the affairs of the housing finance institution as the said
officer may require of him.

Power to call

for repayment
before agreed
period.

National
Housing Bank
to have access
to records.

Validity of
Loan or

advance not to
be questioned.

‘National Hous-
ing Bank not to
make to loans
or advances
against its own
bonds or de-
bentures.
Power to
inspect.


Power to
collect credit
information.

Power of Na-
tional Housing
Bank to collect
information
from Housing
finance institu-
tions as to de-
posits and to
give directions.

Audit.

Penalties.

30

25. (1) The National Housing Bank may, for the purpose of the efficient discharge of
its functions under this Act, at any time direct any housing finance institution to submit to
it credit information in such form and within such time as may be specified by the National
Housing Bank from time to time.

(2) Every housing finance institution shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any law for the time being in force or in any instrument regulating the
constitution thereof or in any agreement executed by it, relating to the secrecy of its dealings
with its constituents, be bound to comply with any directions issued under sub-section (1).

(3) The National Housing Bank may, for the purpose of the efficient discharge of its
functions under this Act collect from the Central and State Governments, local authorities,

the Reserve Bank, any bank or such financial or other institutions as the Reserve Bank may
specify in this behalf, credit information or other information,

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and section 26, credit information
means any information relating to—

(i) the amount of loans and advances and other credit facilities granted for the
purpose of housing;

(ii) the nature of security taken*for such loans, advances or other credit facilities;

(iii) the guarantees furnished; and

(iv)-any other information which has a bearing on the creditworthiness of the
borrower.

* * * * *
31. (1) * * * *

(3) The National Housing Bank may, if it considers necessary in the public interest so
to do, give directions to housing finance institutions accepting deposits either generally or
to any group of housing finance institutions accepting deposits, and in particular, in respect
of any matters relating to, or connected with, the receipt of deposits, including the rates of
interest payable on such deposits, and the periods for which deposits may be received.

* * * * *

40. (1) * * * * *

(5) The National Housing Bank shall furnish to the Central Government and the
Reserve Bank within three months from the date on which the annual accounts of the National
Housing Bank are closed and balanced, a copy of its balarice sheet as on the close of the
relevant year together with a copy of the profit and loss account for the year and a copy of
the auditors’ report and a report of the working of the National Housing Bank during that
year, and the Central Government shall, as soon as may be after they are received by it,
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.

* * * * *
49. (1) * * * *

(3) If any person—

(a) receives any deposit in contravention of any direction given or order made
under Chapter V; or .

(0) issues any prospectus or advertisement otherwise than in accordance with
section 35 or any order made under section 30, as the case may be;


31

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and
shall also be liable to fine which may extend,—

(i) in the case of a contravention falling under clause (a), to twice the amount
of deposit received; and

(ii) in the case of a contravention falling under clause (b), to twice the amount
of the deposit called for by the prospectus or advertisement.

* * * * *

52, A court imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the whole or any part
thereof shall be applied in, or towards payment of, the cost of the proceedings.

* * * * *

55. (1) * * * *

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

* * * * * *

(5) The Central Government shall cause every regulation or scheme made under this
Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the regulation or scheme or both Houses agree that the regulation or
scheme should not be made, the regulation or scheme shall there-after have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that regulation or scheme.

* * * * *

Application of
fine.

Power of the
Board to make
regulations.