1
AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
ON 14TH MARCH, 2006
THE COMPULSORY  REGISTRATION OF  MARRIAGES  BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory registration of all marriages solemnized in the country so
as to prevent child marriages, check bigamy or polygamy, help women to exercise
their rights of maintenance from husband and custody of children, enable widows
to claim inheritance and to serve as deterrent to husband deserting their
wives and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government.
Short title,
extend and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXI  of 2006
Definitions.
5

2
(b) “designated authority” means an authority or an officer designated for the
purpose of registration of marriages under section 4.
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
or in any custom or usage to the contrary, all the marriages solemnized in the country after
the commencement of this Act shall be registered within sixty days of solemnization of
marriage in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of each husband to get his marriage registered with the
designated authority.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette
designate an authority or an officer for registration of marriages, where no such authority
or officer exists, in each district within its jurisdiction.
(2) The designated authority shall maintain a register of marriage containing such
particulars and details as may be prescribed and shall also keep the same in electronic
form.
(3) The appropriate Government shall prescribe the documents relating to
solemnization of marriage, which shall be furnished for the registration of the marriage.
(4) After the registration of the marriage under the provisions of this Act, a marriage
certificate shall be issued to the couple giving such details as may be prescribed.
5.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any custom, the marriage performed after the commencement of this Act shall be null and
void if not registered within sixty days of solemnization of marriage.
6.  If a person fails to register his marriage within the prescribed period or gives false
information in registering his marriage, he shall be liable for fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees:
Provided that such a person shall also not be entitled to any benefits under the
various schemes of appropriate Governments or their undertakings.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made in this behalf, provide
such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being applicable to marriages.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Compulsory
registration
of marriage.
Establishment
of designate
authority.
Marriage
without
registration to
be null and
void.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
money.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our country, marriage is treated as an institution. Our culture assigns great value to
the solemnization of marriage between two individuals. But, of late, there are numerous
instances of abuse of the institution of marriage. It has been seen that many times unscrupulous
husbands altogether deny marriage leaving their wives in lurch, be it for seeking maintenance,
custody of children or inheritance of property. Then, there are States where child marriages
are rampant without any check. Every year, lakhs of marriages are performed in our country
mostly in traditional way. Most of these marriages have no official record, as hardly a few of
these marriages are registered. Recently, the Supreme Court, moved by the plight of women
fighting for their right under wedlock, ruled that all marriages should be registered in order to
prevent child marriages, check bigamy or polygamy, help women to exercise their rights of
maintenance from husband and custody of children and enable widows to claim inheritance.
There is no such law at present to provide for compulsory registration of marriages in the
country, though four States, namely, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka and Himachal Pradesh
have enacted laws for compulsory registration of marriage. The proposal for a uniform law
for the country has been pending for the last 15 years.
Therefore, it is high time that a law on compulsory registration of marriage is enacted.
Hence this Bill.
V ANGA  GEETHA
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint designated
authority or an officer for registration of marriages. The expenditure in relation to Union
Territories in this regard shall fall on the Central Government. Clause 7 of the Bill provides
that the Central Government shall provide required funds for the purposes of this Bill. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees twenty crore will be required for the purpose.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one crore will also be required.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory registration of all marriages solemnized in the
country so as to prevent child marriages, check bigamy or polygamy, help
women to exercise their rights of maintenance from husband and custody
of children, enable widows to claim inheritance and to serve as deterrent
to husband deserting their wives and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Vanga Geetha, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—6492RS(S1)—16-3-2006.