1
THE NATIONAL TRIBAL EDUCATION BOARD BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for promoting and monitoring education and
skill development of persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribes and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Tribal Education Board Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointed day" means such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for the purpose of section 3;
Short title
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXI of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 20TH JULY, 2018
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "Board" means the National Tribal Education Board constituted under
section 3;
(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board;
(d) "member" means a member of the Board and includes the Chairperson;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "regulations" mean regulations made by the Board under this Act;
3. (1) With effect from the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by notification
in the Official Gazette, constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the
National Tribal Education Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to contract
and shall, by the said name, sued and be sued.
(3) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(a) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs,
ex officio—Chairperson;
(b) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry off Human Resource
Development, ex officio—Member;
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Skill Development
and Entrepreneurship, ex officio—Member;
(d) six members to be nominated by the Central Government by rotation in the
alphabetical order to represent respectively the Governments of the States of
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Sikkim and Tripura:
Provided that the nomination shall be from officials of the State Government holding
the rank of Secretary to the State Government and dealing with education or skill
development or tribal matters;
(e) not more than three members to be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst persons having experience in pedagogy;
(f) not more than three members to be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst persons having experience in imparting education or skills training:
(4) The head office of the Board shall be at Visakhapatnam in the State of
Andhra Pradesh or such other places as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify and the Board may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, establish offices or agencies at other places in or outside India.
(5) The qualifications and experience, term of office and allowances of the members
specified in clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (3) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) Not less than two members shall be persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribes.
(7) The Chairperson shall; in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board,
exercise and discharge such powers and duties, as may be prescribed or delegated to him by
the Board.
(8) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Board;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board;
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the
case.
Constitution
and
incorporation
of Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
4. ( 1) The Board may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of itsffunctions under this Act.
(2) The qualifications and experience, terms and conditions of service including
salary and allowances of the officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be
specified in the regulations Made by the Board.
(3) The Board may engage the services of personnel, both from within and outside the
country as consultants, visiting educationists on such terms and conditions and
remunerations as may be specified in the regulations made by the Board and shall facilitate
their operations within the country.
5. (1) Subject to the rules made in this behalf, the Board shall constitute an Oversight
Committee of Experts consisting of experts, eminent educators and academics to advise and
assist the Board.
(2) The Oversight Committee shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(i) an educator of eminence and international repute— Chairperson;
(ii) Chancellor of the Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Madhya Pradesh,
ex officio—Member;
(iii) not more than fivd members to be appointed by the Central Govemment from
amongst distinguished experts in different areas of skill development, education, tribal
welfare and pedagogy;
6. (1) Subject to the rules made in this behalf, the Board may appoint such committees
as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions
under this Act.
(2) The Board shall have the power to co-opt as members of any committee appointed
under sub-section (I), such number of persons who are not members of the Board as it may
think fit, and the person so co-opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the
committee, and take part in the proceedings of the committee.
7. (1) The Board shall serve as a body for promoting and monitoring education and
skill development of persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribes.
(2) The powers and functions of the Board, shall, inter alia, include to—
(i) serve as a monitoring agency for educational and skill development schemes
intended for the benefit of the persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribes run by the
Central Government and various State Governments;
(ii) evolve nationally coordinated programmes to promote literacy and formal
education in districts with a significant portion of population belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes, with a special focus on increasing literacy amongst the female
individuals of such population;
(iii) assist in setting up infrastructure and environment suitable for educational
pursuit in schools in districts with a significant portion of population belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes;
(iv) promote the availability of course contents designed specifically for children
belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in local languages and dialects;
(v) coordinate measures taken by the various State Governments to increase the
levels of education in the population belonging to the Scheduled Tribes on a regular
basis to develop a repository of best pedagogical and outreach practices;
(vi) conduct and publish research papers and surveys on the state of education
and skill attainment of the persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribes;
Officers and
employees of
the Board.
Oversight
Committee of
Experts.
Committees
of Board.
Powers and
functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(vii) recommend and suggest to the Central Government and the various State
Governments with regard to improving the quality of the educational and skill
development schemes intended for the benefit of the persons belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes;
(viii) consider and take decisions on the recommendations and suggestions
made by the Oversight Committee;
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "population" means
tlie population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have
been published.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "a significant portion"
means a portion of not less than thirty per cent.
8. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law,
in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums of money as that Government
may consider necessary.
9. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Tribal Education Board fund,
and there shall be credited to the Fund—
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government under
section 8;
(b) all sums received by the Board including donations from any other source;
(c) recoveries made of the amounts granted from the Fund;
(d) any income from investment of the amount of the Fund.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) expenses on the object and for the purposes authorised by this Act;
(b) salaries, allowances and other expenses of the members, officers and other
employees of the Board;
(c) remunerations of the consultants and visiting educators; and
(d) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act.
10. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, as
may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.
11. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, as may
be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
12. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable
by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by
him in connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have
the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the auditing of the
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any
of the office of the Board under this Act.
Grants and
loans by the
Central
Government.
Tribal
Education
Board Fund.
Budget.
Annual
report.
Accounts and
audit.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(4) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government, before such date as may be
prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with auditor's report.
13. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be
laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
14. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in
the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on
questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express
its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of the policy or
not, shall be final.
15. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion —
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the
functions and the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or;
(b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying with any direction
issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions
and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such
default the financial position of the Board or the administration of the Board has
deteriorated; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to
do,
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Board for
such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Board,—
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as
such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board shall, until the Board
is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or
persons as the Central Government may direct; and
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the board is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute thc Board by a fresh
appointment and in such case any person or persons who vacated their offices under clause
(a) of sub-section (2), shall not be deemed to be disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the
period of supersession, take action under this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( I)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such
action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
16. The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson
or any other member or to any officer of the Board subject to such conditions and limitations,
if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act
(except the power under section 19) as it may deem necessary.
Annual report
and auditor's
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
Power of the
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power of the
Central
Government
to supersede
Board.
Delegation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
17. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government
or the Board or any committee appointed by it or any member of the Board or such committee,
or any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other person authorised by
the Central Government or the Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to
be done under this Act or the rules or regulation made thereunder.
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the qualifications and experience, term of office and other allowances of the
members of the Board, under sub-section (5) of section 3;
(b) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (7) of section 3;
(c) the constitution of Oversight Committee under section 5;
(d) the constitution of committees under sub-section ( 1) of section 6;
(e) the form in which, and the time at which the Board shall prepare its budget
under section 10 and its annual report under section 11;
(f) the form of annual statement of accounts under sub-section (1) of section 12
and the date before which audited copy of the accounts may be furnished to the
Central Government under sub-section (4) of that section;
(g) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be or may be, made by rules.
19. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules
generally to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for the qualifications and experience, terms and conditions of service
including salaries and allowances of the officers and employees of the Board under
sub-section (2) of section 4.
20. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rule.
Power of
Board to
make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to the Census of 2011, the tribal population in India is ten crore and forty
two lakh.  India has the world's largest tribal population which continues to remain relatively
underprivileged despite the country's economic progress. Though India's education system
over the past few decades has made significant progress, the literacy of the Scheduled
Tribes and other marginalized groups has been a matter of concern even after so many years
of independence. This is despite the fact that the largest proportion of centrally sponsored
programmes for tribal development are related to the single sector of education.
2. India's literacy rate has climbed from 28.1% in 1961 to 72.9% in 2011, while the
literacy rate of the tribal population is only 58.9% in 2011 after starting at a dismal 8.5% in
1961. The Statistical Profile of Scheduled Tribes Report 2013 by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs
noted that the literacy rate has all along been lower both for males and females Scheduled
Tribes as compared to Scheduled Castes and the total population. The tribal population of
Andhra Pradesh has the lowest it racy rate among all states at a low 49.2%. According to the
Census of 2011, 80 tribes in India, including 15 tribes in Andhra Pradesh, still have a literacy
rate lower than thirty per cent.
3. The Selected Educational Statistics 2010-2011 document published by the Ministry
of Human Resource Development notes the low percentage enrolment of Scheduled Tribes
population in the various levels of schooling: 11% at primary, 8.7% at upper primary and just
6.4% at the secondary level. Statistics of School Education Report 2010-2011 notes that the
dropout rates, in case of the tribal population, is high as 70.9% in classes I to X, compared to
less than  fifty per cent pan-Indta.
4. The National Education Policy 2016 noted several issues currently faced in the
education of tribal children, including the lack of classes and course material in local tribal
languages and dialects, and the difficulty faced by tribal students when the content is not
appropriately designed for them. The Committee, inter alia, recommended that these be
addressed by having the initial classes in local dialects, that skill development be integrated
into tribal education, and classes be conducted at flexible times to suit local needs.
5. There is a need to proactively promote education and skill development in the tribal
population by making special measures for them, and effectively monitor all Government
schemes intended for this purpose.
Hence this Bill.
V .  VIJAYASAI  REDDY
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish the National Tribal Education Board to serve as
a body for promoting and monitoring education and skill development of persons belonging
to the Scheduled Tribes. Sub-clause ( 5) of clause 3 makes provision for allowances of
members of the Board. Sub-clause (3) of clause 4 provides for salary and allowances of the
officials and employees of the Board.
2. Clause 8 provides for grants and loans by the Central Government to be used by the
Board.
3. Clause 9 provides there shall be constituted a fund to be called the Tribal Education
Board Fund to which shall be credited, inter alia any grants and loans made to the Board by
the Central Government under Clause 9 that after due appropriation made by Parliament, by
law, the Central Government may make to the Board by way of grants and loans, of such
sums of money as that Government may consider necessary, for being utilised for the purposes
of the Bill.
4. It is not possible to give at this stage the exact estimates of recurring expenditure
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India. However, no non-recurring
expenditure is likely to be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Bill. Such rules may, inter alia, provide for:—(i) the qualifications and
experience, term of office and other allowances of the members of the Board, under
sub-clause (5) of clause 3; (ii) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-clause (7)
of clause 3; (iii) the constitution of Oversight Committee under clause 5; (iv) the constitution
of committees under sub-clause (1) of clause 6; (v) the form in which, and the time at which
the Board shall prepare its budget under clause 10 and its annual report under clause 11;
(vi) the form of annual statement of accounts under sub- clause (1) of clause 12 and the date
before which audited copy of the accounts may be furnished to the Central Government
under sub-clause (4) of that section.
2. Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulations, consistent with the
provisions of the Bill and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of the Bill.
Such regulations may, inter alia, provide for the qualifications and experience, terms and
conditions of service including salaries and allowances of the officers and employees of the
Board under sub-clause (2) of clause 4.
3. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be under the aforesaid
provisions are matter of procedure and administrative details. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
9

MGIPMRND—909RS(S3)—23-07-2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for promoting and monitoring education and
skill development of persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribes and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)