THE DISTRESSED AND NEGLECTED WIDOWS AND DIVORCED
WOMEN (MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for the protective umbrella through maintenance, financial and other requisite
support, withdrawal from begging, chanting of  bhajan as profession and flesh trade,
get rid of exploitation and for the welfare measures to be introduced by the State for
the distressed, neglected, indigent, poverty or infirmity stricken widows and
divorced women irrespective of their caste, creed or religion and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Distressed and Neglected Widows and Divorced
Women (Maintenance, Support and Welfare) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘Authority’’ means the National Welfare Authority for the Distressed Widows
and Divorced Women established under section 3;
Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XXI of  2011
Definitions.
10
5

2
(c) ‘‘distressed’’ in relation to a widow or divorced women means who is stricken
with poverty, without any means of livelihood and house to live with or without her
minor dependent children or who is infirm due to old age, physical deformity, disease,
mental imbalance and who is not looked after by any of her relatives;
(d) ‘‘neglected’’ in relation to a,
(i) widow means who has been abandoned under any prevailing custom
or otherwise by her family or relatives and is not given the due care and attention
by her near and dear ones and left to fend for herself;
(ii) divorced women means who has been disowned by her in-laws as well
as parental relatives and left to fend for herself;
(e) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(f) ‘‘widow’’ means an adult female human being legally married and whose
husband has died.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be but within six months of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an Authority to
be call the "National Welfare  Authority for the Distressed Widows and Divorced Women"
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, to contract and by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Lucknow in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(4) The Authority shall establish its branches in all the States and Union Territories
at conspicuous places in the country.
(5) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) the Minister in charge of the Union Ministry of Women and Child
Development as ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualifications and experience as may be
prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) five members of Parliament preferably women members, of whom three
shall be from Lok Sabha and two from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective
Presiding Officers of both the Houses;
(d) three members representing the Union Ministries of Social Justice and
Empowerment, Finance and Human Resource Development respectively;
(e) not more than four members to be nominated by the Governments of the
States, by rotation in alphabetical order to represent the Governments of the States;
(f) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
recognised Non-Governmental  Organisations working for the welfare of distressed
and neglected widows and divorced women covered under this Act.
(6) The term of office, remuneration and other facilities of the Deputy Chairperson
and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) The Authority shall follow such procedure for holding its meetings and the quorum
for such meeting shall be such as may be prescribed.
(8) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and members
of the staff with such terms and conditions of service and salary, allowances and other
facilities as may be prescribed from time to time.
Establishment
of the
National
Welfare
Authority for
the Distressed
Widows and
Divorced
Women.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Functions of
the Authority.
4. (1) The Authority shall promote and implement such protective and welfare measures
as it thinks fit, expedient or appropriate for the distressed and neglected widows and divorced
women irrespective of their caste, creed or religion who are in need or make request for such
protective and welfare measures to the Authority and who are covered under this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the Authority shall,—
(a) invite applications by giving wide publicity throught the electronic and print
media and hoardings and posters, from the distressed and neglected widows and
divorced women who require the protective umbrella of the Authority:
Provided that the general public may also provide the information about the
distressed and neglected widows and divorced women covered under this Act to the
Authority and the Authority shall take cognizance of such information;
(b) on the basis of applications so received or informaton given by the general
public, the Authority shall register the names and particulars and maintain a district-
wise register of the distressed and neglected widows and divorced women covered
under this Act with such particulars and details as may be prescribed;
(c) work out plans and formulate schemes for the protection, welfare and
rehabilitation of the distressed and neglected widows and divorced women covered
under this Act;
(d) formulate, rehabilitation measures and other protective measures in particular
for the bhajan chanting widows of Mathura, Vrindavan and other religious places;
(e) establish adequate number of hostel accommodations for board, lodging and
make provision of necessary facilities therein for the needy widows and divorced
women covered under this Act;
(f) take such other measures not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
the Authority may deem necessary for the protection and welfare of the distressed and
neglected widows and divorced women covered under this Act.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall, on the recommendation of the Authority or
of its own, provide the distressed neglected widows and divorced women registered under
this Act, the following faclities, namely:—
(a) monthly subsistence allowance of rupees three thousand in case she is
having any dependent child or rupees two thousand if she is alone;
(b) hostel accommodation free of cost wherever necessary;
(c) free education if, she is illiterate;
(d) free education including higher education, technical and medical education
to their children;
(e) free medicare;
(f) gainful employment;
(g) free vocational training wherever necessary;
(h) scuh other facilities, as may be necessary for her rehabilitation, development
and maintaing a respectable life in the society:
Provided that if any distressed and neglected widow or the divorced women covered
under this Act either gets gainful employment or remarries, all the facilities provided to
her and her children in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall be withdrawn from
the date she gets the gainful employment or remarriage, as the case may be.
Financial
assistance and
other
facilities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
45

4
(2) It shall be the duty of the Authority as well as of the appropriate Government to
extend or get extended the vocational training and in particular for stiching, weaving
embroidery, handicrafts paintings, doll making, producing papad and namkeens, sweets,
pickles and other household items to the widows and divorced women covered under this Act
as per their calibre and extend necessary financial and other assistance to them for their
self employment after their training.
6. The Authority shall submit an Annual Report in such form and in such manner, as
may be prescribed of its activities and the protective and welfare measures undertaken for
the purposes of this Act to the President of India who shall cause the Report to be laid before
both the Houses of Parliament alongwith the action taken by the Central Government thereon
as soon as it is recieved.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Authority and the Governments of the States
and Union Territories administrations, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central may,
by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith  contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt within this Act.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Annual
Report.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power of
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our nation is very vast and second most populous nation of the globe with different
religious, cultures, customs and languages. Nearly half of our population is composed of
women and therefore, it is natural that there is a very large number of widows in our country.
Quite a large number of such widows and divorced women are from lower and middle income
groups or classes of our society. Those who are illiterate and confined to thier households
alone become distressed and forced by the circumstances to live uncared in the society.
Many of the widows are neglected by their families and even thrown out of the households
by their in-laws and they are not welcomed in their parental homes too for various reasons.
In some cases, due to custom or because of personal law, the women are divorced very easily
and thrown out of the households. Since most much widows and divorced women have no
means to support themselves and their dependent children, they work as house maids for
survival but even this is not possible for the infirm, old, physically handicapped or mentally
ill and they have to subsist on begging. Many who are young are forced into flesh trade to
avoid starvation which inturn  makes their lives more disgraceful. Ours is a democratic
country and a welfare state and hence, it is the primary duty of the State to provide protective
umbrella to the distressed and neglected widows and divorced women by removing the
exploitation of the such women and provide financial assistance, shelter, medicare, education
and other necessary facilities to such women so that they too lead a respectable life in the
society with their dependent children. To ensure this protective umbrella, an authority should
be established so that all such unfortunate and hapless, widows and divorced women are
protected from all kinds of exploitation in the society.
Hence, this Bill.
DR.  AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Welfare Authority
for the Distressed Widows and Divorced Women. Clause 5 provides for financial assistance
and other facilities for the widows and divorced women. Clause 7 make it obligatory for the
Central Government to provide requisite funds to the Authority and Governments of the
States and Union Territories for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill if, enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Though it is not possible to
quantify the amount at this juncture it is estimated that a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore
may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty thousand crore may also
involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of this Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

GMGIPMRND—956RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protective umbrella through maintenance, financial and other requisite
support, withdrawal from begging, chanting of bhajan as profession and flesh trade,
get rid of exploitation and for the welfare measures to be introduced by the State for the
distressed, neglected, indigent, poverty or infirmity stricken widows and divorced
women irrespective of their caste, creed or religion and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)