AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA Sapna,
ON 3१० DecemBer, 2004

Bill No. XXI of 2004
THE PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
AND GIRLS BILL, 2004
A
BILL

to protect the women and girls from domestic violence of various kinds including
Physical and mental violence by providing deterrent punishment for such violence
and to help the victim woman or girl to move out from her house to a safer place
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Domestic Violence against Women and
Girls Act, 2004.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(०) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;

(6) “domestic violence” includes beating and such other physical torture, sexual

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


2

emotional blackmail, abusing

8९3, :

| for personal expen irl in the household:

abuse, non providing of marpaychological es ० आर os Act हे
A uage this Act,

and using Fou 1988 ‘ cans prescribed by rules made under fined i |

(0) "perseribed #ा ed but not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian

us

(d) terms and phrases assigned to them in the said Act.

AN

e meaning, J iit 45 or ॥,
Penal Code 1860 shall have the pee din any other law for the time being in force, 869
bition 3. (7) Notwithstanding ail girl, as the case may be, 's hereby prohibited,
Prehomestic domestic violence against any woman 0: E sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
poeta (2) Whoever contravenes the provisions 0 १4
inst
pi and under this Act.
eit 10
4. Whoever— voinan or etH
Penalty . F the nature of hurt on any girlin
inflicts physical torture of : A yaaa
wu ee eal en peavietoa ina court of law, be pai ie ~ ee
ba a which shalll not be less than two years but may extend to five years and also
vith fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees; :
grevious hurt to any woman or gi! in his house shall, on conviction 15
i 01 कर punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than five
ot overt which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to one lakh
years
rupees; झा tak के
i i i inst the woman or girl in his house
‘c) indulges in sexual violence against 2
कल लक मे his relation with such a woman or girl, as the case may be, and also 20
sexually exploits the woman or girl shall, on conviction in court of law, be punishable
with imprisonment for life;
(०) indulges in emotional blackmail or psychological abuse or abuses OF uses
foul language against any woman or gir! in his house shall, on conviction in a court of
law, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months and with fine 25
which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees.
Right of the 5. 0) The appropriate Government shall set up such number of short stay homes as it
woman or gi! may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.
to move out
of house for (2) Any abused woman or girl, as the case may be, under this Act shall have the right
safety. to move out of her house with bag and baggage t@a safer place or short stay home for her 30
safety.
Appointment

6. (Z) For the purposes of this Act, the appropriate Government shall appoint such
- oe. number of Special Protection Officers as it may deem Mecessary,
Officers. prescribed.

(2) The Special Protection Officer shall be responsible for,—

(i) assisting the abused woman or girl to remove her belongi

toa safe or short stay home set up under this Act; 2 rine:
(0) coordinating the functionin; of vari

Chimienleas se ig 1005 Government and non Governmental

, medical, legal counselli i
and girls who are victims of d i violenoe, ing and other services to the women

(iif) such other Tesponsibilities as may be Prescribed,

in such manner as may be

35

40

Savings. 7. The provisions of thi . a
law for the time being in forge, O° in addition to and notin derogation of any other
Power to 8.( 1) The Central Gov
१ शा हु
make es. or Carrying out the purposes oh रे by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
(2) The a : 4s
for giving efecto en oon ment may, by not

‘i 0 Notification | ial Gazette,
the provisions of Sections 5(1) and 6 ipernrig ies


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Domestic violence inflicted on women and Birls over the years through heinous
practices. Domestic violence ina family can be more than physical. It is increasingly taking
a non-verbal form as well. Often it is

simply a lack of Concern, support and care for the
women,
Though sections 498A and 304B of

the IPC cover aspects of domestic violence, however,
justice through these laws takes time and the woman is not immediately removed from
potentially dangerous situation. Mor: i

go to acriminal court complaining
victim. It often ends up with more

ight now no remedy for domestic violence. So
the Bill ifimplemented can certainly be effective.

Hence this Bill.

SANTOSH BAGRODIA


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
shall set up such number of

Clause 5 provides that appropriate Government
short stay homes for the purposes of this Act. Clause 6 provides for the appointment
of Special Protection Officers. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the

Fund of India. It is estimated that 8 sum of Rupees one hundred crore

Consolidated
may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
also involve as non recurring

A sum of Rupees Two hundred crores may
expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DE

EGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the 8

PPropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill which will 16

late to matters of details on ly.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to protect the women and girls from domestic violence of various kinds including physical
and mental violence by providing deterrent punishment for such violence and to help the
victim woman or girl to move out from her house to a safer place and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

{Shri Santosh Bagrodia, MP)

MGIPMRNO—3186RS—3 42 2004