1
THE  TOUR OPERATORS AND TRA VEL AGENTS (REGULATION)
BILL,  2010
A
BILL
to provide  for regulation of  tour operators and  travel agents  by  providing  for
compulsory registration of these operators and agents by competent authority;
 and by prescribing requisite norms and infrastructure for various tour
 tourist related activities and for matters connected therewith
 or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Tour Operators and Travel Agents (Regulation)  Act,
2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  XXI of  2010
Short title,
extent And
commencement.
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government
and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "competent authority" means any office or officer notified by the appropriate
Government under section 4;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(d) "tour operator or tour agent" means any person including any establishment
who undertakes and conducts, tours to the various parts of the country and outside or
provides transport, passport and visa facilities, reservation of seats for airlines, rail,
bus, steamer and ship and consultancy to tourists;
(e) "tourist" means any person who undertakes any journey or visits any place
in or out side India and includes a pilgrim.
3.  (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette appoint, no person or establishment shall work as tour operator or tourist
agent without prior registration with the competent authority.
(2) Any person or establishment found working as tour operator or tourist agent
without registration shall be guilty of an offence under this Act.
4.  (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
a competent authority for the purposes of registration of tour operator or tourist agents
within its jurisdiction.
(2) Any person or establishment willing to work as tour operator or tourist agent shall
apply to the competent Authority for the purpose of registration in such form and manner as
may be prescribed.
(3) Any person or establishment working as tour operator or tourist agent before the
commencement of this Act shall apply for registration to the competent authority within a
period of forty-five days from the date of commencement of this Act in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
(4) On receipt of an application for registration as tour operator or tourist agent the
competent authority shall scrutinize the application and may call for such other information
or documents from the applicant as may be prescribed.
(5) The competent authority shall, before registering any tour operator or tourist
agent, inspect the infrastructure and facilities available with the tour operator or tourist
agent to have the first hand information and ensure the compliance of the norms and standards
fixed by the appropriate Government in this behalf.
(6) The competent authority shall, after being satisfied with the various requirements
under this Act, grant a registration certificate to the applicant in such manner and form as
may be prescribed which shall be valid for three years.
(7) The competent authority shall renew the registration of any tour operator or tourist
agent only after re-inspecting the infrastructure facilities with the tour operator or tourist
agent and on fulfilment of requirements and norms fixed in this behalf by the appropriate
Government under this Act.
(8) The competent authority may refuse to register or the renew registration of a tour
operator or tourist agent if he fails to comply with the norms and standards fixed by the
appropriate Government in this behalf or the competent authority finds its infrastructure
insufficient for the purpose of working as tour operator or agent:
Definitions.
Compulsory
registration
of Tour
Operators
and Travel
Agents.
Procedure for
registration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Provided that in case of non-registration or non-renewal of registration of a tour
operator or tourist agent, the competent authority shall record reasons in writing and
communicate the same to the applicant.
(9) The competent authority shall take a decision on the application filed under sub-
section (2) within a period of thirty days.
(10) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
an appeallate authority, in order to provide opportunities to the person aggrieved by the
orders of the competent authority.
5. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) fix the maximum free to be charged by the tour operator and travel agents for
various tour related activities;
(b) the rate at which vehicles shall be made available to tourists;
(c) to prescribe norms and standards for various activities;
(d) lay down norms for minimum infrastructure for starting and running tour
operations;
(e) prescribe such other norms as may be necessary for the purpose.
6. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also
with fine which may extend to five lakhs rupees.
7. (1) Where a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule, direction
or order made thereunder has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time
the contravention was committeed, was  in charge of, and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention was committed without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule direction or other made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to  be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation:—For the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
remvoing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject and save
Appropriate
Government
to prescribe
norms for tour
operator and
travel agents.
Penalty.
Offences by
Company.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to
make rules.

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, there is no legislation to regulate the tourism industry, particularly the
travel agencies operating in various regions of the country. This sector is unorgainsed and
any person can start a travel agency anywhere by setting up a small shop just with a
telephone facility. There is no ban on such travel agents and as a result, in some of the cases,
anti social or mischievous elements sneak into this business and flourish in the name of
providing travel consultancy. There have been cases when the foreign tourists have been
cheated and robbed of their valuables by the unscrupulous travel agents. The Association
of Domestic Tour Operators has held several meetings with the Department to make registration
of a travel agency mandatory to curb the untoward incidents and dubious practices indulged
in by some travel agents with ulterior motives. It becomes all the more important to check this
menace of unregulated travel agencies, in view of the upcoming Commonwealth Grames in
New Delhi by suitable legislative measures.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carring out the
purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—2362RS(S4)—03-05-2010.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of tour operators and travel agents by providing for compulsory
registration of these operators and agents by competent authority; and by prescribing
requisite norms and infrastructure for various tour/tourist related activities and for
matters connected therewith  and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)