As Inrropucep In RAvA SABHA

Bill No. XXI of 2000

THE SMALL FAMILY NORMS (INCENTIVE) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
to provide for incentives for the promotion of small family norms and for matters

connected therewith

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Small Family Norms (Incentive) Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
5 notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

(4) It shall apply to all Indian citizens including those who on the date of enforcement
of this Act are residing outside India.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
10 that State and in other cases, the Central Government.

Short ttle,
extent,
‘commencement
and
application

Definitions


Facilities in
case of
stertlization
after first
child,

Facilities in
case of
sterilization
after second
child.

Power to make
rules.

2

(0) “family” means the husband, wife and two children including step-children;

(०) “prescribed” means as prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. If either husband or wife opts for sterilization after the birth of their first child, the
family shall be entitled to the following facilities namely:—
(0) one time cash to both the husband and wife incentive of Rs. 5,000/- each
by the appropriate Government.

(ii) a two bed room flat at such subsidized cost as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government;

(iii) free education including higher and technical education;

(iv) preference in service under the control of the Central Government or
the Government of a State as per his choice to the child shall subject to his fulfilling
the minimum requisite qualifications.

4. If either husband or wife opts for sterilization after their second child, the family
shall be entitled to the following facilities, namely:—
(i a two bed room flat at such subsidized cost as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government;
(ii) free education to both children upto higher secondary level in any
institution of their choice;

(ii) free higher education, including technical education to either of the
children; ‘

(iv) preference in services under the control of the Central Government or
the Government of a State of their choice to both the children shall subject to
their fulfilling the minimum requisite qualifications.

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The basic problem facing the country is rapidly increasing population. Measures for
family planning undertaken by the Government so far have not proved effective. It will be
difficult to provide basic necessities to the rapidly increasing population and therefore, there
is an immediate need to contain the growing population.

It is proposed that the norms of voluntary sterilization of all persons having one or two
living children should be adopted to control the increasing population irrespective of caste,
creed and religion to which they belong. This will be achieved if the incentives are provided
to encourage small family norms.

The Bill seeks to provide certain facilities to those who adopt small family norms with
a view to checking the increasing population.

P. PRABHAKAR REDDY.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for certain facilities like cash incentives, houses at
subsidized rates, free education to the child in case either wife or husband opts for sterilization
after their first child. Clause 4 provides for similar facilities in case either wife or husband
opts for sterilization after their second child. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of the Union territories and in
respect of Central Government employees. The expenditure in relation to States will be met
out of the respective Consolidated Funds of the States. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees four hundred crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide incentives for promotion of small family norms and for matters connect
therewith.

(Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4624RS—05-04-2000.