11
Bill No. XXI-F of  2019
ORIGINAL
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJY A SABHA ON 18 JULY, 2019
LOK SABHA ON 1 AUGUST, 2019)
ASSENTED  TO
 ON 9TH AUG., 2019
ACT NO. 33 OF 2019

1
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT )
A
BILL
further to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2)  Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision
to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force
of that provision.
2. In the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 2,—
(i) in sub-section (1),––
(A) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(ca) “arbitral institution’’ means an arbitral institution designated
by the Supreme Court or a High Court under this Act;’;
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
26 of 1996.
Bill No. XXI-F of 2019

2
(B) after clause (h), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Council under
this Act.’;
(ii) in sub-section (2), in the proviso, for the word, brackets and letter “clause
(a)”, the word, brackets and letter “clause ( b)” shall be substituted.
3. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(i) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3A) The Supreme Court and the High Court shall have the power to
designate, arbitral institutions, from time to time, which have been graded by
the Council under section 43-I, for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that in respect of those High Court jurisdictions, where no
graded arbitral institution are available, then, the Chief Justice of the concerned
High Court may maintain a panel of arbitrators for discharging the functions
and duties of arbitral institution and any reference to the arbitrator shall be
deemed to be an arbitral institution for the purposes of this section and the
arbitrator appointed by a party shall be entitled to such fee at the rate as
specified in the Fourth Schedule:
Provided further that the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court may,
from time to time, review the panel of arbitrators.”;
(ii) in sub-section ( 4), in the long line, for the portion beginning with “the
appointment shall be made” and ending with ‘‘designated by such Court”, the following
shall be substituted, namely:––
“the appointment shall be made, on an application of the party, by the
arbitral institution designated by the Supreme Court, in case of international
commercial arbitration, or by the High Court, in case of arbitrations other than
international commercial arbitration, as the case may be”;
(iii) in sub-section (5), for the portion beginning with ‘‘the appointment shall
be made” and ending with ‘‘designated by such Court”, the following shall be
substituted, namely:––
“the appointment shall be made on an application of the party in
accordance with the provisions contained in sub-section ( 4)”;
(iv) in sub-section (6), in the long line, for the portion beginning with ‘‘party
may request” and ending with ‘‘designated by such Court”, the following shall be
substituted, namely:––
“the appointment shall be made, on an application of the party, by the
arbitral institution designated by the Supreme Court, in case of international
commercial arbitration, or by the High Court, in case of arbitrations other than
international commercial arbitration, as the case may be”;
(v) sub-sections (6A) and (7) shall be omitted;
(vi)  in sub-section (8), for the words “The Supreme Court or, as the case may
be, the High Court or the person or institution designated by such Court”, the words,
brackets and figures “The arbitral institution referred to in sub-sections ( 4), (5) and
(6)” shall be substituted;
(vii)  in sub-section ( 9), for the words “the Supreme Court or the person or
institution designated by that Court”, the words “the arbitral institution designated
by the Supreme Court” shall be substituted;
(viii)  sub-section (10) shall be omitted;
Amendment
of section 11.

3
(ix) for sub-sections (11) to (14), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(11) Where more than one request has been made under sub-section (4)
or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) to different arbitral institutions, the arbitral
institution to which the request has been first made under the relevant
sub-section shall be competent to appoint.
(12) Where the matter referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6) and (8) arise
in an international commercial arbitration or any other arbitration, the reference
to the arbitral institution in those sub-sections shall be construed as a reference
to the arbitral institution designated under sub-section ( 3A).
(13) An application made under this section for appointment of an
arbitrator or arbitrators shall be disposed of by the arbitral institution within a
period of thirty days from the date of service of notice on the opposite party.
(14) The arbitral institution shall determine the fees of the arbitral tribunal
and the manner of its payment to the arbitral tribunal subject to the rates
specified in the Fourth Schedule.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that this
sub-section shall not apply to international commercial arbitration and in
arbitrations (other than international commercial arbitration) where parties have
agreed for determination of fees as per the rules of an arbitral institution.”.
4. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words and figures “or at
any time after the making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with
section 36” shall be omitted.
5. In section 23 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:––
“(4) The statement of claim and defence under this section shall be completed
within a period of six months from the date the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the
case may be, received notice, in writing, of their appointment.”.
6.  In  section 29A of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The award in matters other than international commercial arbitration
shall be made by the arbitral tribunal within a period of twelve months from the
date of completion of pleadings under sub-section ( 4) of section 23:
Provided that the award in the matter of international commercial arbitration
may be made as expeditiously as possible and endeavour may be made to
dispose of the matter within a period of twelve months from the date of
completion of pleadings under sub-section (4) of section 23.’’;
(b) in sub-section (4), after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:––
“Provided further that where an application under sub-section (5) is pending,
the mandate of the arbitrator shall continue till the disposal of the said application:
Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an opportunity of being
heard before the fees is reduced.”.
7.  In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause (a), for the words
“furnishes proof that”, the words “establishes on the basis of the record of the arbitral
tribunal that” shall be substituted.
8.  In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words “An appeal”,
the words “Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, an appeal” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section
29A.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of section 37.

4
9. After section 42 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:––
“42A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the arbitrator, the arbitral institution and the parties to the arbitration
agreement shall maintain confidentiality of all arbitral proceedings except award   where
its disclosure is necessary for the purpose of implementation and enforcement of
award.
42B. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the arbitrator for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or
regulations made thereunder.”.
10.   After Part I of the principal Act, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:––
‘PART  IA
A
RBITRATION COUNCIL OF INDIA
43A. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Arbitration Council of
India appointed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 43C;
(b) “Council” means the Arbitration Council of India established under
section 43B;
(c) “Member” means a Member of the Council and includes the
Chairperson.
43B. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish, for the purposes of this Act, a Council to be known as the Arbitration
Council of India to perform the duties and discharge the functions under this Act.
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of
this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and
to enter into contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3)  The head office of the Council shall be at Delhi.
(4) The Council may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish
offices at other places in India.
43C. (1) The Council shall consist of the following Members, namely:––
(a) a person, who has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or, Chief
Justice of a High Court or, a Judge of a High Court or an eminent person, having
special knowledge and experience in the conduct or administration of arbitration,
to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief
Justice of India–Chairperson;
(b) an eminent arbitration practitioner having substantial knowledge and
experience in institutional arbitration, both domestic and international, to be
nominated by the Central Government–Member;
(c) an eminent academician having experience in research and teaching in
the field of arbitration and alternative dispute resolution laws, to be appointed
by the Central Government in consultation with the Chairperson–Member;
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice or his representative not below the rank of
Joint Secretary–Member, ex officio;
Insertion of
new sections
42A and 42B.
Confidentiality
of
information.
Insertion of
new Part.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Definitions.
Establishment
and
incorporation
of Arbitration
Council of
India.
Composition
of Council.

5
(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance or his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary–
Member, ex officio;
(f) one representative of a recognised body of commerce and industry,
chosen on rotational basis by the Central Government–Part-time Member;  and
(g) Chief Executive Officer-Member-Secretary, ex officio.
(2) The Chairperson and Members of the Council, other than ex officio Members,
shall hold office as such, for a term of three years from the date on which they enter
upon their office:
Provided that no Chairperson or Member, other than ex officio Member, shall
hold office as such after he has attained the age of seventy years in the case of
Chairperson and sixty-seven years in the case of Member.
(3) The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of the Chairperson
and Members referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be such as may
be prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) The Part-time Member shall be entitled to such travelling and other
allowances as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
43D. (1) It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such measures as may be
necessary to promote and encourage arbitration, mediation, conciliation or other
alternative dispute resolution mechanism and for that purpose to frame policy and
guidelines for the establishment, operation and maintenance of uniform professional
standards in respect of all matters relating to arbitration.
(2) For the purposes of performing the duties and discharging the functions
under this Act, the Council may—
(a) frame policies governing the grading of arbitral institutions;
(b) recognise professional institutes providing accreditation of arbitrators;
(c) review the grading of arbitral institutions and arbitrators;
(d) hold training, workshops and courses in the area of arbitration in
collaboration of law firms, law universities and arbitral institutes;
(e) frame, review and update norms to ensure satisfactory level of
arbitration and conciliation;
(f) act as a forum for exchange of views and techniques to be adopted for
creating a platform to make India a robust centre for domestic and international
arbitration and conciliation;
(g) make recommendations to the Central Government on various
measures to be adopted to make provision for easy resolution of commercial
disputes;
(h) promote institutional arbitration by strengthening arbitral institutions;
(i) conduct examination and training on various subjects relating to
arbitration and conciliation and award certificates thereof;
(j) establish and maintain depository of arbitral awards made in India;
(k) make recommendations regarding personnel, training and
infrastructure of arbitral institutions; and
(l) such other functions as may be decided by the Central Government.
Duties and
functions of
Council.

6
43E.  No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy or any defect, in the constitution of the Council;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the
Council; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the
merits of the case.
43F. The Chairperson or the Full-time or Part-time Member may, by notice in
writing, under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or the Full-time Member shall, unless he is
permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until
a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of
his term of office, whichever is earlier.
43G. (1) The Central Government may, remove a Member from his office if he––
(a) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(b) has engaged at any time (except Part-time Member), during his term of
office, in any paid employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest; or
(f) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), no Member shall
be removed from his office on the grounds specified in clauses ( d) and ( e) of that
sub-section unless the Supreme Court, on a reference being made to it in this behalf
by the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held by it in accordance with such
procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf by the Supreme Court, reported that the
Member, ought on such ground or grounds to be removed.
43H. The Council may, appoint such experts and constitute such Committees
of experts as it may consider necessary to discharge its functions on such terms and
conditions as may be specified by the regulations.
43-I. The Council shall make grading of arbitral institutions on the basis of
criteria relating to infrastructure, quality and calibre of arbitrators, performance and
compliance of time limits for disposal of domestic or international commercial
arbitrations, in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.
43J. The qualifications, experience and norms for accreditation of arbitrators
shall be such as specified in the Eighth Schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Council,
by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Eighth Schedule and thereupon, the
Eighth Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
43K. The Council shall maintain an electronic depository of arbitral awards
made in India and such other records related thereto in such manner as may be
specified by the regulations.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Council.
Resignation
of Members.
Removal of
Member.
Appointment
of experts and
constitution of
Committees
thereof.
General norms
for grading of
arbitral
institutions.
Norms for
accreditation.
Depository of
awards.

7
43L. The Council may, in consultation with the Central Government, make
regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder,
for the discharge of its functions and perform its duties under this Act.
43M. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the Council, who shall be
responsible for day-to-day administration of the Council.
(2) The qualifications, appointment and other terms and conditions of the
service of the Chief Executive Officer shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall discharge such functions and perform
such duties as may be specified by the regulations.
(4) There shall be a Secretariat to the Council consisting of such number of
officers and employees as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(5) The qualifications, appointment and other terms and conditions of the
service of the employees and other officers of the Council shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.’.
11.  In section 45 of the principal Act, for the words “unless it finds”, the words
“unless it prima facie finds”, shall be substituted.
12.  In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “An appeal”,
the words “Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, an appeal” shall be substituted.
13. After section 86 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted and
shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 23rd October, 2015, namely:—
“87. Unless the parties otherwise agree, the amendments made to this Act by
the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 shall—
(a) not apply to––
(i) arbitral proceedings commenced before the commencement of
the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015;
(ii) court proceedings arising out of or in relation to such arbitral
proceedings irrespective of whether such court proceedings are
commenced prior to or after the commencement of the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015;
(b) apply only to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after the
commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 and
to court proceedings arising out of or in relation to such arbitral proceedings.”.
14. After the Seventh Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be
inserted, namely: ––
‘‘THE EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
(See section 43J)
Qualifications and Experience of Arbitrator
A person shall not be qualified to be an arbitrator unless he—
(i) is an advocate within the meaning of the Advocates Act, 1961 having ten
years of practice experience as an advocate; or
(ii) is a chartered accountant within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants
Act, 1949 having ten years of practice experience as a chartered accountant; or
Chief
Executive
Officer.
Amendment
of section 45.
Amendment
of section 50.
Power to
make
regulations by
Council.
Insertion of
new section 87.
Effect of
arbitral and
related court
proceedings
commenced
prior to 23rd
October,
2015.
3 of 2016.
3 of 2016.
3 of 2016.
Insertion of
new Schedule.
3 of 2016.
25 of 1961.
38 of 1949.

8
(iii) is a cost accountant within the meaning of the Cost and Works Accountants
Act, 1959 having ten years of practice experience as a cost accountant; or
(iv) is a company secretary within the meaning of the Company Secretaries
Act, 1980 having ten years of practice experience as a company secretary; or
(v) has been an officer of the Indian Legal Service; or
(vi) has been an officer with law degree having ten years of experience in the
legal matters in the Government, Autonomous Body, Public Sector Undertaking or at
a senior level managerial position in private sector; or
(vii) has been an officer with engineering degree having ten years of experience
as an engineer in the Government, Autonomous Body, Public Sector Undertaking or
at a senior level managerial position in private sector or self-employed; or
(viii) has been an officer having senior level experience of administration in the
Central Government or State Government or having experience of senior level
management of a Public Sector Undertaking or a Government company or a private
company of repute;
(ix) is a person, in any other case, having educational qualification at degree
level with ten years of experience in scientific or technical stream in the fields of
telecom, information technology, Intellectual Property Rights or other specialised
areas in the Government, Autonomous Body, Public Sector Undertaking or a senior
level managerial position in a private sector, as the case may be.
General norms applicable to Arbitrator
(i) The arbitrator shall be a person of general reputation of fairness, integrity
and capable to apply objectivity in arriving at settlement of disputes;
(ii) the arbitrator must be impartial and neutral and avoid entering into any
financial business or other relationship that is likely to affect impartiality or might
reasonably create an appearance of partiality or bias amongst the parties;
(iii) the arbitrator should not involve in any legal proceeding and avoid any
potential conflict connected with any dispute to be arbitrated by him;
(iv) the arbitrator should not have been convicted of an offence involving
moral turpitude or economic offence;
(v) the arbitrator shall be conversant with the Constitution of India, principles
of natural justice, equity, common and customary laws, commercial laws, labour laws,
law of torts, making and enforcing the arbitral awards;
(vi) the arbitrator should possess robust understanding of the domestic and
international legal system on arbitration and international best practices in regard
thereto;
(vii) the arbitrator should be able to understand key elements of contractual
obligations in civil and commercial disputes and be able to apply legal principles to a
situation under dispute and also to apply judicial decisions on a given matter relating
to arbitration; and
(viii) the arbitrator should be capable of suggesting, recommending or writing
a reasoned and enforceable arbitral award in any dispute which comes before him for
adjudication.’’.
15. Section 26 of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 shall be
omitted and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from the 23rd October, 2015.
Amendment
to Act 3 of
2016.
23 of 1959.
56 of 1980.

9
16.  In the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, for the brackets, words and figures
“[See section 11 (14)]”, the brackets, words, figures and letter “[See section 11 (3A)]” shall
be substituted.
Amendment
to Fourth
Schedule.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—2638LS(S3)—17-08-2019.