AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 26TH JULY 2024 
Bill No.XXI of 2024 
THE RIGHT TO UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME 
 BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for universal basic income to all citizens and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
        BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
   as  follows:– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1.  (1) This Act may be called the Right to Universal Basic Income Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State; in the case of a Union Territory, the Union Territory
Administration and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b
) “Board” means the National Advisory Board constituted under secti on
7 of
 the Act;
(
c) “citizen” means any Indian citizen above the age of eighteen years;
(d
) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(
e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(
f) “universal basic income” means a stipulated financial grant as decided
and paid by the appropriate Government to all citizens.
5 
10 
CHAPTER II 
RIGHT TO UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME 
Right of 
citizens to 
universal basic 
income. 
3. Every citizen of India shall have the right to universal basic income.
15 Special 
provisions for 
people who 
belong to 
below poverty  
line 
4. The appropriate Government shall, while ensuring universal basic income
to all citizens, take special measures, in such manner as may be prescribed,
to ensure a basic standard of living for people who belong to the below
poverty line category.
Special 
provisions for 
people without 
any other 
source of 
income. 
5. The appropriate Government shall, while ensuring universal basic income
to all citizens, take special measures, in such manner as may be prescribed,
to ensure a basic standard of living for people, who do not have any other
source of income, especially the homeless people.
20 
Special 
provision for 
children.
6. The appropriate Government shall, while ensuring universal basic income
to all citizens, take special measures to ensure provision of basic nutrition to
all children, for investing in a better future. 25 
CHAPTER III 
THE NATIONAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Constitution of 
the National 
Advisory 
Board.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, with effect from the appointed day, by
notification in the official Gazette, constitute, a Board to be called the
National Advisory Board, for advising the appropriate Government in the
matter of fixing universal basic income  and revising it from time to time, to
account for inflation as per the Consumer Price Index.
30 
 

3 
5 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act,
to contract and shall, by the said name, sued and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and the Board may, if
deemed necessary, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
establish offices at other places in India.
(4
) The Board shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
10 
8. (1) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of members, to be
nominated from amongst the Members of both Houses of Parliament and the State 
Legislative Assemblies, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2
) The term of office of, the salary and allowances payable to, and other
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of the
Board, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Composition of 
the Board. 
15
20 
25 
9. The Board shall perform the following functions, namely: -
(a
) advising the appropriate Government in the matter of fixing and revising 
universal basic income;
(b
) develop a framework for implementation of the provisions of the Act
including the modalities involved in its practical implementation at the
ground level;
(
c) devising a mechanism to redress the grievances of the concerned
p
arties;
(d
) regularly monitor and review the implementation of the Act and submit
reports thereon to the appropriate Government in such form and manner
and at such time, as may be prescribed;
(
e) recommend necessary changes in the provisions of the Act, as deemed
necessary, to keep pace with the changing times and requirements; and
(
f) any other function as may be assigned to it.
Functions of the 
Board. 
30
10. (1) The Board may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The qualifications and experience, terms and conditions of service
including salary and allowances payable to the officers and employees of the
Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
Officers and 
employees of the 
Board. 

4 
Annual Report. 11. The Board shall prepare every year, in such form and within such time as may be
5 
prescribed by the Central Govern ment an annual rep ort giving a true and full 
account of its activities during the previous year and cop ies thereof shall be 
forwarded to th e Central Government, who shall cause it to be laid before each 
House of Parliament, along with a memo randum of action taken or proposed to 
be taken on th e reco mmendations of th e Board  and the reasons fo r non-
acceptance of the recommendations, if any, within a period of one year from the 
date of receipt of such report(s).
CHAPTER IV 
DUTIES OF THE APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT  10 
Duties of the 
appropriate 
Government. 
12. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to, -
(a) pr
ovide universal basic income to all citizens, either directly or
indirectly, or ensure employment which provides basic income to all
citizens;
(b) e
nsure that no citizen be denied universal basic income on account
of not having a permanent address; and
(c) e
nsure that no citizen be denied the benefits of any existing subsidies
or welfare schemes or any reduction in the level of benefits received
under such schemes on account of provisions of this Act.
15 
20Sharing of 
financial and 
other 
responsibilities.
13. (1) The Central Government and the State Government shall have
concurrent responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and
recurring expenditure for the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
(3) The Central Government shall provide to the State Governments, as
grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure referred to in sub-
section (2), as it may determine, from time to time, in consultatio n with the
State Governments to undertake the monitoring, administration and
implementation of the Act.
(4) T
he Central Government may make a request to the President to make a
reference to the Finance Commission under sub-clause (d) of clause (3) of article
280 to examine the need for additional resources to be provided to any State
Government so that the said State Government may provide its share of funds for
carrying out the provisions of the Act.
(5) Not
withstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), the State Government
shall, taking into consideration the sums provided by the Central Government to
a State Government under sub-section (3), and its other resources, be responsible
to provide funds for implementation of the provisions of the Act.
(6) It shall be the duty of the State Government to monitor the implementation of
this Act, at the micro level, and prepare and submit a comprehensive report to the 
Central Government, in such form and manner and at such time as may be 
prescribed. 
25 
30 
35 
40 

5 
5 
(7) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to examine the report mentioned 
in sub- section (6) and take necess ary action thereon to ensure provision of
universal basic income to all citizens.
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
14. The appropriate Government may issue such guidelines to local authorities, as it
may consider necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Appropriate 
Government to 
issue guidelines. 
      15.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
16. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for
the time being in force.
Act to have an 
overriding 
effect. 
15 
20 
17. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
appropriate Government may, make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or
expedient for removing such difficulty.
(2) Eve
ry order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made,before each House of Parliament.
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
25 
30 
 
18. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) E
very rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
(3) E
very rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it
consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before
that House.
Powers of 
appropriate 
Government to 
make rules. 
10

6 
S
TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
We are living in a highly iniquitous world where a microscopic minority is 
controlling huge assets and the majority is poor and marginalized. One of t he 
major problems faced by the world is of inequality in the distribution of money, 
resources and opportunities . It is also imperative to acknowledge society’s 
obligation to guarantee a minimum living standard in times of uncertain 
employment generation.  Ensuring universal basic income will help every citizen 
to gain some financial freedom and strive for his life goal. It will provide the 
necessary material foundation for a life with access to basic goods and a life of 
dignity, but also promote many of the basic values of a society which respects all 
individuals as free and equal.  It will also promote equality by reducing poverty, 
improve health conditions and educational outcomes, promote efficiency by 
reducing waste in government transfers and even promote greater productivity. 
The Bill aims to achieve an egalitarian society where individuals can lead a 
dignified and healthy life by providing every citizen the right to universal basic 
income.  
V. SIVADASAN

7 
F
INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the right of all citizens to universal basic 
income. Clause 4 provides for special provisions for people who belong to the below 
poverty line category. Clause 5 provides for special provisions for people without 
any other source of income and clause 6 provides for special provision for meeting 
the nutritional needs of children.  Clause 7 provides for constitution of the National 
Advisory Board and Clause 8 (2) provides for the salaries and allowances payable to 
the Chairperson and Members of the Board. Clause 10 (2) of the Bill provides for the 
salaries and allowances of the officers and employees of the Board.  states the duties 
of the appropriate Government. Clause 12 provides that the Central Government shall 
provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the functions assigned to it. 
Clause 14 provides for sharing of financial and other responsibilities between Central 
Government and State Governments. 
T
he Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is 
difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 

8 
M
EMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to issue guidelines. 
Clause 18 provides that the appropriate Government may, make such order or give such 
direction, as necessary for removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this 
Bill. Clause 19 empowers the appropriate Government  to make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Bill. 
As the guidelines, orders, directions and rules will relate to matters of details 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

 
RAJYA SABHA 
_________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for universal basic income to all citizens and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
_________ 
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—161—31.07.2024 