Bill No. XXI of  2020
Short title.
THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A  PERMANENT
BENCH IN WESTERN ODISHA) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court
of Orissa in Western Odisha.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the High Court of Orissa (establishment of a Permanent
Bench in Western Odisha) Act, 2020.
(2) There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court of Orissa in
Western Odisha at a suitable place, to be decided by the Union Government in consultation
with the Orissa High Court and other appropriate authorities as may required and; such
Judges of the Orissa High Court, being not less than five in number, as the Chief Justice of
that High Court may from time to time nominate, shall sit at such place where the permanent
bench will be set up in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested
in that High Court in respect of cases arising in the districts of Western part of the State of
Odisha, including Bargarh, Bolangir, Jharsuguda, Nayagarh, Nuapada, Sambalpur, Subarnapur,
Kalahandi, Baudh, Sonepur, Koraput, Kandhamal, Nabarangpur, Raygada and Sundargarh.
Establishing a
bench of HC
of Orissa in
Western
Odisha.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Constitution of India provides the right of access to justice to every citizen.
Justice at the door step has been the motto of every Government, and yet the demand for
establishment of a permanent bench of the Orissa High Court in Western Odisha has been
pending for a long time. There have been unending agitations, protests and demonstrations
by all sections of the people in support of the cause. Many parts of Western Odisha are tribal
dominated and a larger part by the other backward communities. The High Court of Orissa
situated at Cuttack is roughly at a distance of around three hundred kilometers from districts
of Western Odisha. The people of that region are not in a position to bear the burden of
expenditure on account of travelling and lodging to Cuttack frequently. The Orissa High
Court, as such, is over-burdened with cases. In average, there is only one High Court Judge
per forty lakh of the population of the State.
This Bill, therefore, seeks to establish a permanent Bench of the Orissa High Court at
any suitable place in Western Odisha by the Union Government in consultation with the
Hon'ble High Court of Orissa and other appropriate authorities.
Hence, this Bill.
PRASANNA  ACHARYA
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court
of Orissa in Western Odisha.
————
(Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1319RS(S3)—07-12-2021.