THE PROHIBITION OF USING TELECOMMUNICA TION SYSTEM
FOR HOAX CALLS BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of using telecommunication system for making hoax calls and
short message service and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Using Telecommunication System for
Hoax Calls Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Bill No. XXI of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015
Short title, and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(b) "telecommunication system" means any mode of electronic telecommunication
and includes any landline telephone, public telephone booth, mobile phone, satellite
phone, internet phone or any other such means;
(c) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code 1860, the Indian Telegraphic Act, 1885 and the Information
Technology Act, 2000 shall have the same meaning as is respectively assigned to them
in those Acts.
3. (1) The use of any telecommunication system for hoax calls or hoax Short Message
Service (SMS) or for any other similar purpose is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Any person who is found guilty of making a hoax call or hoax SMS with an intention
to spread fear or panic in public shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a minimum
term of seven years which may extend upto ten years and a fine of ten lakh rupees.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 every
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
6. Notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
7. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Prohibition of
Misusing tele-
communica-
tion system.
45 of 1860.
13 of 1885
21 of 2000
10
15
20
Penalty.
Offence to be
cognizable.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The menace of hoax calls or SMS made from local public telephone booths,
Mobiles, internet phones etc. for spreading false information related to spreading fear,
panic, and sexual harassment by using these devices has reached alarming levels.
Every day the newspapers are filled with reports of misuse of the telecommunication
system by anti-social elements for making false/hoax calls or SMS raising a serious
security concern for our nation which adversely affects the functioning of police
forces and disrupts public services at large.
The culprits of such nefarious acts are encouraged to continue their activities
since the punishment for such terrible acts is very minimal. It is felt that if, harsh
punishment is imposed on perpetrators of such heinous acts, they would discontinue
their activities. Therefore, it is proposed to provide for harsher punishment for making
hoax calls to curb this nuisance.
Hence this Bill.
MANSUKH  L.  MANDAVIYA

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The delegation of legislative powers is of normal character, as the
matters to be prescribed are of details only.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of using telecommunication system for making hoax calls and
short message service and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya, , M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3368RS(S3)—07-12-2015.