1
 Bill  No.  XXI of  2008
THE WOMEN AND GIRL CHILD (PREVENTION OF TEASING,
STRIPPING, MOLESTATION, RAPE AND OTHER ATROCITIES)
 BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to prevent and prohibit the commission of atrocities and offences like teasing, stripping or
parading naked, molestation, rape, outraging modesty, branding or killing as witches,
forcing into prostitution offering as devadaasi etc. against the women and girl child
and to provide for deterrent punishment and special Courts for the trial of such
offences and for the relief and rehabilitation of the victims of such offences  and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Women and Girl Child (Prevention of Teasing,
Stripping, Molestation, Rape and Other Atrocities) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘atrocity’’ includes parading naked or painting face or body black or such
other similar acts, compelling or enticing to do begar or bonded work, or misusing
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
 commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
position to harass or sexually exploit, or insulting or intimidating with intention to
humiliate publicly, taking pictures or video without consent, or forcing woman or girl
child into prostitution;
(c) ‘‘girl child’’ means a female who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(d) ‘‘Special Court’’ means a Court of Session specified as a Special Court in
section 6 including a Fast Track Court;
(e) ‘‘Stripping’’ includes forcible removing or tearing of any cloth or part thereof
worn by a girl child or woman with an intention of exposing the body or any part
thereof of such a girl child or woman, as the case may be;
(f) ‘‘teasing’’ includes uttering words, song, making sound of whistle or gesture,
exhibiting any object or part of the body, throwing any object or doing any act to
attract the attention of the girl or woman, as the case may be, thereby intentionally
harassing such girl child or woman;
(g) ‘‘woman’’ means a feamle who has attained the age of eighteen years or
more;
(h) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, no person
shall,—
(a) with malicious intention of taking revenge or to fulfil his lust or to outrage the
modesty of any woman or girl child, as the case may be, strip publicly any woman or
girl at any point of time;
(b) tease any woman or girl at any place and at any point of time;
(c) for any reason, whatsoever declare any woman or girl as a witch or offer any
girl child as devadaasi in a temple, etc.;
(d) commit atrocity on any woman or girl child, as the case may be.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Whoever contravenes the provisions of,—
(a) clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be liable for imprisonment,
which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten years and also with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees;
(b) clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 shall be liable for
imprisonment, which shall not be less than three years and also with fine which shall
not be less than rupee two lakhs but may extend to five lakh rupees;
(c) clause (d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 shall be liable for imprisonment
which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten years and also with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees:
Provided that whoever commits the atrocity of rape on a woman or girl child,
notwithstanding anything in the Indian Penal Code, shall be punished with death.
5. Whoever, being a public servant, willfully neglects his duties required to be performed
by him under this Act, shall be,—
(a) dismissed from service forthwith; and
(b) liable for imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less than one year but
may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Prohibition of
teasing,
stripping,
molestation,
Rape and
other
atrocities on
women and
girl child.
Penalty for
neglect of
duties.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
Penalty.
45 of 1860.

3
6. The appropriate Government shall, with the concurrence of the concerned High
Court, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Special Court for the purposes of
this Act, for each district within its territorial jurisdiction to try offences under this Act.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 an
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
8.  (1) The appropriate Government shall provide such relief to the victims under this
Act by framing appropriate schemes as may be notified from time to time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing Provisions the relief and
rehabilitation measures shall include,—
(a) free of cost medical facilities;
(b) free board and lodging;
(c) recreational facilities;
(d) vocational training;
(e) employment in deserving cases;
(f) such other measures as the appropriate Government may deem
necessary and expedient to initiate for the purposes of this Act.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or any custom or usage or any instrument having effect by virtue of any other
law.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Establishment
of Special
Courts.
Offences to
be cognizable
and non-
bailable.
2 of 1974.
Relief and
rehabilitation
measures.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our society, despite reforms and awakening, it is very unfortunate that young girls
and women are still most vulnerable to various atrocities and violence. Teasing and molesting
them even at public places, public transport, etc. have become order of the day. The teasers
have become fearless. They pass vulgar remarks, make obscene gestures and meddle hastily
with them, which many a time cause bodily injury and nobody comes to the rescue of the
hapless girl or woman. They are subjected to all kinds of torture in public transport, public
place which more often go unreported. Many a time women are reportedly stripped and
paraded naked in the Villages and streets and beaten ruthlessly to take revenge or for merry
making. In some parts, the women are being branded as witches and killed ruthlessly which
needs to be dealt with severely by providing deterrent punishment. Similarly, in some parts
of the country, girls are offered as Devadaasis to deities in the temples which ultimately
makes them sex workers. Similarly, young girls and women are abducted and forced into
prostitution. The girl child and women are also raped or gang raped and the number of these
cases increasing rapidly. Some of these girls and women are brutally killed after rape. There
is no fear of law among the rapists.
Hence, it has become necessary to provide deterrent punishment for the perpetrators
of atrocities against the girl child and women in order to give the women and girl child a
respectable position in the society. Hopefully, these stringent measures may curb the
atrocities against the girl child and women in the society.
Hence this Bill.
E.M. SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Special Courts. Clause 8 provide
for relief and rehabilitation measures for victims by the appropriate Government. Clause 9
makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees Five thousand crore may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A  sum of rupees seven thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of the Bill.
The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of legislative power is of
normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent  and prohibit the commission of atrocities and offences like teasing, stripping or
parading naked, molestation, rape, outraging modesty, branding or killing as witches,
forcing into prostitution offering as devadaasi etc. against the women and girl child
and to provide for deterrent punishment and special Courts for the trial of such offences
and for the relief and rehabilitation of the victims of such offences  and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4748RS(S-5)—29.12.2008.