AS INTRODUCED IN THE RasyA Saptia

Bill No. XXI of 2001

THE CONSUMER GOODS (PUBLICATION OF PRICE WITH
ADVERTISEMENT) BILL, 2001

A
BILL

to provide for compulsory publication of retail sale price alongwith the advertisement of
the consumer goods and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Goods (Publication of Price with
Advertisement) Act, 2001.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “advertised product” includes all products and services which for sale are
published or printed in newspaper, magazines or in any other form, broadcast or telecast
10 through radio or television or through any other media or through verbal announcement
made in the public in this regard;
(6) “Consumer goods” include all raw materials, agricultural commodities, finished
goods of any kind or any other article and services intended for sale;

(c) “price” means the actual retail sale price of the product;

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


Publication of
the retail sale
prices of the
consumer
goods in
advertisement

Penalties.

3, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be mandatory for an advertiser of any product or consumer goods to publish
simultaneously the price of the product which is intended to be sold in the domestic market
and the agency whether owned by Government or any individual or group of individuals
advertising such products shall ensure that no such product is advertised without
simultancously publishing such price.

4. (J) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 of this Act shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees or with both.

(2) if the offence under sub-section (/) is committed by an agency or a company the
head of such agency or company by whatever name called, shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Consumer movement at present is picking up its tempo in our country. Though
slowly, it has forced the Government to bring forward legislations to protect the consumers
and accordingly Parliament enacted the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Simultaneously
a number of other enactments dealing with consumer interest were amended to protect the
rights and interests of the consumers. But still there are some shortcomings in the Consumer
Protection Laws. One such shortcoming is the non-publication of retail sale price of various
consumer goods alongwith their advertisements. It is a well known trade practice that
publicity of a product is a must for capturing the market and to boost its sale. This publicity
is done through advertisements in Radio, TW. newspapers, magazines, cinema slides,
hoardings, posters, announcements in the public through loudspeakers etc. Today radio,
TV, newspapers and magazines, etc. are the most popular means of advertisement. The
consumers are in fact lured by the advertisements to purchase the particular product but
when the consumer goes to the market he finds different rates of the same product in
different shops or agencies. The consumer is fleeced to the extent possible and he cannot
resist his being fleeced because he does not know the actual sale price of the product. This
can be stopped if simultaneous publication of actual sale price of the product alongwith its
advertisement is made mandatory by enacting a law in this regard and providing for stiff
penalties for violation thereof. This mandatory publication of sale price will protect the
consumer from being fleeced by unscruplous traders but it will also give him opportunity
to think twice before deciding to purchase a product according to the money in his pocket.
It will save him from the mad rush of shopping without caring for his budget. It will go a
long way in the movement of consumer protection.

Hence this Bill.

S. S. AHLUWALIA.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for compulsory publication of retail sale price alongwith the
advertisement of the consumer goods and for matters connected
therewith.

(Shri 5. 5. Ahluwalia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6647RS—23-02-2001.