1
THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2)   It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
for the long title, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“An Act to provide for the reconstitution of the Medical Council of India and for the
determination, coordination, maintenance, and regulation of standards of medical education,
to regulate the practice of medicine, ensure adequate availability of doctors in all States and
maintain the Indian Medical Register  and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.”.
Short title and
commence-
ment .
Amendment
of long title.
102 of 1956.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. XXII of 2013
5
10

2
3.    In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) one member, to represent the Union territories by rotation, to
be nominated by the Central Government;”;
(ii) in clause (b), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where there is a Health University in a State, that
University shall elect, in such manner as may be provided by  the rules
made by the Central Government, one representative for every ten medical
colleges affiliated to it to represent such medical colleges:
Provided further that  a Health University with  less than ten medical
colleges affiliated to it, shall also be eligible to elect one representative to
represent such medical colleges:
Provided also that such number of representatives shall be reviewed
by the Central Government after every five years;”;
(iii) clause (d) shall be omitted;
(b)  in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that no person shall hold office as the President or the Vice-President
for more than two terms.”;
(c) after sub-section (3), the following  sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4)   The term of the Council shall be for a period of four years from the
date of notification issued under sub-section ( 1).”.
4.   After section 3A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“3AA. The Central Government shall, as soon as possible, after the
commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2013, by notification
in the Official Gazette, reconstitute the Council:
Provided that the Board of Governors constituted under sub-section ( 4) of
section 3A shall continue to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the
Council till the new Council is reconstituted.”.
5.   In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) the words, brackets and letter “or clause (d)” shall be omitted;
(b) the words, brackets, letter  and figures “and any rules so made may provide
that pending the preparation of the Indian Medical  Register in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, the members referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 3  may be nominated by the Central Government instead of elected as provided
therein” shall be omitted.
6.   In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(a)  in sub-section (1), for the words “five years”, the words “four years” shall be
substituted;
(b)  for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) Subject to the provisions of the Act, a member, whether nominated or
elected, shall hold office for a term of four years.”;
Amendment
of section 3.
Insertion of
new section
3AA.
Reconstitu-
tion of
Council.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 7.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(c) in sub-section (6), for the words “five years”, the words “four years” shall be
substituted.
7.   After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“9A. (1) The Council shall, subject to the provisions of the Act and rules made
thereunder, take measures to determine, coordinate and maintain the standards of
medical education and practice in medicine, and ensure adequate availability of doctors
to all States.
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the measures
referred to in sub-section (1), may, inter alia, provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) lay down the standards of professional ethics in the practice of medicine;
(b) grant or withdraw permission for establishment of medical college and
course of study in medical education and ensure compliance of its terms and
conditions for such permission;
(c) maintain the Indian Medical Register;
(d) render advice to the Central Government or the State Government on
matters relating to the medical education and  practice in medicine;
(e) facilitate  medical education in the institutions  situated outside the
country;
(f) undertake and recommend to the  Central Government  or the State
Government such measures as may be necessary to regulate medical education
in or outside the country;
(g) organise seminars, symposiums  and workshops in order to promote
continuous medical education and practice in medicine; and
(h) perform such other functions as may be provided by the  rules made by
the Central Government.”.
8.  In section 13 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “a citizen of India”, the words “a citizen of
India or an overseas citizen of India” shall be substituted;
(b)  in sub-section (3), for the words “a citizen of India”, the words “a citizen of
India or an overseas citizen of India” shall be substituted;
(c)   in sub-section (4A), for the words “a citizen of India”, the words “a citizen of
India or an overseas citizen of India” shall be substituted;
(d)  after sub-section (5), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
Explanation.—  For the purposes of this section, the expression “overseas
citizen of India” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( ee) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955.
9. In section 14 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section (1), the words “for
the time being for the purposes of teaching, research or charitable work” shall be omitted.
10.   In section 21 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1
), for the words “the names”, the words “the names and
biometric details” shall be substituted;
Insertion of
new section
9A.
Functions of
Council.
Amendment
of section 13.
57 of 1955.
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 21.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(b) after sub-section (2), the  following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(2A) The Council shall, in addition to the Indian Medical Register referred
to in sub-section (1), maintain the Electronic Medical Register containing the
particulars specified in the Indian Medical Register.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this sub-section, the expressions,—
(i) “Electronic Medical Register” means the Indian Medical Register
published in the electronic form;
(ii) “electronic form” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (r) of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.’.
11. After section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“23A. The enrolment of a person as a medical practitioner on the Indian Medical
Register or the State Medical Register  shall be valid for a period of ten years from the
date of such enrolment:
Provided that a medical practitioner who has completed ten years of enrolment,
may apply to the Council for renewal of his enrolment immediately after the
commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2013, within a period
of twelve months in such form, in such manner and with such fees, as may be prescribed:
Provided further that the Council may extend the period of twelve months, if
applicant shows that he was prevented by sufficient course from preferring the
application within time.”.
12.   After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“30A. (1)    The President, Vice-President or any member of the Council may, by
notice in writing under his hand  addressed to the Central Government, resign from
office:
Provided that the President, Vice-President or any member of the Council shall,
unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such
notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until
the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government may remove from office the President, Vice-President, or any  member of
the Council, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such
President, Vice-President, or other member; or
(c)  is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(d)  has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially the exercise of his functions as such President, Vice-President, or
other member; or
21 of 2000.
Insertion of
new section
23A.
Renewal of
enrolment.
Insertion of
new section
30A.
Resignation,
removal and
suspension of
President,
Vice-President
or members
of Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused his position as
to render his continuance in office  detrimental  to the overall public interest; or
(g) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour.
(3) No person shall be removed from his office on the grounds specified in
clause (e) or clause ( f) or clause ( g) of sub-section ( 2) unless he has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.”.
13.    In section 32 of the principal Act,  for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of electing the representative of the medical colleges under
the first proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3;
(b) the mode of election of the Council under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(c) the other functions of the Council under clause (h) of sub-section (2)
of section 9A;
(d) the conditions relating to the payment of a fee for filing an appeal
before the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 24;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, provided by rules
or in respect of which provision is to be made  by rules.”.
14.   In section 33 of the principal Act, after clause (ma), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(mb) the form, manner and payment of fee for renewal of enrolment under section
23A;”.
15. After section 33 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
33A. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority
shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it
from time to time:
Provided that the Council shall, as far as practicable, be given opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy
or not shall be final.
33B.  (1) Where the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may,
by order in  writing,  direct  the  Council  to  make  any  regulations  or  to amend  or
revoke  any regulations already made within such period as it may specify in this
behalf.
(2) If the Council fails or neglects to comply with such order within the specified
period, the Central Government may make the regulations or amend or revoke the
regulations made by the Council, as the case may be, either in the form specified in the
order or with such modifications thereof as the Central Government thinks fit.
33C.  Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall  be  laid,  as  soon
as  may  be  after  it  is  made,  before each  House  of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 33.
Insertion of
new sections
33A, 33B and
33C.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Powers of
Central
Government
to direct
regulations to
be made or to
make or
amend
regulations.
Laying of
rules and
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule, regulation or both Houses agree that the rule and regulation
should not be made, the rule and regulation shall, thereafter have effect only in such
modified form  or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 was enacted for the purpose of reconstituting
the Medical Council of India (Council) and to provide for the maintenance of the Indian
Medical Register and for matters connected therewith. The Act was amended, inter alia, by
the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 superseding the Council for one year
with effect from the 15th May, 2010 and providing for the constitution of a Board of Governors
of not more than seven persons to exercise the powers and to perform the functions of the
Council under the said Act. Subsequently, the term of the Board of Governors was extended
to one year at a time by amending the Act in 2011 and 2012 and as per the provisions of the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2012 the Council has to be reconstituted within a
period of three years from the date of its supersession, that is latest by the 14th May, 2013.
2. Now, it is proposed to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 to reconstitute
the Council and review the composition of the said Council so as to give representation to
Union territories and to remove the anomaly where States having larger number of medical
colleges, but having formed a medical university, were having fewer seats in the Council as
compared to States having fewer colleges affiliated to several Universities, by inserting a
proviso in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3.
3. The Council's main functions as contained in the Indian Medical Council Act,1956 is
to make recommendations to the Central Government in matters of recognition of medical
qualifications, determining the courses of study and examinations required to obtain such
qualifications, inspection of examinations and maintenance of register of medical practitioners,
etc. By the amendment of the said Act in 1993, the power to grant permission for establishment
of new Medical Colleges, increase in admission capacity or for starting new or higher course
of study or training in the established colleges was entrusted to the Central Government
from the respective State Governments. For this purpose, the Council became a
recommendatory body to the Central Government for taking final decisions in these matters.
After reviewing the working of the Council in this area, and the problems being faced, a need
has been felt to empower the Central Government to give such directions to the Council
wherever necessary on matters of policy and public importance and to ensure their proper
compliance.
4. The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013, inter alia, provides the following,
namely:—
(a) to amend long title of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (Act) so as to
make it more comprehensive;
(b) to amend sub-section (2) of the section 3 of the Act so as to provide that no
person shall hold the post of President or the Vice-President for more than two terms;
(c) to amend section 13 of the Act relating to recognition of medical qualifications
granted to a citizen of India by medical institutions not included in the First or Second
Schedule so as to extend the benefit to the overseas citizen of India;
(d) to amend section 14 of the Act relating to the medical practice by the persons
having medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in any country outside
India. It is proposed to provide that the practice by such persons shall be limited for a
specified period in the institution to which they are attached;
(e) to amend section 21 of the Act relating to the Indian Medical Register so as
to provide that the biometric details of all persons enrolled on any State Medical
Register shall be verified at the time of renewal of registration;
7

8
(f) to provide for renewal that every medical practitioner whose name has been
enrolled as such on the Indian Medical Register or State Medical Register shall be
valid for a period of ten years from the date of such enrolment and thereafter, it may got
be renewed;
(g) to insert a new section 30A in the Act relating to resignation by the President,
Vice-President and Members of the Council and the power of the Central Government
to remove from the office the President, Vice-President or a Member; and
(h) to insert a new section 33A in the Act relating to power of the Central
Government to give directions to the Council in the matters of policy and for making
any regulation.
5. The proposed amendments will make the composition of the Council compact, and
representative, and empower the Central Government to discharge its functions effectively
to ensure proper development of medical education in the country.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; GHULAM  NABI  AZAD
The 13th March, 2013.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL ACT, 1956
(102 OF 1956)
An Act to provide for the reconstitution of the Medical Council of India, and the
maintenance of a Medical Register for India and for matters connected therewith.
* * * * *
3. (1) The Central Government shall cause to be constituted a Council consisting of
the following members, namely:—
* * * * *
(b) one member from each University, to be elected from amongst the members of the
medical faculty of the University by members of the Senate of the University or in case the
University has no Senate, by members of the court;
* * * * *
(d) seven members to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on any
of the State Medical Registers who possess the medical qualifications included in Part I of
the Third Schedule;
* * * * *
(2) The President and Vice-President of the Council shall be elected by the members of
the Council from amongst themselves.
* * * * *
4. (1) An election under clause (b), clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section
3 shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such rules as may be
made by it in this behalf, and any rules so made may provide that pending the preparation of
the Indian Medical Register in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the memebrs
referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 may be nominated by the Central
Government instead of being elected as provided therein.
* * * * *
7. (1) The President or Vice-President of the Council shall hold office for a term not
exceeding five years and not extending beyond the expiry of his term as member of the
Council.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member shall hold office for a term of five
years from the date of his nomination or election or until his successor shall have duly
nominated or elected, whichever is longer.
* * * * *
(6) Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member, a
successor may be nominated or elected at any time within three months before the said term
expires but he shall not assume office until the said term has expired.
* * * * *
13.  ( 1) * * * * *
(2) The medical qualifications granted to a citizen of India—
(a) before the 15th day of August, 1947, by medical institutions in the territories
now forming part of Pakistan, and
(b) before the Ist day of April, 1937, by medical institutions in the territories now
forming part of Burma,
which are included in Part I of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical
qualifications for the purposes of this Act.
9
Constitution
and
composition
of the
Council.
Mode of
election.
Term of office
of President,
Vice-President
and members.
Recognition of
medical
qualifications
granted by
certain medical
institutions
whose
qualifications
are not
included in the
First or Second
Schedule.

10
(3) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India before
such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
which are included in Part II of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical
qualifications for the purposes of this Act, but no person possessing any such qualification
shall be entitled to enrolment on any State Medical Register unless he is a citizen of India and
has undergone such practical training after obtaining that qualification as may be required
by the rules or regulations in force in the country granting the qualification, or if he has not
undergone any practical training in that country he has undergone such practical training as
may be prescribed.
* * * * *
(4A) A person who is a citizen of India and obtains medical qualification granted by
any medical institution in any country outside India recognised for enrolment as medical
practitioner in that country after such date as may be specified by the Central Government
under sub-section (3), shall not be entitled to be enrolled on any Medical Register maintained
by a State Medical Council or to have his name entered in the Indian Medical Register unless
he qualifies the screening test in India prescribed for such purpose and such foreign medical
qualification after such person qualifies the said screening test shall be deemed to be the
recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act for that person.
* * * * *
14. (1) The Central Government after consusltation with the Council may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, direct that medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in
any country outside India in respect of which a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of
medical qualifications is not in force, shall be recognised medical qualifications for the
purposes of this Act or shall be so only when granted after a specified date:
Provided that medical practice by persons possessing such qualifications—
(a) shall be permitted only if such persons are enrolled as medical practitioners
in accordance with the law regulating the registration of medical practitioners for the
time being in force in that country;
(b) shall be limited to the institution to which they are attached for the time being
for the purposes of teaching, research or charitable work; and
* * * * *
21. (1) The Council shall cause to be maintained in the prescribed manner a register of
medical practitioners to be known as the Indian Medical Register, which shall contain the
names of all persons who are for the time being enrolled on any State Medical Register and
who possess any of the recognised medical qualifications.
* * * * *
32. (1) * * * * *
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
33. The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, make
regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and, without prejudice to the
generality of this power, such regulations, may provide for—
* * * * *
Special
provision in
certain cases
for
recognition
of medical
qualifications
granted by
medical
institutions in
countries
with which
there is no
scheme of
reciprocity.
The Indian
Medical
Register.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
make
regulations.

RAJYA  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
————
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of  Health and Family Welfare)
GMGIPMRND—5796RS(S4)—15-03-2013.