5

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXIII of 1999

THE PREVENTION OF PRODUCTION, DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OF
SYNTHETIC MILK BILL, 1999

A

BILL

to provide for the prohibition of production, distribution and sale of dangerous
synthetic milk made of detergents, urea and other chemicals, edible oils and
fats and passed on to unsuspecting consumers as natural milk and for
deterrent punishment including capital punishment for the offenders and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. ( This Act may be called the Prevention of Production, Distribution and Sale of
Synthetic Milk Act, 1999.

(ii) It extends to the whole of India.

Short title
extent and.

ment.


Definition’s.

Prohibition of
production,
distribution
and sale of
synthetic milk,

Special Task
Force.

Offence to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.

Power to make
rules.

2
(iii) It shall come into force with imediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in other cases, the Central Government;

(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(c) “Synthetic milk” includes milk made of detergent powder, urea, edible
oils, fats etc. or any whitener or milk other than the natural milk in form of powder
or liquid, as the case may be.

3. Nothwithstanding anything contained in the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act, 1954 (37 of 1954) or any other law for the time being in force, the production,
distribution and sale of synthetic milk, whether in form of powder or liquid, is hereby
prohibited.

4, (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 of the first time, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but may
extend to ten years and also with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees but may
extend to five lakh rupees and for the subsequent offence shall be punished with death.

(2) Where an ‘offence is committed against this Act by any person acting as the
agent or servant of another person, or being otherwise subject to the supervision or
instructions of another person for the purposes of any employment in the course of which
the offence was committed, that other person shall, without prejudice to the liability of
the first mentioned person, be liable under this Act in the same manner and to the same
extent as if he had personally committed the offence if it is proved that the Act which
constituted the offence was committed with his consent or connivance or that it was
attributable to an neglect on his part.

(3) Where an offence under this Act committed by a body corporate is proved to
have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any
neglect on the part of any Director, Manager, Secretary or other similar officer of the body
corporate, or any person who was purporting to act in any such capacity, he, as well as the
body corporate shall be guilt of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.

5. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Special Task Force for
carrying out the purposes of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.

(2) The functions, conditions of service and jurisdiction of the Special Task Force
shall be such, as may be prescribed.

6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
the offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.

4, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

15

20

25

30

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

These days print media is full of reports about the large scale sale of synthetic milk
in various parts of the country particularly in U.P., Rajasthan, Haryana, Gujarat and even
in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and in other parts of the country as well. The
synthetic milk is generally produced from detergents, edible oils, fats, urea etc. and mixed
with small quantity of natural milk and then passed on to the unsuspecting consumers as
natural milk. This has endangered the health particularly those of the children because
consumption of synthetic milk can lead to various dreaded diseases including cancer,
kidney and lung failure. This business has become so lucrative that people have started
producing it on a very large scale. Even some reputed milk companies are involved in this
for making quick money. Both State Governments and Central government are unable to
cope with this menace in the absence of any stringent law to check it. It is felt that deterrent
punishment has to be provided for those who are passing on poison to unsuspecting
consumers.

Hence, this Bill.
S. RAMACHANDRA REDDY


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the Constitution of a special Task Force for the
implementation of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Con-
solidated Fund of India to the tune of Twenty Five Crore rupees per annum as recurring
expenditure.

Asum of Ten Crore rupees may also involve as non-recurring expenditure,


wee

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

To provide for the prohibition of production, distribution and sale of dangerous synthetic
milk made of detergents, urea and other chemicals, edible oils and fats and passed on to
unsuspecting consumers as natural milk and for deterrent punishment including capital pun-
ishment for the offenders and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1869RS—22-11-1999