Short title, and
commencement.
THE  FOREST (CONSERV ATION)  AMENDMENT  BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment  Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. After section 3B of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, (hereinafter referred to as
the Principal Act) the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“3C. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 2 and 3, the Central
Government may delegate all or any of its functions as enumerated therein to a particular
State for carrying out developmental activities subject to the condition that the grant
of approval under section 2 shall be made by a committee consisting of Forest officers,
environment specialists, engineers and other technical experts to be notified by that
State Government with the prior approval of the Central Government."
Bill No. XXIII  of  2007
Insertion of
new section
3C.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 27TH APRIL, 2007.

2
3. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(i) after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that if the powers under section 3C have been delegated to the
State government then that State Government may make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act in that State.
(ii) after sub section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that every rule made under this Act by the State Government
under proviso to sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be laid as soon as may be,
after it is made, before the House or each House of the state legislature as the
case may be, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, the House or the Houses agree(s) in making any modification
in the rule or the House or the Houses agree(s) that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.”
Amendment of
section 4.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 was enacted by the Parliament to check
deforestation leading to ecological imbalance and environmental degradation. The Parliament
having enacted legislation dealing with forest conservation, the State Legislature have no
power to make, enact any law, regulation or rule which touches on the subject. That the
provisions of the Act are mandatory requiring strict compliance on the pain of incurring
penalties as enumerated in sections 3A and 3B of the A. The latter deals with and contemplates
punishment to government officers. Section 2 starts with a non-obstinate clause requiring
prior approval of the Central Government before any activity on land described as reserved
forest or forest land. All activities except reforestation are banned. There is no provision
giving any discretion to the State Government to initiate, extend or continue development
activities, peculiar to its needs.
Himachal Pradesh has hilly and mountainous terrain covered with trees. The topography
of the State does not permit easy access to villages, towns and cities. Interlinking panchayat,
tehsil, sub-divisional headquarters requires construction of roads which are the life-line of
economic and social development. Provision of basic amenities and government facilities
like schools, healthcare centres, government offices, banks, post offices, telegraph facilities,
revenue offices, etc. is the basic and primary constitutional duty of the State and the
fundamental requirements of the inhabitants. All construction activity required for provision
of these services has come to a grinding halt as permission from the Central Government as
envisaged by sections 2 and 3 is not forthcoming and takes considerable amount of time.
Resultantly, all developmental activities are being hindered. When the Act was passed, it
was presumed that Government to Government permission would not take time.
Considering the peculiar and unique topography of the hilly states and the pressing
and urgent requirements of socio-economic development requiring immediate and prompt
action, the mandatory requirement of prior permission from the Central Government should
be dispensed with and ample safeguards be provided in the Act to conserve ecology while
at the same time speeding development activity in the State.
Therefore, it is proposed that after section 3B of the Act, a provision may be inserted
giving powers to the Central Government to delegate all or some of the powers under sections
2 and 3 to the State Government to perform such of the duties under the Act as deemed
necessary with the approval of a Committee consisting of forest officers, environment experts,
engineers and other technical experts notified by the State Government with the approval of
Central Government. It is also proposed that the power to make or amend the rules may also
be delegated to the State to which power under sections 2 and 3 have been delegated.
VIPLOVE  THAKUR
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
—————
(Shrimati Viplove Thakur, M.P.)
MGIPMRND— 1766RS(S-3)—27-04-2007.