1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall  come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "sixty two years" the
words "sixty five years" shall be substituted.
3.  In article 233 of the Constitution, after clause ( 2), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
(3) Every district judge appointed under this article shall hold office until he
attains the age of sixty five years:
Provided that a district judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to
the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, resign his post:
Provided further that a district judge may be removed from his office by
the concerned High Court as per the established procedure.
Amendment
of article 217.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of article 233.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD  JULY, 2009
Bill  No.  XXII of  2008
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There appears to be no particular rationale underlying the existing, diversity of age of
superannuation ranging from fifty eight years to sixty five years as one proceeds up the
judicial pyramid. Similarly, there is no basis to suppose that a judicial officer would be unable
to discharge his judicial duties adequately only till fifty eight years of age whereas a High
Court Judge can do so only upto sixty-two years, whereas a Supreme Court Judge can do so
upto sixty-five years of age.
Given the over three crore pendency of cases by way of arrears, the availability of
existing experience judicial manpower uniformly all over the country till sixty-five years of
age is desirable. It is felt that such uniformity in age would also reduce, if not eliminate the
occasional unseemly urges for judges of a lower court to seek promotion to the next higher
rung of the judicial order. It is, therefore, desired that  the superannuation age of all Judges
in the country should be symmetrically aligned.
The above Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.
Hence this Bill.
ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
Article 217.  Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High Court.—
(1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his
hand and seal after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State,
and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice
of the High Co urt, and shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as
provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years:
* * * * * *
Article 233. Appointment of district judges.— (1) Appointments of persons to be, and
the posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor of
the State in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.
(2) A person not already in the service of the Union or of the State shall only be eligible
to be appointed a district judge if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate or
a pleader and is recommended by the High Court for appointment.
* * * * * *
3

GMGIPMRND—2552RS(S5)—03-07-2009.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, M.P.)