THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL
OFFENCES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJYA SABHA ON 24 JULY, 2019  
LOK SABHA ON 1 AUGUST, 2019)
Bill No. XXII-F of 2019
ASSENTED  TO
 ON 05TH AUG, 2019
ACT NO. 25 OF 2019

1
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT )
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the SeventiethYear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in section 2,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
'(da) "child pornography" means any visual depiction of sexually explicit
conduct involving a child which include photograph, video, digital or computer
generated image indistinguishable from an actual child, and image created,
adapted, or modified, but appear to depict a child;';
Amendment
of section 2.
Short title and
commencement.
32 of 2012.
Bill No. XXII-F of  2019

2
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and figures "the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000", the words, brackets and figures "the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015" shall be substituted.
3. In the principal Act, section 4 shall be renumbered as section 4(1)  thereof and—
(a)  in sub-section ( 1) as so renumbered, for the words "seven years", the
words "ten years" shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child below sixteen
years of age shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which
shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of natural life of that person, and
shall also be liable to fine.
(3) The fine imposed under sub-section ( 1) shall be just and reasonable
and paid to the victim to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of such
victim.".
4. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(I) in clause (j),—
(A) in sub-clause (i), the word "or" occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(B) in sub-clause (iii), the word "or" occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(C) after sub-clause ( iii), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(iv) causes death of the child; or";
(II) in clause ( s), for the words "communal or sectarian violence", the words
"communal or sectarian violence or during any natural calamity or in similar situations"
shall be substituted.
5. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"6. (1) Whoever commits aggravated penetrative sexual assault shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of natural life of that person, and shall also be liable to fine, or with death.
(2) The fine imposed under sub-section ( 1) shall be just and reasonable and
paid to the victim to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of such victim.".
6. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( s), for the words "communal or sectarian violance", the words
"communal or sectarian violence or during any natural calamity or in any similar
situations" shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (u), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(v) whoever persuades, induces, entices or coerces a child to get
administered or administers or direct anyone to administer, help in getting
administered any drug or hormone or any chemical substance, to a child with
the intent that such child attains early sexual maturity;".
Punishment
for aggravated
penetrative
sexual assault.
Amendment
of section 4.
56 of 2000.
2 of 2016.
Amendment
of section 5.
Substitution of
new section
for section 6.
Amendment
of section 9.

3
7.  For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"14. (1) Whoever uses a child or children for pornographic purposes shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years and
shall also be liable to fine, and in the event of second or subsequent conviction
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years and also be liable
to fine.
(2) Whoever using a child or children for pornographic purposes under
sub-section (1), commits an offence referred to in section 3 or section 5 or section 7
or section 9 by directly participating in such pornographic acts, shall be punished for
the said offences also under section 4, section 6, section 8 and section 10, respectively,
in addition to the punishment provided in sub-section ( 1).".
8.  For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"15. ( 1) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material in any
form involving a child, but fails to delete or destroy or report the same to the designated
authority, as may be prescribed, with an intention to share or transmit child pornography,
shall be liable to fine not less than five thousand rupees, and in the event of
second or subsequent offence, with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand
rupees.
(2) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material in any form
involving a child for transmitting or propagating or displaying or distributing in any
manner at any time except for the purpose of reporting, as may be prescribed, or for
use as evidence in court, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material in any form
involving a child for commercial purpose shall be punished on the first conviction
with imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than three years
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both, and in the event of
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description which
shall not be less than five years which may extend to seven years and shall also be
liable to fine.".
9. In section 34 of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and figures "the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000", the words, brackets
and figures "the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015" shall be
substituted.
10. In section 42 of the principal Act, for the figures, letter and words "376E or
section 509 of the Indian Penal Code", the  figures, letters and words "376E, section 509 of
the Indian Penal Code or section 67B of the Information Technology Act, 2000" shall be
substituted.
11. In section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (a) shall be re-lettered
as clause (ab) thereof and before clause ( ab) as so re-lettered, the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—
"(a) the manner of deleting or destroying or reporting about pornographic
material in any form involving a child to the designated authority under sub-section (1)
of section 15;
(aa) the manner of reporting about pornographic material in any form involving
a child under sub-section (2) of section 15;".
Punishment
for storage of
pornographic
material
involving
child.
Substitution of
new section for
section 15.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of section 42.
Amendment
of section 45.
45 of 1860.
21 of 2000.
56 of 2000.
2 of 2016.
Punishment
for using child
for
pornographic
purposes.
Substitution of
new section
for section 14.

A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—2584LS(S3)—08-08-2019.