Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XXII of 2006
THE DESTITUTE AND NEGLECTED WOMEN (WELFARE) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the maintenance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the
destitute, neglected, old, infirm or physically challenged widow, divorcee or unmarried
women through establishment of an Authority and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute and Neglected Women (Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH JUL Y, 2006.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Authority” means the Destitute and Neglected Women Welfare Authority
established under Section 3;
(c) “destitute” in relation to a women who may be a widow, divorcee or unmarried
means a women who has no relative or kinsmen to support her or who has no independent
source of livelihood including the livelihood to her minor children dependent on her or
any woman stricken with infirmity owing to old age, physical deformity, ailment, mental
imbalance and who lives uncared for;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “widow” means an adult female human whose husband has died after her
legal marriage.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish the Desitute and Neglected Women Welfare Authority for the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Bangalore in the State of Karnataka;
(4) The Authority shall establish its branches in all the States and Union Territories at
such conspicuous places as may be prescribed;
(5) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and employees,
with such terms and conditions of service as may be necessary for the efficient functioning
of the Authority as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall consist of —
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be the Minister-in-charge of the Union Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson with such qualifications as may be prescribed to be
appointed by the Central Government;
(c) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be from the Lok Sabha and
one from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of each
House;
(d) two members representing the Union Ministry of Human Resource
Development to be appointed by the Central Government;
(e) not more than five members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Governments of States, by rotation in alphabetical order, to
represent the Governments of the States;
(f) four members to be appointed by Central Government from amongst the Non-
Governmental Organizations working for destitute women or widows.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to promote by such measures, as it thinks fit
or appropriate, welfare measures for destitute or neglected women or widows of the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the Authority
shall,—
(a) maintain district-wise register of destitute or neglected women or widows
who are in need of assistance from the Authority with such details and in such manner
as may be prescribed;
Establishment
of the
Destitute and
Neglected
Women
Welfare
Authority.
Definitions.
Functions of
the Authority.

3
(b) work out plans and formulate schemes for the welfare of destitute or neglected
women or widows  covered under this Act;
(c) give wide publicity through the electronic and print media about the welfare
measures being undertaken by the Authority;
(d) perform such other functions not inconsistend with the provisions of this
Act, as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government from time to time.
5. The appropriate Government shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, provide
the women covered under this Act, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) monthly allowance of two thousand rupees if the woman is having any
dependent children and rupees one thousand five hundred in case she has no dependent
child as subsistence allowance;
(b) residential accommodation free of cost wherever necessary;
(c) free education including technical education to dependent children;
(d) free medical aid;
(e) gainful employment;
(f) free vocational education wherever necessary;
(g) such other facilities, as may be necessary, for her rehabilitation, proper
development, and for maintaining a respectable life in the society:
Provided that if any woman covered under this Act either gets gainful
employment or remarries, all the facilities provided to her and her dependent children
in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall be withdrawn from the date the get
the gainful employment or remarries, as the case may be.
6. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, from time to time for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being applicable to women covered under this Act.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Facilities to
the destitute
or neglected
women or
widows.
Power to
make rules.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Quite a large number of women in our Country particularly those belonging to lower
and middle income groups or classes of the society become destitute after the death of their
husbands who do not leave adult sons behind them or are divorced women or unmarried
women either neglected by their families or being lonely have no means to support them. It
has also been seen that in many cases the widows are thrown out of the households. Many
of them work as housemaids for their survival and to support the children if they have the
ones. But even this is not possible for the infirm, old, physically or mentally challeged
women who mostly survive on begging. Many women are forced into flesh trade and become
sex workers to avoid starvation, which makes their lives disgraceful. The position of destitute
women is more awful in rural areas because being illiterate they are exploited to the extent
possible.
It is expedient to liquidate the exploitation of the destitute, neglected women or widows
in a Welfare State like ours and provide financial assistance and other necessary facilities to
such women so that they live honourably in the society. For this purpose an Authority
should be established to ensure that the conditions of destitute, neglected women or widows
should not become so miserable due to poverty which may enable the unscrupulous elements
of the society to exploit the situation and make their lives disgraceful in the Society.
Hence this Bill.
PREMA  CARIAPPA.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Destitute and Neglected
Women Welfare Authority. Clause 5 provides for certain facilities to the destitute and neglected
women. Clause 6 lays down that Central Government shall provide rquisite funds. The Bill if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non recurring expenditure to the tune of one hundred crore may also involve.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the maintenance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the
destitute, neglected, old, infirm or physically challenged widow, divorcee or unmarried
women through establishment of an Authority and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Prema Cariappa, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1764RS(S5)—28-07-2006.