1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill  No.  XXII  of  2007
THE DESTITUTE, INDIGENT AND NEGLECTED CITIZENS
(MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the due care, maintenance and welfare measures to be initiated by the State
for those citizens who are destitute, indigent, stricken with poverty or infirmity due
to old age, incurable disease or physically challenged ones, and those who are
without independent source of livelihood like widows, senior citizens, orphans and
underprivileged children and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute, Indigent and Neglected Citizens (Maintenance
and Welfare) Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 27TH APRIL, 2007.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the Destitute, Indigent and Neglected Citizens Welfare
Authority established under Section 3;
(c) "destitute" in relation to a,—
(i) male who may be physically challenged or unfit for gainful employment
or suffering from incurable disease and without any independent source of
livelihood or a senior citizen who has become infirm due to old age or chronic
ailment and who has nobody to support him; and
(ii) woman who may be a widow, divorcee or unmarried woman who has no
relative to support her and who has no independent source of livelihood including
livelihood of her minor children dependent on her or any woman stricken with
infirmity owing to old age, physical deformity, ailment, mental imbalance and
who lives uncared for;
(d) "indigent" means a person who is stricken with poverty, without any means
of livelihood or source of income and who subsists on alms received by him after
begging;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "senior citizen" means any person who has completed sixty years of age;
(g) "underprivileged children" means the deprived children with unknown
parentage, abandoned, vagabond or loitering, rag pickers, and neglected children of
pavement dwellers, sex worker, jail inmates, mentally ill or retarded women and who
subsist on begging and petty offences;
(h) "widow" means an adult female whose husband has died after her legal
marriage.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be known as the Destitute, Indigent and Neglected Citizens
Welfare Authority for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Jaipur in the State of Rajasthan.
(4) The Authority shall establish its branches in all the States and Union Territories at
conspicuous places.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) the Minister-in-charge of the Union Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment — ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson with such qualifications as may be prescribed, to be
appointed by the Central Government;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of each
House;
(d) three members representing the Union Ministries of Women and Child
Development, Planning and Finance respectively;
Definitions.
Establishment
of the
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.

3
(e) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Governments of the States, by rotation in alphabetical order, to
represent the Governments of the States;
(f) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
Non-Governmental Organisations working for destitute widows, senior citizens and
underprivileged children.
(2) The term of office, remuneration and other facilities of the Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Authority shall follow such procedure for holding its meeting and the quorum
for such meeting shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to promote by such measures, as it thinks fit
or appropriate, welfare measures for those citizens who are destitute, indigent, stricken with
poverty or infirmity due to old age, incurable disease or physically challenged ones and for
those who are without source of livelihood such as widows, senior citizens, orphan and
underprivileged children covered under this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Authority
shall, —
(a) maintain district wise register of the destitute, indigent and neglected citizens
including the physically challenged ones, senior citizens, neglected women who may
be widows, divorcee and who do not have anyone to support and the orphans and
other street children;
(b) work out plans and formulate schemes for the welfare of the citizens covered
under this Act;
(c) establish adequate number of senior citizen homes for board, lodging and
provision of necessary facilities of daily life for the needy senior citizens;
(d) establish shelters or rehabilitation centres for the needy physically challenged
citizens, orphans and street children and widows with provision of board, lodging and
other necessities of daily life therein free of cost;
(e) work out scheme to provide free medical aid and means of entertainment in
the senior citizen homes and shelters and rehabilitation centres established under this
section.
(f) take such other measures not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
the Authority may deem necessary for the welfare of the citizens covered under this
Act.
6. The appropriate Government shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, provide
the destitute women, indigent and needy senior citizens covered under this Act, the following
facilities namely:—
(a) monthly allowance of two thousand rupees to every indigent and needy
senior citizen in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) monthly allowance of two thousand rupees to every destitute woman and if
such a woman has dependent children to support a monthly allowance of three thousand
rupees in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that if any woman covered under this Act either gets gainful
employment or remarries, the facilities and monthly allowance being provided to her
shall be discontinued and withdrawn from the date she gets the gainful employment
or remarries as the case may be.
(c) residential accommodation wherever necessary, free of cost;
Functions of
the
Authority.
Facilities to
the destitute
women,
indigents and
senior citizens
by the
appropriate
Government.

4
(d) free educational facilities including technical and vocational education to the
dependent children;
(e) free medical care;
(f) gainful employment;
(g) vocational training and assistance for self employment;
(h) such other facilities as may be necessary from time to time.
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the local police of every district headquarter shall keep a record of senior citizens,
old widows and physically challenged ones residing within its jurisdiction in such manners
and with such details, as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of the area Station  House Officer or any Police officer who for
the time being in charge of local Police Station or Police Post, as the case may be, to
compulsorily,—
(a) verify the character and antecedents of the domestic servant or domestic
help engaged or provided to the senior citizen or lonely old couple or old widow or
physically challenged citizen residing within his jurisdiction in such manner as may
be prescribed; and
(b) provide adequate security to the citizens referred to in para (a) above.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority, from time to time, for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
9. The Authority shall submit an Annual Report in such form and in such manner as
may be prescribed, of its activities of the welfare measures undertaken for the purposes of
this Act to the President of India who shall cause the report to be laid before both the
Houses of Parliament along with action taken thereon by the Central Government as soon
as it is received.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty.
11. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith, contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual Report
of the
Authority.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are crores of destitute, indigent and neglected citizens consisting of widows,
senior citizens, orphans and other underprivileged children, physically challenged ones and
quite a large number of them live uncared for in our Country. They are stricken with infirmity
particularly due to old age or physical deformity or serious and prolonged ailment and many
of them suffer from mental imbalance. Majority of such citizens have no means to support
themselves and they are ill treated by people at large. Unfortunately, the number of such
citizens is increasing day by day. In a welfare state like ours it is the solemn duty of the state
to take care of such destitute, indigent and neglected citizens. For this purpose an independent
Authority will have to be established with sufficient funds and this Authority will be entrusted
with the main function of formulating welfare schemes for such hapless citizens and implement
them with sincerity and zeal.
Hence this Bill.
ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Destitute, Indigent and
Neglected Citizens Welfare Authority. Clause 4(2) provides for remuneration and facilities to
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and members.  Clause 6 proivdes for certain facilities to
be provided to the destitute women, indigent and senior citizens. Clause 8 makes it obligatory
for the Central Government to provide adequate funds to the Authority for the purposes of
the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of rupees ten thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A sum of rupees five thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the due care, maintenance and welfare measures to be initiated by the State for
those citizens who are destitute, indigent, stricken with poverty or infirmity due to old
age, incurable disease or physically challenged ones, and those who are without
independent source of livelihood like widows, senior citizens, orphans and
underprivileged children and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1762RS—27-04-2007.