1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, after sub-section (9),
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely,:—
"Provided further that the Election Commission can de-register or withdraw
recognition of any political party, if the Commission has conclusive evidence that elected
representatives and office bearers of a political party are engaged in propagating communal
hatred, spreading fake information through various media, engaging in hate speech and
functioning countrary to the principles of socialism, secularism and democracy enshrined
in our Constitution.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XXIII of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Amendment of
Section 29A.
43 of 1951.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Preamble of the Constitution outlines the underlying ideals and philosophy, as
well as the policy goals and objectives that our founding fathers envisaged. Giving due
recognition to these principles, section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in
sub-section 5, clearly stipulates that an application for registration as a political party "shall
be accompanied by a copy of the memorandum or rules and regulations of the association or
body, by whatever name called, and such memorandum or rules and regulations shall contain
a specific provision that the association or body shall bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution  of India as by law established, and to the principles of socialism, secularism
and democracy, and would uphold the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India." However,
section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 is silent about the course of action
to be taken against a registered political party, if the Election Commission found that a
particular political party/office bearers/elected representatives have violated the specific
provisions of the memorandum (with special reference to the principles of socialism, secularism
and democracy) submitted at the time of application for registration.
Over the years, it has been noted that political leaders and party representatives often
use fake news, communal hatred and hate speech as effective tools to win elections through
religious polarisation. A recent media report states that more than fifty politicians who hold
elected office in the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies face charges in criminal cases related to
inciting religious violence or stoking communal hatred. This is indeed a dangerous trend that
can dismantle the very foundations of our democracy, secularism and ideals enshrined in the
Constitution. Besides, this is a blatant violation of the provision of section 29A of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 which clearly states that an association or body shall
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India for getting registration as a political
party.
Laws against fuelling communal violence and offending communal sentiments are
contained in sections 153A, 153B, 295, 295A, 505(1)(c), 505(2), and 505(3) of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 as well as in section 125 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 which
criminalises the promotion of "feelings of enmity or hatred" between communities in
connection with an election. But the recurrent occurrence of hate speech and fake news
propaganda necessitate the urgent need for inserting a 'strong provision' within the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 to make political parties accountable for this. The Act
needs to stipulate that a particular political party/parties will lose registration and recognition
if the leaders and representatives of that political party/parties are found to be engaged in
propagating communal hatred, hate speech, spreading of fake news and any other activity
that violate the principles of socialism, secularism and democracy. Unless and until the
political parties are not made accountable for the 'divisive activities of their office-bearers
and representatives, this tendency will continue.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to
authorize the Election Commission to deregister a political party or withdraw recognition, if
the elected representatives and office bearers of a political party propagate communal hatred,
spread fake information through various media, engage in hate speech and function contrary
to the principles of socialism, secularism and democracy enshrined in our Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
SANDOSH  KUMAR  P.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
ACT, 1951 (43 OF 1951)
* * * *
29A. (1) * *
* *
* *          
*
(9) After an association or body has been registered as a political party as aforesaid,
any change in its name, head office, office-bearers, address or in any other material matters
shall be commuicated to the Commission without delay.
* * * *
Registration
with the
Election
Commission
of associations
and bodies as
political
parties.
3
*

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)— 041—12-12-2023.