AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXIII of 2001

THE CHILDREN OF PAVEMENT DWELLERS AND SEX
WORKERS (PREVENTION OF ABUSE AND WELFARE
MEASURES) BILL, 2001

A

BILL

to provide for the prevention of exploitation and abuse including sexual abuse of
children of parents living on pavements of Urban areas and of sex workers
languishing in red light areas and for welfare measures to be undertaken by
+ the State for such children by establishing special care homes for them and
making provisions for free educatjgt. including vocational education and
employment and other amenities and for matters connected therewith,and
incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— ’

1. (1) This Act may be called the Children of Pavement Dwellers and Sex Workers
(Prevention of Abause and Welfare Measures) Act, 2001.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the Context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the State Government
and in the case of Union Territory the Central Government;

10 (b) “child” means a boy or girl who has not attained the age of fifteen years;

Short title,
extent and
commencement,


Appropnate
Government to
take custody of
children born of
pavement
dwellers and sex
workers

Establishment of
Special Care
Homes

Standards for
non
Governmental
institutions

Grants-in-aid

Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Penalty for

cruelty to
children,

Penalty for
sexual abuse of
children
Penalty for
forcing child
to beg,

(c) “pavement dweller” means person living on the pavement of road, street or
in the open space,

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(e) “sex worker” shall have the same meaning assigned to the term “prostitute”

under the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956, 5 104 of 1956

(f) “special care Homes” means an institution established or certified as such
by the appropriate Government under section 4

3. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the ume being in
force, the appropriate Government shall take custody of every child born of or
accompanying a pavement dweller or a sex worker, as the case may be, in such manner as 10
may be prescribed

(2) Every child taken custody of under sub-section (/) shall be admitted to Special
Care Homes, as provided under section 4, in such manner as may be prescribed.

4, (1) The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain such number of
Special Care Homes as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act; 15

Provided that where the appropriate Government is satisfied that any Institution
run by any Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) is fit for the reception of the children
under this Act, it may recognise such an institution as special care Home for the purposes
of this Act.

(2) Every Special Care Home or an institution recognised as such, as the case20
may be, shall not only provide the child with free accommodation, boarding, lodging,
meals, dresses and other necessities for his maintenance and facilities for education,
vocational training and rehabilitation, but shall also provide him with facilities for the
development of his character and career and such other functions as may be prescribed

to ensure all-round growth and development of his personality. 25

5. (1) The appropriate Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for
the conditions for the institutions of NGO's including the standards and nature of services
to be maintained by them and the circumstances under which and the manner in which the
recognition of institution of NGO's may be granted or withdrawn.

(2) The rules made under sub-section (1) may also provide for the classification and 30
separation of children on the basis of sex, age and atmosphere prevalent in their case,

6. The appropriate Government shall provide adequate grants-in-aid to the institu-
tions of NGO's recognised under this Act.

7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament,
provide adequate funds to the States for the implementation of this Act. 35

8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever having charge of or control over a child governed by the provisions of this Act
assaults, abandons, exposes or wilfully neglects the child in a manner likely to cause such
child unnecessary mental or physical suffering shall be punishable with imprisonment which
shall not be less than two years but which may extend to five years and also with fine which 40
may extend to fifty thousand rupees.

9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, whoever sexually
abuses any child governed by the provisions of this Act, shall be punished with death.

10. Whoever forces any child, governed by the provisions of this Act to beg shall be
punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than two years but may extend to45
five years and also with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.


3

11. (2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Welfare Fund under such name as it may think fit for the welfare and
rehabilitation of children under this Act and provide initial fund of rupees two hundred
crores after due appropriation made by Parliament by Law in this behalf and thereafter the
Central and State Government shall contribute to the Fund in such proportion and in such
manner as may be prescribed.

(2) There shall be credited to the Fund such voluntary donations, contributions or
subscriptions as may be made by any individual or organisation.

12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being inforce but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters
dealt with in this Act.

13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty.

14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this act.

Constitution
of Welfare
Fund.

effect of the
Act.

Power to
remove
difficulties.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It is said that prostitution is the oldest profession in the World and this profession is
going on consistently throughout the world even today despite being illegal in many parts
of the world. In our country also there are lakhs of sex workers in the flesh trade and despite
their best efforts not to conceive, thousands of unfortunate children are born to these sex
workers who are forced by circumstances to live in the inhuman surroundings and atmosphere
of brothels. Here the boy ultimately becomes a pimp and the hapless girl a sex worker and
that is the destiny of these innocent and unfortunate children.

Similarly many people due to acute unemployment and abject poverty are forced to
live on pavements and sustain on begging, ragpicking and even stealing, cheating etc.
Children are born on these pavements and become part and parcel of the vicious circle of the
pavement. They too ultimately become beggars, ragpickers, pickpockets and other anti
social elements,

‘These children too, like other children are the future citizens of our country and it is our
duty tomake them good citizens. Ours being a welfare State, the Central and State Governments
have to ensure that these children grow in good atmosphere and their future becomes safe.
They are not exploited and they do not become the victims of lust. The Government must
take care of them, open special care homes for them and provide all requisite facilities for
their proper growth and advancement in life.

Hence this Bill.

DR. DASARI NARAYANA RAO


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Special Care Homes. Clause 7
prescribes that Central Governments will provide funds to the States. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, It is estimated that a sum of rupees
two hundred crores will involve as recurring expenditure per annum.

A sum of rupees five hundred crores may also involve as non-recurring expenditure
to construct Special Care Homes in the country.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5(1) gives power to the appropriate Government to make rules for governing
the NGO institutions. Clause 14 empowers the Central Government,to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The,delegation of Legislation Power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the prevention of exploitation and abuse including sexual abuse children
of parents living on pavements of urban areas and of sex workers languishing in red
light areas and for welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for such children
by establishing special care homes for them and making provisions for free
education including vocational education and employment and other
amenities and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.

(Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6752RS—-26-02-2001.