AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XXIII of 2011
THE ANTI-CORRUPTION, GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL  AND
WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION  BILL, 2011
————
ARRANGEMENT  OF  CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, and commencement.
2.  Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF LOKPAL
3.  Establishment of the institution of Lakpal.
4.  Qualification for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Lokpal.
5.  Term of office and other conditions of service of Lokpal.
6.  Appointment of the Chairperson and members.
7.  Removal of Chairperson or members.
CHAPTER III
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF LOKPAL
8.  Powers and functions of Lokpal.
9.  Search and Seizure.
10.  Evidence.
11.  Reports of Lokpal.
12.  Lokpal to be a deemed police officer.
13.  Powers of Lokpal in case of non-compliance of orders.
14.  Numbers of Special Judges for trial.
15.  Functioning of Lokpal.
CHAPTER IV
C
OMPLAINT MAKING MECHANISM AND PROTECTION OF COMPLAINANT AND PUNISHMENT
 16.  Procedure for making a complaint to the Lokpal.
17.  Matters to be investigated by the Lokpal.
18.  Matters not subject to investigation.
19.  Procedure relating to complaints and investigations.
20.  Protection of Whistleblower.

CHAPTER V
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMS
21.  Citizens’ Charters and Grievance redressal.
CHAPTER VI
AUTHORITIES AND STAFF OF LOKPAL
22.  Chief  Vigilance Officer.
23.  Staff of Lokpal.
24.  Repeal and Savings.
25.  Investigation wing of Lokpal.
26.  Complaints against officers or employees of Lokpal.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
27.  Protection of action taken in good faith.
28.  Public Servants to submit amount property statements.
29.  Power to delegate and assign functions.
30.  Time Limits to be fixed for enquiries.
31.  Penalty for false complaint.
32.  Preventive measures.
33.  Removal of difficulties.
34.  Overriding effect of the Act.
35.  Power to make regulations.
36.  Power to make rules.
CHAPTER VIII
A
MENDMENTS OF PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT
37.  Amendments of Prevention of Corruption Act.
(ii)

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION, GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL AND
WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of effective anti-corruption and grievance redressal systems
at the centre by creating effective deterrant against corruption and also to provide
effective protection to whistleblowers and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anti-Corruption, Grievance Redressal and
Whistleblower Protection Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “action” means any action taken by a public servant in the discharge of his
functions as such public servant and includes decision, recommendation or finding or
in any other manner and includes willful failure or omission to act and all other
expressions relating to such action shall be construed accordingly;
(b) “allegation” in relation to a public servant inlcudes any affirmation that such
public servant—
(i) has indulged in misconduct, if he is a government servant;
(ii) has indulged in corruption;
Bill No. XXIII of  2011
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5
10
15

2
(c) “complaint” includes any grievance or allegation or a request by whistleblower
for protection and appropriate action;
(d) “corruption” includes anything made punishable under Chapter IX of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988;
(e) “government” or “Central Government” means Government of India;
(f) “government servant” means any person who is or was any time appointed to
a civil service or post in connection with the affairs of the Central Government or High
Courts or Supreme Court either on deputation or permanent or temporary or on
contractual employment but would not inlcude the judges;
(g) “grievance” means a claim by a person that he sustained injustice or undue
hardship in consequence of mal-administration;
(h) “Lokpal” means:
(i) benches constituted under this Act and performing their functions as
laid down under various provisions of this Act, or
(ii) any officer or employee, exercising its powers and carry out its functions
and responsibilities, in the manner and to the extent, assigned to it under this
Act, or under various rules, regulations or orders made under various provisions
of this Act;
(iii) for all other purposes, the Chairperson and members acting collectively
as a body;
(i) “mal-administration” means action taken or purporting to have been taken in
the exercise of administrative function in any case where,—
(i) such action or the administrative procedure or practice governing such
action is unreasonable, unjust, oppressive or improperly discriminatory; or
(ii) there has been willful negligence or undue delay in taking such action
or the administrative procedure or practice governing such action involves undue
delay;
(j) “misconduct” means misconduct as defined in the Central Civil Services
Conduct Rules and which has vigilance angle;
(k) “public authority” means any authority or body or institution of self-
government established or constituted—
(i) by or under the Constitution;
(ii) by any other law made by Parliament;
(iii) by notification issued or order made by the Government, and includes
any body owned, controlled or substantially financed by the Government;
(l) “public servant” means a person who is or was at any time,—
(i) the Prime Minister;
(ii) member of the Council of  Ministers;
(iii) a Member of Parliament;
(iv) a Judge of High Courts or Supreme Court;
(v) a Government servant;
(vi) the Chairman or Vice-Chairman (by whatever name called ) or a member
of a local authority in the control of the Central Government or a statutory body
or corporation established by or under any law of the Parliament of India, including
a co-operative society, or a Government Company within the meaning of
section 617 of  the Companies Act, 1956 and members of any Committee or
Board, statutory or non-statutory, constituted by the Government.
45 of 1860.
49 of 1988.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(vii) holding positions in such other authorities as the Central
Government may, by notification, from time to time, specify;
(m) “vigilance angle” includes—
(i) all acts of corruption;
(ii) gross or wilful negligence; recklessness in decision making; blatant
violations of systems and established procedures; exercise of discretion in excess,
where no ostensible/public interest is evident; failure to keep the controlling
authority or superiors informed in time;
(iii) failure or delay in taking action, if under law the Government servant
ought to do so, against subordinates on complaints of corruption or dereliction
of duties or abuse of office by the subordinates;
(iv) indulging in discrimination through one’s conduct, directly or
indirectly;
(v) victimizing whistle blowers;
(vi) any undue unjustified delay in the disposal of a case, perceived after
considering all relevant factors, would reinforce a conclusion as to the presence
of vigilance angle in a case;
(vii) make unfair investigation or enquiry to either unduly help culprits or
fabricate the innocent.
(viii) any other matter as notified from time to time by the Lokpal.
(n) “whistleblower” means any person who faces threat of (i) professional harm,
including but not limited to illegitimate transfers, denial of promotions, denial of
apropriate perks, departmental proceedings, discrimination or (ii) physical harm or is
actually subjected to such harm; because of either making a complaint to the Lokpal
under this Act or for filing an application under Right to Information Act, 2005.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF LOKPAL
3. ( 1) There shall be an institution known as Lokpal which shall consist of a
Chairperson and ten members along with its officers and employees.
(2) The Chairperson and members of the Lokpal shall be selected in such manner as
laid down in this Act.
(3) A person appointment as Chairperson or member of the Lokpal shall, before entering
upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, an oath or affirmation in the form
as prescribed.
(4) The Government shall appoint the Chairperson and members of the first Lokpal and
set-up the institution with all its logistics and assets within six months of enactment of this
Act.
(5) The Government shall fill up a vacancy of the Chairperson or a member caused due
to—
(a) retirement three months before the chairperson or the members retires.
(b) Any other unforeseen reason, within a month of such vacancy.
4. The Chairperson and members of the Lokpal shall not be sitting or former member of
either the Parliament or the Legislature of any State and shall not hold any office or trust of
profit (other than the office as Chairperson or member) or would have ever been connected
with any political party or carry on any business or practice any profession and accordingly,
before he enters upon his office, a person appointed as the Chairperson or member of Lokpal
shall—
Establishment
of the
institution of
Lokpal.
Qualifications
for appoint-
ment of
Chairperson
and Members
of Lokpal.
22 of 2005.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(i) if he holds any office of trust or profit, resign from such office; or
(ii) if he is carrying on any business, sever his connection with the conduct and
management of such business; or
(iii) if he is practicing any profession, suspend practice of such profession; or
(iv) if he is associated directly or indirectly with any other activity, which is likely
to cause conflict of interest in the performance of his duties as Lokpal, he should
suspend his association with that activity:
Provided that if even after the suspension, the earlier association of that person
with such activity is likely to adversely affect his performance as Lokpal, that person
shall not be appointed as a member or Chairperson of  Lokpal.
5. (1) A person appointed as the Chairperson or member of the Lokpal shall hold office
for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office;
Provided that,—
(a) the Chairperson or member of the Lokpal may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office; or
(b) the chairperson or member may be removed from office in the manner provided
in this Act.
(2) There shall be paid to the Chairperson and each member every month a salary
equal to that of the Chief Justice of India and that of the judge of the Supreme Court
respectively;
(3) The allowances and pension payable to and other conditions of service of the
Chairperson or a member shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that the allowances and pension payable to and other conditions of service of
the Chairperson or members shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
(4) There shall be a separate fund by the name of “Lokpal fund” in which penalties or
fines imposed by the Lokpal shall be deposited and in which ten per cent of the loss of Public
Money detected or prevented on account of investigations by the Lokpal shall also be deposited
by the Government.
(5) The disposal of such Lokpal fund shall be completely at the discretion of the
Lokpal and such fund shall be used only for enhancement or upgradation or extension of the
infrastructure of Lokpal.
(6) Any person if he has ever held the position of the Chairperson or a member of
Lokpal for any period shall not be eligible for appointment on any position in the Government
of India or Government of any State or for contesting elections:
Provided however that a member or Chairperson may be reappointed for one more term
or a member may be appointed as the Chairperson, however, that any person shall not serve
for more than a total of two terms.
6. (1) The Chairperson and members shall be appointed by the President on the
recommendation of a selection committee.
(2) Following persons shall not be eligible to become Chairman or Member of the
Lokpal:
(a) Any person who was ever charge-sheeted for any offence under the Indian
Penal Code 1860 or the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or was ever penalized under
Central Civil Services Conduct Rules.
(b) Any person who is less than forty years of age.
Term of office
and other
conditions of
service of
Lokpal.
Appointment
of the
Chairperson
and members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.
49 of 1988.

5
(3) At least four members of the Lokpal shall have legal background.
(4) The selection committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of :
(i) two senior most judges of the Supreme Court,
(ii) two senior most Chief Justices of the High Courts,
(iii) all Nobel Laureates of Indian origin,
(iv) last three Magsaysay Award winners,
(v) comptroller and Auditor General of India,
(vi) Chief Election Commissioner,
(vii) after the first set of selection process, the outgoing Chairperson and members
of  Lokpal.
(5) The senior most judge of the Supreme Court shall act as the Chairperson of the
selection committee.
(6) The selection committee shall followed the following selection process:—
(a) recommendations for the post of Chairperson and members of Lokpal shall
be invited through open advertisements in prescribed format;
(b) the candidates should have unimpeachable integrity and should have
demonstrated their resolve and efforts to fight against corruption in the past;
(c) each person recommending any name shall be expected to justify the selction
of his candidate giving examples from the past achievements of the candidate;
(d) the list of candidates along with their recommendations received in the format
mentioned above shall be displayed on a website;
(e) each member of the selection committee, on the basis of the above material,
shall recommend such number of names as there are vacancies;
(f) a priority list shall be prepared with the candidate receiving recommendations
from maximum number of members of selection committee at the top and the candidates
recommended by the same number of members shall be treated at par;
(g) this priority list shall be displayed on the website;
(h) around three times the names as per the vacancies, shall be short-listed from
the top;
(i) public feedback shall be invited on the short-listed names by putting these
names on the website;
(j) the selection committee may decide to use any means to collect more
information about the background and past achievements of the short-listed candidates;
(k) selection committee shall invite short-listed candidates for discussions, video
recordings of which shall be made public;
(l) all the material obtained so far about the candidates shall be made available to
each member of the selection committee in advance to enable the members to make
their own assessment of each candidate;
(m) the selection committee shall meet and discuss the material so received
about each candidate and the final selections for the Chairperson and members shall
be made preferably through consensus:
Provided that if three or more members, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
object to the selection of any member, he shall not be selected;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(n) All meetings of selection committee shall be video recorded and shall be
made public;
(7) Selection Committee shall recommend the names to the President, who shall order
such appointments within a month of receipt of the same.
7. (1) The Chairperson or any member shall not be removed from this office except by
an order of the President.
(2) The Chairman or any member can be removed on one or more of the following
grounds,—
(a) Proved misbehaviour;
(b) Professional or physical incapacity;
(c) If he is adjudged to be insolvent;
(d) Has been charged of an offence which involves moral turpitude;
(e) If he engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the
duties of his office;
(f) Has acquired such financial interests or other interests which are likely to
affect prejudicially his functions as member or Chairperson;
(g) If he is guided by considerations extraneous to the merits of the case either
to favour someone or to implicate someone through any act of omission or commission;
(h) If he commits any act of omission or commission which is punishable under
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or is a misconduct;
(i) If a member or the Chairperson in any way, concerned or interested in any
contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or participates
in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom
otherwise than as a member and in common with the other members of an incorporated
company, he shall be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.
(3) The following process shall be followed for the removal of any member of
Chairperson—
(a) Any person may move an application or petition before the Supreme Court
seeking removal of one or more of the members or Chairperson of the Lokpal alleging
one or more of the grounds for removal and providing evidence for the same; and
(b) The Supreme Court shall hear the matter in a bench of three or more Judges
on receipt of such petition and may take one or more of the following steps—
(i) order on investigation to be done by a Special Investigation Team
appointed by the Supreme Court, if a prima facie  case is made out and if the
matter cannot be judged based on affidavits of the parties;
(ii) dismiss the petition if, no case is made out;
(iii) if the grounds are proved, recommend to the President for removal of
the said member or Chairperson; or
(iv) direct registration and investigation of cases with appropriate agencies
if, there is prima facie  case of commission of an offence punishable under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
(c) the Supreme Court shall not dismiss such petitions in liminae;
(d) if the Supreme Court concluded that the petition has been made with
mischievous or malafide motives, the Court may order imposition of fine or imprisonment
upto one year against the complainant; and
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Removal of
Chairperson
or members.

7
(e) on receipt of a recommendation from the Supreme Court under this section, the
President shall order removal of Chairperson or member within a month of the receipt of the
same.
CHAPTER III
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF LOKPAL
8. (1) The Lokpal shall be responsible for receiving,—
(a) complaints where there are allegations of such acts of omission or commission
which are punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988;
(b) complaints where there are allegations of misconduct by a government servant;
(c) grievances; and
(d) complaints from whistleblowers.
(2) The Lokpal after getting such inquiries and investigations done as it deems fit, may
take one or more of the following actions:
(a) close the case, if prima facie,  the complaint is not made out; or
(b) initiate prosecution against public servants as well as those private entities
which are party to the act; and
(c) order imposition of appropriate penalties under the Central Civil Services
Conduct Rules:
Provided that if, an officer is finally convicted under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 major penalty of dismissal shall be imposed on such government servant.
(d) order cancellation or modification of a license or lease or permission or
contract or agreement, which was the subject matter of investigation;
(e) blacklist the concerned firm or company or contractor or any other entity
involved in that act of corruption;
(f) issue appropriate directions to appropriate authorities for redressal of grievance
in such time and in such manner as is specified in the order;
(g) invoke its powers under this Act if, its orders are not duly complied with and
ensure due compliance of its orders; or
(h) take necessary action to provide protection to a whistleblower as per various
provisions of this Act.
(3) Suo-motu  initiate appropriate action under this Act if any case, of the nature
mentioned in clauses (a), (b), (c) or (d) of sub-section (1) comes to the knowledge of the
Lokpal from any source.
(4) issue such directions, as are necessary, from time to time, to appropriate authorities
to make such changes in their work practices, administration or other systems so as to
reduce the scope and possibility for corruption, misconduct and public grievances.
(5) The Lokpal shall be deemed to be “Disciplinary authority” or “Appointing authority”
for the purpose of imposing penalties under CCS Conduct Rules.
(6) Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall not apply to any
proceedings under this Act. All permissions, which need to be sought for initiating
investigations or for initiating prosecutions under any Act shall be deemed to have been
granted once the Lokpal grants such permissions.
Powers and
Functions of
Lokpal.
2 of 1974.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
9. (1) Where, in consequence of information in his possession, the Lokpal—
(a) has reason to believe that any person,—
(i) to whom a summon or notice under this Act, has been or might be
issued, will not produce or cause to be produced any property, document or
thing which will be necessary or useful for or relevant to any inquiry or other
proceeding to be conducted by him;
(ii) is in possession of any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable
article or thing and such money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or
thing represents either wholly or partly income or property which has not been
disclosed to the authorities for the purpose of any law or rule in force which
requires such disclosure to be made; or
(b) considers that the purposes of any inquiry or other proceedings to be
conducted by him will be served by a general search or inspection.
He may by a search warrant authorize any Police Officer not below the rank of an
Inspector of Police to conduct a search or carry out an inspection in accordance
therewith and in particular to,—
(i) enter and search any building or place where he has reason to suspect
that such property, document, money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article
or thing is kept;
(ii) search any person who is reasonably suspected of concealing about
his person any article for which search should be made;
(iii) break open the lock of any door, box, locker safe, almirah or other
receptacle for exercising the powers conferred by sub-clause (i) where the keys
thereof are not available;
(iv) seize any such property, document, money, bullion, jewellery or other
valuable article or thing found as a result of such search;
(v) place marks of identification on any property or document or make or
cause to be made; extracts or copies therefrom; or
(vi) make a note or an inventory of any such property, document, money,
bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to search and
seizures shall apply, so far as may be, to searches and seizures under sub-section (1).
(3) A warrant issued under sub-section (1) shall for all purposes, be deemed to be a
warrant issued by a court under section 93 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
10. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, for the purpose of any investigation
(including the preliminary inquiry, if any, before such investigation) under this Act, the
Lokpal may require any public servant or any other person who, in his opinion is able to
furnish information or produce documents relevant to the investigation, to furnish any such
information or produce any such document.
(2) For the purpose of any such investigation (including the preliminary inquiry) the
Lokpal shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) Summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) Requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) Receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) Requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
Search and
Seizure.
Evidence.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(e) Issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) Ordering payment of compensatory cost in respect of a false or vexatious
claim or defence;
(g) Ordering cost for causing delay;
(h) Such other matters as may be prescribed.
(3) Any proceeding before the Lokpal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding with
in the meaning of section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
11. (1) The Chairperson of Lokpal shall present annually a consolidated report in
prescribed format on its performance to the President.
(2) On receipt of the annual report, the President shall cause a copy thereof together
with an explanatory memorandum to be laid before each House of the Parliament.
(3) The Lokpal shall upload, every month on its website the list of cases disposed
with brief details of each such case, outcome and action taken or proposed to be taken in that
case along with lists of all cases received by the Lokpal during the previous month, cases
disposed and cases which are pending.
12. (1) For the purposes of section 36 of the code of Criminal Procedure 1973, the
Chairperson, members of the Lokpal and the officers in investigation wing of the Lokpal shall
be deemed to be police officers.
(2) While investigating any offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988,
they shall be competent to investigate any offence under any other law in the same case.
13. (1) Each order of the Lokpal shall clearly specify the names of the officials who are
required to execute that order, the manner in which it should be executed and the time period
within which that order should be complied with.
(2)If the order is not complied with within the time or in the manner directed, the Lokpal
may decide to impose a fine on the officials responsible for the non-compliance of its orders.
(3)The Drawing and Disbursing Officer of the concerned Department shall be directed
to deduct such amount of fine as is clearly specified by the Lokpal in its order made in sub-
section (2) from the salaries of the officers specified in the order:
Provided that no penalty shall be imposed without giving the Officer a reasonable
opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that if the Drawing and Disbursing Officer falls to make deduct on
from the salary as specified in the said order, he shall make himself liable for a similar penalty.
(3)In order to get its orders complied with, the Lokpal shall have, and exercise the same
jurisdiction powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and
may exercise, and, for this purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 shall
have the effect subject to the modification that the references therein to the High Court shall
be construed as including a reference to the Lokpal.
14. On an annual basis, the Lokpal shall make an assessment of the number of Special
Judges required under section 4 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 in each area and
the Government shall appoint such number of Judges within three months of receipt of such
recommendation:
Provided that the Lokpal shall recommend such number of Special Judges so that trial
in each case under this Act is completed within a year.
15. (1) The Chairperson shall be responsible for overall administration and supervision
of the institution of Lokpal.
(2)All policy level decisions including formulation of regulations, developing internal
Reports of
Lokpal.
Lokpal to be
deemed police
officer.
Number of
Special Judges
for trial.
Functioning of
Lokpal.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
49 of 1988.
70 of 1971.
49 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Powers of
Lokpal in case
of non-
compliance of
orders.

10
systems for the functioning of the Lokpal, assigning functions to various officials in the
Lokpal, delegation of powers to various functionaries in the Lokpal etc. shall be taken by the
Chairperson and the members collectively as a body.
(3)The Chairperson shall have an annual meeting with the Prime Minister to assess the
needs of the Lokpal for finances and manpower and the Lokpal shall be provided required
resources by the Government on the basis of outcome of such meeting.
(4)The Lokpal shall function in benches of three or more members which shall be
constituted randomly and cases shall be assigned to them randomly by computer.
(5)Each bench shall consist of at least one member with legal background.
(6)The benches shall be responsible for:—
(i) granting permission to close any case after a preliminary inquiry;
(ii) granting permission to either close a case after investigations or issuing
orders imposing penalties under Central Civil Service Conduct Rules and/or for initiating
prosecution in that case;
(iii) Issuing orders under section 26.
(7) The Lokpal may decided to initiate investigations into any case suo-motu also.
(8) The Chairperson shall chair all the meetings of the Lokpal.
(9) The decision to initiate investigation or prosecution against any member of the
Cabinet or any judge of the High Court or the Supreme Court shall be taken in a meeting of all
the existing members and the Chairperson and the minutes and records of such meetings
shall be made public.
CHAPTER  IV
C
OMPLAINT MAKING MECHANISM AND PROTECTION OF COMPLAINT AND PUNISHMENT
16. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, any person may make a complaint under
this Act to the Lokpal:
Provided that in case of a grievance, if the person aggrieved is dead or for any reason,
unable to act for himself, the complaint may be made or if, it is already made, may be continued
by his legal representatives or by any other person who is authorized by him in writing in this
behalf.
(2) A complaint could be on a plain paper but should contain all such details as
prescribed by the Lokpal.
(3) On receipt of a complaint, the Lokpal shall decide whether it is an allegation or a
grievance or a request for whistleblower protection or a mixture of two or more of these.
(4) Every complaint shall have to be compulsorily disposed of by the Lokpal within a
specified time as may be prescirbed:
Provided that no complaint, other than those which are anonymous, shall be closed
without hearing the complainant.
17. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Lokpal may investigate any action which
is taken by or with the general or specific approval of a public servant where a complaint
involving a grievance or an allegation is made in respect of such action:
Provided that the Lokpal may also investigate such action suo-motu or if it is referred
to it by the Government, if such action can be or could have been in his recorded opinion,
subject of a grievance or an allegation.
Procedure for
making a
complaint to
the Lokpal.
Matters to be
investigated by
the Lokpal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
18. (1) The Lokpal shall not conduct any investigation under this Act in case of a
grievance in respect of any action,—
(i) if the complainant has or had, any remedy by way of appeal, revision, review
or any other remedy before any other authority provided in any other law and he has
not availed of the same;
(ii) taken by a judicial or quasi-judicial body, unless the complainant alleges
malafides;
(iii) if the substance of  the entire grievance is pending before any court or
quasi-judicial body of competent jurisdiction;
(iv) if there is inordinate and inexplicable delay.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as authorising the Lokpal to investigate any
action which is taken by or with the approval of the Presiding Officer of either House of
Parliament.
(3) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to the provisions of any other
enactment or any rule or law under which any remedy by way of appeal, revision, review or
in any other manner is available to a person making a complaint under this Act in respect of
any action and nothing in this Act shall limit or affect the right of such person to avail of such
remedy.
(4) Nothing in this section shall bar the Lokpal from entertaining a complaint making an
allegation of misconduct or corruption or a complaint from a whistleblower seeking protection.
19. (1) The Lokpal, on receipt of a complaint in the nature of an allegation or a grievance
or a combination of the two, or in a case initiated on his own motion, may on perusing the
documents, either decide to proceed to inquire or investigate into that complaint or decide,
to make such preliminary inquiry before proceeding to inquire or investigate into such
complaint or direct any other person to make such preliminary inquiry as it deems fit for
ascertaining whether there exists reasonable ground for conducting the investigation.
(2) The outocme of such preliminary inquiry, and if the complaint is being closed along
with reasons for the same and all material collected during preliminary inquiry, shall be
communicated to the complainant:
Provided that if any case is closed, all documents related thereto shall thereafter be
treated as public:
Provided further that if the complaint contains verifiable and specific information
about misconduct or corruption, then that case shall not be rejected even if the complaint is
anonymous:
Provided also that no complaint of allegation shall be rejected by questioning the
motives or intention of the complainant:
Provided again that all hearings before the Lokpal shall be video recorded and shall be
available to any member of the public on payment or copying costs.
(3) Every month, a list of all such cases shall be put on the website with reasons for
closing a case and all material connected with such closed cases will be provided  to anyone
seeking it under Right to Information Act, 2005.
(4) The procedure for preliminary inquiry of a complaint shall be such as the Lokpal
deems appropriate in the circumstances of the case and in particular, the Lokpal may, if it
deems necessary to do so, call for the comments of the public servant concerned:
Provided that the preliminary inquiry shall be completed and a decision shall be taken
whether to close a case or to proceed with investigations within one month of receipt of any
complaint.
Matters not
subject to
investigation.
Procedure
relating to
complaints
and
investigations.
22 of 2005.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(5) Where the Lokpal proposes, either directly or after making preliminary inquiry, to
conduct any investigation under this Act, he,—
(a) may make such order as to the safe custody of documents relevant to the
investigations, as it deems fit;
(b) at appropriate stage of investigations or in the end, shall forward a copy of
the complaint, his findings and copy of the material relied upon to the concerned
public servant and the complainant;
(c) shall afford to such public servant and the complainant an opportunity to
offer comments and be heard:
Provided that such hearing shall be held in public, except in such rare circumstances,
to be recorded in writing, it may be held in camera.
(6) The conduct of an investigation under this Act against a Public servant in respect
of any action shall not affect such action, or any power or duty of any other public servant
to take further action with respect to any matter subject to the investigation.
(7) If, during the course of preliminary inquiry or investigation under this Act, the
Lokpal is prima facie satisfied that the allegation or grievance in respect of any action is
likely to be sustained either wholly or partly, he may, through an interim order, direct the
public servant concerned to stay the implementation or enforcement of the decision or
action complained against, or to take such mandatory or preventive action, on such terms
and conditions, as he may specify in his order to prevent further harm from taking place.
(8) The Lokpal, either during the course of investigations, if he is satisfied that
prosecution is likely to be initiated in that case, or at the end of the investigations at the time
of initiating prosecution, shall make a list of the assets of all the accused in that case and
shall notify the same.
(9) In the event of final conviction, the court shall be empowered to recover loss
determined under section 20 of this Act from this property and transfer any of property
subsequent to the date of notification by the Lokpal under this sub-section shall be treated
as null and void.
(10) If during the course of investigation or inquiry into a complaint. The Lokpal feels
that continuance of a public servant in that position could adversely affect the course of
investigations or inquiry or that the said person is likely to influence evidence or witnesses,
the Lokpal may issue appropriate orders including transfer of that public servant from that
position or his suspension:
Provided that such orders shall not be passed against the Prime Minister.
(11) In case of a grievance, the Lokpal may issue interim orders to the appropriate
authority recommending grant of interim relief to the complainant, if he is satisfied at any
stage of preliminary inquiry or investigation that the complainant has sustained injustice or
undue hardship in consequence of any decision or action of a public servant.
(12) The Lokpal may, at any stage of inquiry or investigation under this Act, direct
through an interim order, the appropriate authorities to take such action as is necessary,
including suspension of a Government servant, pending inquiry or investigation,—
(i) to safeguard wastage or damage of public property or public revenue by the
administrative acts of the public servant;
(ii) to prevent further acts of misconduct by the public servant;
(iii) to prevant the public servant from secreting the assets allegedly acquired
by him by corrupt means.
(13) Where after investigation into a complaint, the Lokpal is satisfied that the complaint
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
involving an allegation against the public servant is substantiated and that the public servant
concerned should not continue to hold the post held by him, the Lokpal shall pass orders to
that effect:
Provided that if public servant is a Government servant, he shall be deemed to have
vacated the position with effect from receipt of such order.
(14) In case of public servants other than Government servants the Lokpal shall make
such recommendation to the President, who shall decided either to accept such
recommendation or reject it within a month of its receipt.
(15) If, after inquiry into a grievance and after affording reasonable opportunity of
being heard to both the complainant and the public authority, the Lokpal is satisfied that
such grievance is substantiated either wholly or partly, he shall,—
(i) pass appropriate orders directing appropriate authorities to redress the
grievance in a manner and within the time prescribed in the order, and
(ii) direct the appropriate authorities to deduct from the salary of the officials
mentioned in the order amount calculated and specified in the order at the rate of
Rs. Two Hundred Fifty per day of delay calculated from day the time limit mentioned in
citizens' charter for redressing that grievance got over, and
(iii) direct the appropriate authorities to compensate the complainant with such
amounts as mentioned in the order:
Provided that any grievance shall be disposed within fifteen days of its receipt:
Provided further that if, it relates to life and liberty of a person or if the matter is such
as to warrant immediate attention and the Lokpal is so satisfied, the same shall be disposed
within forty eight hours.
(16) All records and information of the Lokpal shall be public and shall be provided
under Right to Information Act, 2005 even at the stage of investigation or inquiry, unless
release of such information would adversely affect the process or inquiry or investigation:
Provided that no information in any case shall be withheld under the Right to Information
Act, 2005 after the completion of  inquiry or investigation.
20. (1) A whistleblower may write to the Lokpal seeking protection from threat of
physical or professional victimization or if he has been subjected to such professional or
physical victimization.
(2) On receiving such a complaint, the Lokpal shall take following steps,—
(a) On threat of professional victimization the Lokpal shall conduct appropriate
inquiries and if, it feels that there is a real threat to the person and the threat is on
account of that person having made an allegation under this Act, then the Lokpal shall
pass appropriate orders, as soon as possible but in not more than a month of receipt of
such complaint, directing appropriate authorities to take such steps as directed by the
Lokpal.
(b) If a person complains that he has already been victimized professionally on
account of making an allegation under this Act, the Lokpal shall, after conducting
inquiries, if he is of the opinion that the victimization is indeed because of that person's
having made an allegation under this Act, pass appropriate orders, as soon as possible
but in not more than a month, directing appropriate authorities to take such steps as
directed by the Lokpal:
Provided that for clause (a) the Lokpal may, but for clause (b) the Lokpal shall, also
issue orders imposing penalties under Central Civil Services Conduct Rules against the
officer or officials who issued threats or caused victimization:
Protection of
Whistleblower.
22 of 2005.
22 of 2005.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
Provided further that no such penalties shall be imposed without giving an opportunity
of being heard to the affected officials.
(c) On threat of physical victimization, the Lokpal shall conduct appropriate
inquiries and if, it feels that there is a real threat to the person and the threat is on
account of that person having made an allegation under this Act or for having filed an
under the Right to Information, Act, 2005 application to any public authority covered
under this Act, then notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the Lokpal
shall pass appropriate orders, as soon as possible but in not more than a week, directing
appropriate authorities, including police, to take such steps as directed by the Lokpal
to provide adequate security to that person, to register criminal cases against those
who are issuing threats and also to take all such steps necessary to mitigate
circumstances leading to such threat:
Provided that if the threat is imminent, the Lokpal may decide to act immediately, within
a few hours to prevent physical assault on that person.
(d) If a person complains that he has already been physically assaulted on
account of making an allegation under this Act and if the Lokpal is satisfied after
conducting inquiries that the person has been assaulted because of his having made
an allegation under this Act or for filing an under Right the Information Act, 2005
application in any of the public authorities covered under this Act, then notwithstanding
anything else contained in any other law, the Lokpal shall pass such orders, as soon as
possible but in not more than twenty-four hours, directing the concerned authorities
to take such steps as directed by the Lokpal to provide adequate security to that
person, to register criminal cases and also to ensure that no further harm is done to that
person.
(e) If the whistleblower has alleged an act punishable under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 then for cases under clause ( c), the Lokpal may and for cases
under clause ( d), the Lokpal shall, assign the allegations made by that person to a
special team, put it on a fast track and complete investigations in that case in not more
than a month.
(f) If the whistleblower has alleged an act punishable under any law other than
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 then for cases under clause (c), the Lokpal may
and for cases under clause ( d), the Lokpal shall, direct the agency which has the
powers to enforce that law to assign the allegations made by the whistleblower to a
special team, put it on a fast track and complete investigation in that case in such time
as directed by the Lokpal.
(g) The Lokpal shall have the powers to issue directions to appropriate agencies
in the cases covered under clause ( f), monitor such investigations and if necessary,
issue directions to that agency to do the investigations in the manner as directed by
the Lokpal.
(3) If any complainant requests that his identity should be kept secret, the Lokpal shall
ensure the same and shall prescribe detailed procedures on how such complainants shall be
dealt with.
(4) The Lokpal shall issue orders to the public authorities to make necessary changes
in their policies and practices to prevent recurrence of victimization.
CHAPTER V
G
RIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEMS
21. (1) Each public authority shall be responsible for ensuring the preparation and
implemention of Citizens’ Charter, within a reasonable time, and not exceeding one year from
the coming into force of this Act.
Citizens'
Charter and
grievance
redressal.
22 of 2005.
22 of 2005.
49 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
30
35
40
45
49 of 1988.
25

15
(2) Every Citizens’ Charter shall enumerate the commitments of the respective public
authority to the citizens, officer responsible for meeting such commitment and the time limit
within which the commitment shall be met.
(3) Each public authority shall designate an official called Public Grievance Redressal
Officer, whom a complainant shall approach for any violation of the Citizens’ Charter.
(4) Every public authority shall review and revise its Citizens’ Charter at least once
every year through a process of public consultation.
(5) The Lokpal may by an order direct any public authority to make such changes in
their Citizens’ Charter as are mentioned in that order.
(6) No grievance shall be accepted by the Lokpal if fifteen days have not elapsed after
submission of complaint by the complainant with the Public Grievance  Redressal Officer of
Public Authority:
Provided that if the Lokpal feels that considering the gravity or urgency of the grievance,
it is necessary to do so, the Lokpal may decide to accept such grievance earliers also.
CHAPTER VI
A
UTHORITIES AND STAFF OF LOKPAL
22. (1) There shall be a Chief Vigilance Officer in each public authority to be selected
and appointed by the Lokpal.
(2) The Chief Vigilance Officer shall not be from the same public authority and shall be
a person of impeccable integrity and ability to take proactive meaures against corruption.
(3) The Chief Vigilance Officer shall be responsible for accepting complaints against
any public authority and shall transfer the complaints related to other public authorities
within two days of receipt.
(5) The Chief Vigilance Officer shall be responsible for carrying out all such
responsibilities as assigned to him from time to time by the  Lokpal including dealing with
complaints in the manner as laid down by the Lokpal from time to time:
Provided that the complaints which require investigations under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 shall be transferred to the Investigative Wing of the Lokpal:
Provided further that the complaints, other than  grievances, against officers of the
level of Joint Secretary or above shall not be dealt by the Chief Vigilance Officer and shall be
transferred to the Lokpal, who shall set up a committee of Chief Vigilance Officers of three
other public authorities to inquire into such complaint.
23. (1) There shall be such officers and employees as may be prescribed to assist the
Lokpal in the discharge of his functions under this Act.
(2) The number and categories of officer and employees shall be decided by the Lokpal
in consultation with the Government.
(3) The categories, recruitment and conditions of service of the officers and employees
referred in sub-section (1) including such special conditions or special pay as may be necessary
for enabling them to act without fear in the discharge of their functions, shall be such as may
be prescribed according to the recommendations of the Lokpal:
Provided that no official, whose integrity is in doubt, shall be considered for being
posted in Lokpal:
Provided further that all officers and employees, who work in Lokpal on deputation or
otherwise shall be eligible for the same terms and conditions as prescribed under this clause.
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Lokpal may for the
purpose of conducting investigations under this Act utilize the services of—
Chief
Vigilance
Officer.
Staff of
Lokpal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
49 of 1988.

16
(a) any officer or investigating agency of the Government; or
(b) any officer or investigating agency of any other Government with the prior
concurrence of that Government; or
(c) any person or any other agency.
(5) The officers and other employees referred to in sub-section (1) shall be under the
administrative and disciplinary control of the Lokpal.
(6) The Lokpal shall have the power to choose its own officials for which the Lokpal
may enlist officials on deputation from other Government agencies for a fixed tenure or it may
enlist officials on permanent basis from other Government agencies or it may appoint people
from outside on permanent basis or on a fixed tenure basis.
(7) The Staff and officers shall be entitled to such pay scales and other allowances,
which may be different and more than the oridinary pay scales in the Central Government,
as are decided by the Lokpal from time to time, in consultation with the Prime Minister, so
as to attract honest and efficient people to work in the Lokpal.
24. (1) The Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 shall stand repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any act or thing done under the said Act shall be
deemed to have been done under this Act and may be continued and completed under the
corresponding provisions of this Act.
(3) All inquiries and investigations and other disciplinary proceedings pending before
the Central Vigilance Commission and which have not been disposed of, shall stand
transferred to and be continued by the Lokpal as if they were commenced before him under
this Act.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any Act, the posts of the Secretary and
other Officers and Employees of the Central Vigilance Commission are hereby abolished and
they are hereby appointed as the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Lokpal.
(5) The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of services of the said
secretary, officers and other employees shall, until they are varied, be the same as to which
they were entitled to immediately before the commencement of this Act.
(6) All vigilance administration under the control of all Ministries/Departments of the
Central Government, corporations established by or under any Central Act, Government
companies, societies and local authorities owned or controlled by the Central Government
shall stand transferred, along with its personnel, assets and liabilities to the Lokpal for all
purposes.
(7) The personnel working in vigilance wings of the agencies mentioned in sub-
section (6) shall be deemed to be on deputation to the Lokpal for a period of five years from
the date they are transferred to the Lokpal:
Provided, the Lokpal may decided to repatriate any personnel anytime.
(8) The Department from where any personnel have been transferred to the Lokpal
under sub-section (6) shall cease to have any control over the administration and functions
of transferred personnel.
(9) The Lokpal shall rotate the personnel and create vigilance wing of each department
in such a way that no personnel from the same department get posted for vigilance functions
in the same department.
(10) No person shall be employed with the Lokpal against whom any vigilance inquiry
or any criminal case is pending at the time of being considered.
Repeal and
savings.
45 of 2003.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
25. (1) There shall be an investigation wing at the Lokpal.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17 of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 such officers of Investigation wing, upto the level as decided by the Lokpal, shall
have, in relation to the investigation and arrest of persons throughout India, in connection
with investigation of complaints under this Act, all the powers, duties, privileges and liabilities
which members of Delhi Special Police Establishment have in connection with the investigation
of offences committed therein.
(3) The part of the Delhi Special Police Establishment, in so far as it relates to
investigation and prosecution of offences alleged to have been committed under the
Prevention Corruption Act, 1988, shall stand transferred, along with its employees, assets
and liabilities to the Lokpal for all purposes.
(4) The part of the Delhi Special Police Establishment, which has been transferred
under sub-section (3), shall form part of Investigation Wing of the Lokpal.
(5) The Central Government shall cease to have any control over the transferred part
and its personnel.
(6)The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of services of the personnel
transferred under sub-section ( 3) shall be the same as to which they were entitled to
immediately before the commencement of this Act.
(7) All cases which were being dealt by that part of the Delhi Special Police Establishment,
which has been transferred under sub-section (3), shall stand transferred to the Lokpal.
(8) After completion of investigation in any case, the investigation wing shall present
the case to an appropriate bench of the Lokpal, which shall decide whether to grant permission
for prosecution or not.
26. (1) The Complaints against employees or officers of the Lokpal shall be dealt with
separately and as per provisions of this section.
(2) There shall be a separate wing in the Lokpal to deal with complaints against officers
or staff of the Lokpal.
(3) Complaint under this section may relate to an allegation of an offence punishable
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or a misconduct or a dishonest inquiry or
investigation.
(4) As soon as such a complaint is received the same shall be displayed on the website
of the Lokpal along with the contents of the complaint.
(5) Investigations into each such complaint shall be completed within a month of its
receipt.
(6) In addition to examining the allegations against the said official, the allegations
shall especially be examined against sections 107, 166, 167, 177, 182, 191, 192, 196, 199, 200,
201, 202, 204, 217, 218, 219, 463, 464, 468, 469, 470, 471, 474 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(7) If, during the course of investigations, the Lokpal feels that the charges are likely to
be sustained, the Lokpal shall divest such officer of all his responsibilities and powers and
shall place him under suspension.
(8) If after completion of inquiry or investigations, the Lokpal decides to prosecute
that person under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 or holds him guilty of any
misconduct or of conducting dishonest inquiry or investigations, then that person shall not
work with the Lokpal anymore.
(9) The Lokpal shall either dismiss that person from the job, if that person is in the
employment of the Lokpal, or shall repatriate him, if he is on deputation:
Investigation
Wing of
Lokpal.
Complaints
against
officers or
employees of
Lokpal.
49 of 1988.
49 of 1988.
45 of 1860.
49 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
49 of 1988.

18
Provided that no order under this clause shall be passed without giving reasonable
opportunity of being heard to the accused person:
Provided further that order under this clause shall be passed with fifteen days of
completion of investigations.
(10) The Lokpal shall take all steps to ensure that all inquiries and investigations on
complaints against its own staff and officials are conducted in most transparent and honest
manner.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
27.  (1) No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Chairperson
or members or against any officer, employee, agency or person referred to in Section 15(4) in
respect of anything which is done in good faith while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duties under this Act.
(2) No proceedings of the Lokpal shall be held to be bad for want of form and except on
the ground of jurisdiction, no proceedings or decision of the Lokpal shall be liable to be
challenged, reviewed, quashed or called in question in any court of ordinary Civil Jurisdiction.
28.  (1) Every public servant, other than those mentioned in section 2( k) (i) to (iii),
shall within three months after the commencement of this Act and thereafter before the 30th
June of every year submit to the head of the public authority, in the form prescribed by
Lokpal, a statement of his assets and liabilities and those of the members of his family.
(2) Public servants mentioned in section 2 (k) (i) to (iii) shall submit their returns in a
format prescribed by the Lokpal to the Lokpal with the aforesaid time lines.
(3) The Head of each public authority shall ensure that all such statements are put on
the website by the 31st of August of that year.
(4) If no such statement is received by the Head of that public authority from any such
public servant within the time specified in sub-section (1), the Head of that public authority
shall direct the concerned public servant to do so immediately and if within next one month,
the public servant concerned does not submit such statement, the Head shall stop the salary
and allowances of that public servant till he submits such statement.
(5) The Lokpal on new compliance sub-section ( 1) and (2) may initiate prosecution
against such public servant under Section 176 Indian Panel Code, 1860.
(6) If any public servant furnishes any statement, which is subsequently found to be
incorrect, then the Lokpal, in addition to taking action against the said public servant under
other sections of this Act, may also impose a penalty upto a maximum of fifty per cent of the
value of the additional property subsequently detected.
(7) The Lokpal shall also intimate such information to the Income Tax Department for
appropriate action.
Explanation.—In this section ‘‘family of a public servant’’ means the spouse and such
children and parents of the public servant as are dependent on him.
29. (1) The Lokpal shall be competent to delegate its powers and assign functions to
the officials working in the Lokpal.
(2) All functions carried out and powers exercised by such officials shall be deemed to
have been so done by the Lokpal:
Provided that the following functions shall be performed by the benches and cannot
be delegated:
(i) granting permission to initiate prosecution in any case;
(ii) Order for dismissal of any Government servant under CCS Conduct Rules;
Protection of
action takens
in good faith.
Public
Servants to
submit annual
property
statements.
Power to
delegate and
assign
functions.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
(iii) passing orders under section 10 on complaints against officials and staff of
the Lokpal;
(iv) pass orders in cases of complaints, other than grievances, against officers of
the level of Joint Secretary and above.
30. (1) The Preliminary inquiry under sub-section ( 1) of  section 19 of this Act be
completed within a month of receipt of complaint:
Provided that the inquiry officer shall be liable for an explanation if the inquiry is not
completed within this time limit.
(2) Investigation into any allegation shall be completed within six months, and in any
case, not more than one year, from the date of receipt of complaint.
31. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if someone makes any false or
frivolous complaint under this Act, the Lokpal may impose such fines on that complainant as
it deems fit:
Provided that no fine can be imposed without giving such person a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(2) Fines imposed under sub-section (1) shall be recoverable as dues of land revenue.
32. (1) The Lokpal shall, at regular intervals either study itself or cause to be studied
the functioning of all public authorities falling within its jurisdiction and in consultation with
respective public authority, issue such directions as it deems fit to prevent incidence of
corruption in future.
(2) The Lokpal shall also be responsible for creating awareness about this Act and
involving general public in curbing corruption and maladministration.
33. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the President, in consultation
with the Lokpal or on request of the Lokpal may, by order, make such provision,—
(i) for brining the provisions of this Act into effective operation;
(ii) for continuing the inquiries and investigations pending before the Central
Vigilance Commission by the Lokpal.
34. The Provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
35. The Lokpal shall have power to make its own regulations for the smooth functioning
of the institution and to effectively implement various provisions of this Act.
36. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act:
Provided that such rules shall be made only in consultation and with the approval of
the Lokpal.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
such rules may provide for,—
(i) the allowance and pensions payable to and other conditions of service of the
Chairperson and members of the Lokpal;
(ii) the powers of a Civil Court which may be exercised by the Lokpal under
clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 10.
(iii) the salary, allowances, recruitment and other conditions of service of the
employees of the Lokpal;
(iv) any other matter for which rules have to be made are necessary under this
Act.
(3) Any rule made under this Act may be made with retrospective effect and when such
a rule is made the reasons for making the rule shall be specified in a Statement laid before
both Houses of the Parliament.
Time limits to
be fixed for
inquiry.
Penalty for
false
complaint.
Preventive
measures.
Removal of
difficulties.
Power to make
regulations.
Power to make
Rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Overriding
effect of the
Act.

20
CHAPTER VIII
AMENDMENT TO THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988
37. In the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988,—
(a) section 19 shall be omitted.
(b) after section 16 the following section shall be inserted namely:—
“16A. The Special Judge on conviction of an accused shall also qualify
the loss caused to the Government  and apportion that amount to various convicts
from whom this money shall be recovered as arrears of land revenue.”
(c) in section 7, for the words “six months but which may extend to five years”
the words “five years which may extend to life imprisonment” shall be substituted.
(d) in section 8, for the words “six months but which may extend to five years”
the words “five years which may extend to life imprisonment” shall be substituted.
(e) in section 9, for the words “six months but which may extend to five years”
the words “five years which may extend to life imprisonment” shall be substituted.
(f) in section 10, for the words “six months but which may extend to five years”
the words “five years which may extend to life imprisonment” shall be substituted.
(g) in section 11, for the words “six months but which may extend to five years”
the words “five years which may extend to life imprisonment” shall be substituted.
(h) in section 12, for the words “six months but which may extend to five years”
the words “five years which may extend to life imprisonment” shall be substituted.
(i) in section 13, sub-section (2) for the words “one year but which may extend to
seven years” the words “five years which may extend to life imprisonment” shall be
substituted.
(j) in section 14, for the words “two years but which may extend to seven years”
the words “five years which may extend to life imprisonment” shall be substituted.
(k) in section 15, for the words “three years” the words “life imprisonment” may
be substituted.
Amendment
of Prevention
of Corruption
Act.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The idea to bring in an institution like Lokpal to look into allegations of corruption,
etc., is borrowed from the office of the Ombudsman which was set up in Scandinavian
countries in Sixtees. After thorough examination, consultations and discussions, the
Government of India entrusted this subject for making appropriate recommendations with
regard to setting up of the Lokpal to the first Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) in
1966. After examining the proposal threadbare, the first ARC recommended the constitution
of a two-tier machinery the Lokpal at the Centre, and the Lokayukta at the State level. The
Government of India considered the recommendation favourably and, for the first time, the
Lokpal Bill was introduced in the Fourth Lok Sabha in 1968 and was passed the next year.
But, unfortunately, the Bill lapsed due to dissolution of the Lok Sabha. Then, the Bill was
introduced again in 1971, 1977, 1985, 1989, 1996, 1998 and 2001. Every time the Bill was
introduced, but due to one reason or the other, it could not become an Act.
India is a democratic country and to uphold the values of democracy, or any other
system of governance for that matter, a clean public life, the standards and character of
political parties have to be built on grounds of moral conscience. Corruption in public life has
become rampant in the country and with the recent scams like 2G spectrum, allocation of
S-band spectrum, Adarsh Housing Society, Commonwealth Games, 2010 delay in unearthing
black money, etc., it becomes all the more necessary and important to immediately put in
place the institution of Lokpal. Apart from corruption by people who are in public life,
corruption in executive has also shot up tremendously. So, the proposed Bill justifies its
enactment in every respect.
There is no doubt that some of the States have appointed the Lokayuktas to look into
corruption cases against people who are in the public life. But, not all the States have
enacted the Lokayuktas. So if the proposed Bill is passed, it would pave the way for enactment
of the Lokayuktas in States where it was  not introduced.
The proposed Bill aims to cover the Prime Minister, Ministers, Members of Parliament,
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts, Government Servants, etc.
The Bill also aims to protect the whistleblower who faces threat of professional harm,
including but not limited to illegitimate transfers, denial of promotions, denial of appropriate
perks, departmental proceedings, discrimination or physical harm or is actually subjected to
such harm.
The Bill seeks to achieve above objectives.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. M.V .  MYSURA  REDDY
21

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Government for establishment of the Institution of
the Lokpal. Clause 5 deals with the salary and allowances of the Chairperson and members of
the Lokpal and creation of the Lokpal Fund. Clause 23 deals with the officers and employees
of the Lokpal and their salary and allowances, etc. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage,  it is not possible to quantify the
exact amount of recurring and non-recurring expenditure to be involved for putting in place
the institution of the Lokpal.
22

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clauses 29 and 35 of the Bill empowers the Lokpal to delegate powers and assign
functions to officials working in the Lokpal and to make its own regulations. Clause 36 gives
powers to the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
These rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore,
of a normal character.
23

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of effective anti-corruption and grievance redressal systems
at the Centre by creating effective deterrent against corruption and also to provide effective
protection to whistleblowers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—972RS(S3)—05.08.2011.