1
G:\BILL 2002\RS\256RS.PM5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No.  XXIII of  2002
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
THE DROUGHT PRONE AREAS (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation of special development plans and establishment of an
autonomous Authority to implement such plans in respect of the drought prone
areas of the country particularly in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Andhra
Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and Gujarat and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drought Prone Areas (Special Provisions) Act,
2002.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Drought Prone Areas Development Authority
established under section 4;
(b) “drought prone areas” mean such areas in the country which in the opinion
of the Central Government are drought prone and declared, by notification in the
Official Gazette, as such in consultation with the Governments of the States and
Union Territory administrations;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5
10

2
G:\BILL 2002\RS\256RS.PM5
3. The Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, formulate special development plans for providing industrial
growth, railways, roads, post and telegraph and other means of communications, and in
particular, plans relating to agriculture, irrigation facilities, drinking water through wells,
handpumps and tap water, fodder facilities, electricity, development of forests, livestock,
milk and poultry co-operatives, health services including family welfare schemes, education
and vocational training and special employment drives in the drought prone areas in the
country particularly in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa,
Rajasthan and Gujarat.
4. (1) For the purposes of this Act, with effect from such date, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, in this behalf, there
shall be established by the Central Government an Authority to be called the Drought
Prone Areas Development Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at Bhopal in the State of Madhya
Pradesh and the Authority may establish offices at such places in the country in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Authority shall consist of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and such other members
as may be prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall have such officers, employees and other set up including
the conditions of services of such officers and employees as the Central Government,
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine from time to time for the
efficient functioning of the Authority.
(6) The Authority shall conduct its business in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. It shall be the duty of the Authority to implement the special development plans
formulated under section 3.
6. The Central Government shall pr ovide, fr om time to time, after  due
appropriation made by Parliament by law, adequate funds for the implementation of
special development plans in the drought prone areas and for the administrative
expenses of the Authority.
7. The Authority shall have a fund to be called the ‘Drought Prone Areas Develop-
ment Fund’ to which shall be credited all moneys received from the Central and State
Governments, international financial institutions, industrial establishments and individuals
for the development of drought prone areas in the country and all payments by the Authority
towards development expenditure shall be made therefrom.
8. The Authority shall submit an annual report, in such form and in such manner, as
may be prescribed of its activities of development in the drought prone areas of the country
to the President of India who shall cause the report to be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is received by him.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may , by notification in the Of ficial Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government to
formulate
special
development
plans for
drought prone
areas.
Establishment
of Drought
prone areas
Development
Authority.
Authority to
implement the
special
development
plans.
Funds of the
Authority.
Development
Fund.
Annual
Report.
Savings.
Power to make
rules.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
G:\BILL 2002\RS\256RS.PM5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Unprecedented drought conditions play consistant havoc in various parts of the
country. Drought conditions are prevailing for the last many years in the tribal belt of
Chhatisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Palamu division of Jharkhand, Kalahandi of Orissa, various
parts of the Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat and other parts of the country. The farmers
could not grow their crops in the parched land of these areas and rain God remains
consistently evasive in such areas resulting in acute shortage of even drinking water because
the wells and hand pumps have either dried up or the water level has gone down
considerably. There are no irrigation facilities. The inhabitants do not get food to eat and
water to drink resulting in their exodus to other places. In many places starvation deaths
have also been reported. The worst affected is the mute livestock dying unnatural death in
absence of fodder and water. Though the Central and State Governments give some relief,
it is inadequate and even negligible. The situation goes from bad to worse due to the
apathy of the authorities. To save the situation urgent steps have to be taken at the national
level.
Drought is not a temporary phenomenon in these areas. It is almost a continuous
process. So a long term national policy will have to be formulated for the proper
development of these drought prone areas. The onus of formulating such a policy lies on
the Central Government. An autonomous Authority will have to be established for
implementating the plans formulated for the development of drought prone areas in the
country. This has to be undertaken on priority.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
SURESH PACHOURI

4
G:\BILL 2002\RS\256RS.PM5
2
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Drought Prone Areas
Development Authority. Clause 6 provides for the funds of the Authority. The Bill, if
enacted and brought into operation will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred crores will be involved as
recurring expenditure per annum.
It may also involve a non recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crores from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

5
G:\BILL 2002\RS\256RS.PM5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

6
G:\BILL 2002\RS\256RS.PM5
MGIP(PLU)MRND—256RS—16-04-2002.
RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation of special development plans and establishment of an
autonomous Authority to implement such plans in respect of the drought prone
areas of the country particularly in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Andhra
Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and Gujarat and for matters connected therewith.
(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)