THE PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES ON WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to prevent the commission of offences of atrocities against the women and children in the
country, to provide for Special Courts for the trial of such offences and for the relief
and rehabilitation of the victims of such offences and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-Seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Atrocities on Women and Children Act,
2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of State, the Government of
that State and for all other cases the Central Government.
(b) "atrocity" means an offence punishable under section 3;
(c) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(d) "Special Court" means a Court of Session specified as a Special Court in
section 7;
Bill No.  XXIII  of 2006
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
ON 14TH MARCH, 2006
Definitions.
2 of 1973.
5
10

2
(e) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Code or the Indian Penal Code shall have the meanings assigned to them respectively
in the Code, or as the case may be, in the Indian Penal Code.
3.  (1) Whoever,—
(i) assaults or uses force against any women with intent to dishonour or outrage
her modesty;
(ii) forcibly removes clothes from the person of a woman or parades her naked or
with painted face or body or commits any similar act which is derogatory to human
dignity;
(iii) compels or entices a woman or child to do 'begar' or other similar forms of
forced or bonded labour;
(iv) being in a position to dominate the will of a woman and uses that position to
harass or exploit her sexually to which she would not have otherwise agreed;
(v) intentionally insults or intimidates with intent to humiliate a woman or child in
any place within public view;
(vi) institutes false, malicious or vexatious suit or criminal or other legal
proceedings against a woman or child;
(vii) takes pictures or video of a women without her consent or knowledge by
violating her privacy;
(viii) forces or compels any women into prostitution;
(ix) forces or compels any child to work in any establishment whether hazardous
or not;
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years
but which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to twenty thousand
rupees.
(2) Whoever being a public servant, commits any offence under this section, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which
may extend to the punishment provided for that offence.
4. Whoever, being a public servant, willfully neglects his duties required to be performed
by him under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend to one year.
5. (1) Where the Special Court is satisfied, upon a complaint or a police report that a
person is likely to commit an offence under this Act, it may, by order in writing, direct such
person to remove himself beyond the limits of such area, within such time as may be specified
in the order, and not to return to that area from which he was directed to remove himself for
such period, not exceeding two years, as may be specified in the order.
(2) The Special Court shall, along with the order under sub-section (1), communicate to
the person directed under that sub-section the grounds on which such order has been made.
(3) The Special Court may revoke or modify the order made under sub-section (1), for
the reasons to be recorded meriting, on the representation made by the person against whom
such order has been made or by any other person on his behalf within thirty days from the
date of the order.
6. Any person contravening an order of the Special Court made under section 5 shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine.
45 of 1860.
Punishments
for offences
of atrocities.
Punishment
for neglect of
duties
Removal of
person likely
to commit
offence
Punishment
for non
compliance of
orders of the
Special Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

3
7. For the purposes of providing for speedy trial, the appropriate Government shall ,
with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify for each district a court of session to be a special court to try offences under this Act.
8. (1) A District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other Executive
Magistrate or any police officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police may,
on receiving information and after such inquiry as he may think necessary, has reason to
believe that a person or a group of persons, residing in or frequenting any place within the
local limits of his jurisdiction is likely to commit an offence or has threatened to commit any
offence under this Act and is of the opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding,
declare such an area to be an area prone to atrocities and taken preventive action.
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make one
or more schemes specifying the manner in which the officers referred to in sub-section (1)
shall take appropriate action specified in such scheme or schemes to prevent atrocities and
to restore the feeling of security amongst the women and children.
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall provided such relief and rehabilitation to the
victims of the atrocities under this Act by framing schemes as may be notified from time to
time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the aforesaid provision the appropriate
Government shall provide the following facilities to the victims of atrocities under this
Act,—
 (i) free medical facilities;
(ii) free board and lodging;
(iii) recreational facilities; and
(iv) vocational training.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made in this behalf, provide
such requisite funds for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or against the State Government or any officer or authority of Government or
any other person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this
Act.
13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or any custom or usage or any instrument having effect by virtue of any other
law.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Special Court
Preventive
action to be
taken by the
law and order
machinery
Relief and
rehabilitation
Central
Government
to provide
Funds
Removal of
Difficulties
Protection of
action taken
in good faith
Overriding
effect of the
Act
Power to
make rules
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Women and children are the most vulnerable classes of our society. Every now and
then, women and children are subject to atrocities and violence. They are subject to all kinds
of torture which more often than not go unreported. At times, the State Machinery do not
react with the kind of agility that is required on the incident of atrocities. There is no dearth
of incident when women are paraded naked in many places in our country and, at times, also
declared as witches. They are left at the mercy of their fate and no one comes to their rescue.
Women are mentally and sexually exploited and pushed in to flesh trade. Similarly, children
when they are to enjoy their childhood, are made to work hours together and exploited. They
are made to work in restaurants, small hotels, dhabhas, small repair shops, carpet industries,
glass industries, etc. under unhygienic and hazardous conditions. Children are the future of
the country and, therefore, putting them in such kind of situations is a blot on us. Of late,
there are reported incidents of sexual exploitation of children which is very unfortunate for
the country. Therefore, in order to give the women a respectable position in the society and
save the childhood from the tyranny of the unscrupulous employers, it is high time that a law
should be framed to protect them from atrocities by providing strict punishment to serve as
deterrent for others.
Hence this Bill.
V ANGA  GEETHA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide relief and
rehabilitation to the women and children who are victims of atrocities. Further, Clause 10 of
the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds for the purposes
of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees twenty crores will be
required for the purpose.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one crore will also be required.
5
SER 4 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/5885RS

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character
6
SER 4 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/5885RS

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent the commission of offences of atrocities against the women and children in the
country, to provide for Special Courts for the trial of such offences and for the relief
and rehabilitation of the victims of such offences and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Vanga Geetha, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—6496RS(S-4)—16.03.2006.