Bill No.  XXII  of  2015
THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE
CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth  year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
(Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 2 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961,
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act)—
(i) after clause (dd), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(dda) ‘co-operative credit society’ means a society registered under the
Co-operative Societies Act, 1912”.
(ii) after sub-clause (v) of  clause (eea), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(vi) a co-operative credit society”.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
47 of 1961 5
10
2 of 1912

2
(iii) in clause ( g), for the words “banking company or a cooperative bank”
wherever they occur, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“banking company, co-operative credit society or a co-operative bank”.
3. In the principal Act, after section 11A, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“11B. The Corporation shall register every co-operative credit society before
the expiry of thirty days from the date of its establishment”.
4. In the principal Act, in section 14, for the words “Regional Rural Bank or a
co-operative bank” wherever they occur, the following shall be substituted namely:—
“Regional Rural Bank, co-operative credit society or a co-operative bank”.
Insertion of
new section
11B.
Registration of
co-operative
credit society.
Amendment
of section 14.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are many investment companies operating in the country which cater to the
need of different kinds of investors. While big banking companies have educated wealthy
persons as their clientele, on the other hand small workmen and daily wagers park their
savings in small co-operative societies formed in and around their workplaces or residences,
which also lend them money in times of need. There occur cases of default by these
investment companies.
Though the investors of banking companies be it a rural bank, cooperative bank or a
urban bank have a very unique facility of safeguarding of their savings in cases of default
by the banking company, which has been guaranteed under the provisions of the Deposit
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, such facility is not available to the
depositors of the co-operative credit societies.
In the event of default of payment by the cooperative societies, small investors lose
their lifetime savings. In view of the hardships faced by the small investors, it is felt that the
facility of safeguarding of their savings as provided under the Deposit insurance and Credit
Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 should be extended to cover the cooperative societies
also.
Hence  this Bill.
MANSUKH  L.  MANDAVIYA
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE
CORPORATION ACT, 1961
(NO. 47 OF 1961)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.
* * * * *
(dd) “co-operative bank” means a State Co-operative bank, a Central co-operative
bank and a primary co-operative bank:
* * * * *
(eea) “credit institution” means all or any of the following namely:—
(i) a banking company:
(ii) a corresponding new bank:
(iii) a Regional Rural Bank:
(iv) a co-operative bank:
(v) a financial institution:
* * * * *
(g) “deposit” means the aggregate of the unpaid balances due to a depositor
(other than a foreign Government, the Central Government, a State Government, a
corresponding new bank, Regional Rural Bank or a banking company or a co-operative
bank) in respect of all his accounts, by whatever name called, with a corresponding
new bank or with a Regional Rural Bank or with a banking company or a co-operative
bank and includes, credit balances in any cash credit account but does not include.
(i) where a banking company or a corresponding new bank at the
commencement of this Act or where an eligible co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1968 is
working under a scheme of compromise or arrangement or of reconstruction
sanctioned by any competent authority providing for the acceptance of fresh
deposits, any amount due to the depositor in respect of his deposit before the
date of the coming into force of the scheme to the extent it is not credited after
the said date under the provisions of that scheme: or
(ia) any amount due on account of any deposit with any insured bank
which has been specially exempted in this behalf by the Corporation with the
previous approval of the Reserve Bank or,
(ii) any amount due to account of any deposit received outside India:
* * * * *
11A. The Corporation shall register every Regional Rural Bank before the expiry
of thirty days from the date of its establishment.
* * * * *
Registration
of Regional
Rural Bank.
56 of 1968
4

5
14. (1) Where the Corporation has registered any banking company Regional Rural
Bank or co-operative bank as an insured bank, it shall, within thirty days of its registration,
send an intimation in writing to the banking company, Regional Rural Bank or co-operative
bank that it has been registered as an insured bank.
(2) Every such intimation shall indicate the manner in which the premium payable by
the bank under section 15 may be calculated.
* * * * *
Intimation of
registration.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee
Corporation Act, 1961.
————
(Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3366RS(S3)—07-12-2015.