Bill No. XXH of 1976

THE MARRIAGE LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1976
(As rntRobucED In THE Ragya SaBHa)
A
BILL
ther to amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage
Act, 1954.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic
India as follows: —
CHAPTER I i
PRELIMINARY ie

1, This Act may be called the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976.

CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE Hinpu Mararace Act, 1955
2 In the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the
du Marriage Act), in section 5, for clause (ii), the following clause
ll be substituted, namely:—
“(it) at the time of the marriage, neither party—
(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in conse-
quence of unsoundness of mind; or

(b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been
suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to such an
extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of child-
Ten; or

(९) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity or

epilepsy;”.

Short
title.

Amend-
ment of
section 5.


Amend-
ment of
section 9,

Amend-
ment of
section 10.

Amend-
ment of
section
il,
Amend-
ment of
section 12.

Amend-
ment of
section

13. vi

2

3, In section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act,—
the brackets and figure “(1)” shan

(a) in sub-section (1), हि
so amended, the following Expl

omitted and to that sub-section as
nation shall be added, namely! —
“Rzplanation.—Where 8 question arises whether there pa

been reasonable excuse for withdrawal from the society, the हे
burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be on the person whe

has withdrawn from the society.”;

(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.

Hindu Marriage Act, for sub-section (1) ang we

4. In section 10 of the
the following sub-section shall be substituted,

the Explanation thereunder,
namely:—

“(1) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnised before or
after the commencement of this Act, may present a ः praying
for a decree for judicial separation on any of the grounds specified jn 1,
sub-section (1) of section 13, and in the case of a wife also on any 5
of the grounds specified in sub-section (2) thereof, as grounds on
which a petition for divorce might have been presented,”.

5. In section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act, after the words “presented
by either party thereto”, the words “against the other party” shall be 25
inserted. |]

6. In section 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act—

(a) in sub-section (1) —
(i) for clause (a), the following
namely: —
(व) that the marriage has not been consummated owing
to the impotence of the respondent; or
(ii) in clause (c), for the words “or fraud”, the words “or

by fraud as to the nature of the ceremony or as to any ma’
fact or circumstance concerning the respondent” shall be subs- 3°

tituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (b), in sub-clause (iii), for te
words “the grounds for a decree”, the words “the said shall
be substituted. ‘ ४
7. In section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for clause (i), the following clauses shall be
namely:—
“(i) has, after the solemnization of the marriage
voluntary sexual intercourse with any person other than
his or her spouse; or

clause shall be substituted,
35

33

substituted,

(ia) has, after the solemnization of the marrt

lage, treated
the petitioner with cruelty; or .


he

(ib) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period
of not less than two years immediately preceding the pre-
sentation of the petition; or”;

(ii) for clause (iti), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely; —

‘(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been
suffering continuously or intermittently from mental dis-
order of such 8 kind and to such an extent that the petitioner
cannot reasonably be expected to live with the respondent.

Explanation.—In this clause,—

(a)the expression “mental disorder’ means mental
illness, arrested or incomplete development of mind,
psychopathic disorder or any other disorder or disability
of mind and includes schizophrenia;

(b) the expression “psychopathic disorder” means a
persistent disorder or disability of mind (whether or not
including sub-normality of intelligence) which results in
abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible con-
duct on the part of the other party, and whether or not
it requires or is susceptible to medical treatment; or’;

(iii) in clauses (iv) and (v), the words “, for a period of not
less than three years immediately preceding the presentation of
the petition,” shall be omitted;

(iv) after clause (vii), the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely: —

‘Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression “deser-
tion” means the desertion of the petitioner by the other party
to the marriage without reasonable cause and without the
consent or against the wish of such party, and includes the
wilful neglect of the petitioner by the other party to the
marriage, and its grammatical variations and cognate ex-
pressions shall be construed accordingly.’;

(b) in sub-section (1A), for the words “two years”, in the two
places where they occur, the words “one year” shall be substituted;

(c) in sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause (ii), for the word “bestiality”, the words
“bestiality; or” shall be substituted;

(ii) after clause (ii) as so amended, the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—

“ (iti) that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, or in a proceeding
under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(or under the corresponding section 488 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898), a decree or order, as the case may
be, has been passed against the husband awarding mainte-


Insertion
of new
sections
135A and
13B.
Alternate
relier

in divorce
procecd-
ings,

Divorce

inutual

ment of

i.

4

t she was ]j

notwithstanding tha ving

ee thst eg ue: passing of such yrs ०7 order, ae
tation between the parties has not nm resumed Pe md

year or upwards; = =
- whether consummateq

bine Pacer Ascites हैक the age of fifteen Rot)
pee she has repudiated the marriage after attaining thet =
but before attaining the age of eighteen years,

Explanation —This clause applies whether the Marriag,
was solemnized before or after the commencement of re
Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976,", 0

8, After section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act as so amended, the fot

lowing sections shall be inserted, namely: —

“13A. In any proceeding under this Act, on a petition 105 dis.
solution of marriage by a decree of divorce, except in so far 85 the ,
petition is founded on the grounds mentioned in clauses (४), (ण) 5
and (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 13, the court may, if it con.
siders it just so to do having regard to the circumstances of the case,
ass instead a decree for judicial separation.

13B. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act a Petition for
dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce may be presented ty
the district court by both the parties to a marriage ‘together, whether
such marriage was solemnized before or after the
of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976, on the ground that
they have been living separately for a period of one year or more, 35
that they have not been able to live together and that they have
mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.

(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six
months after the date of the presentation of the petition referred to
in sub-section (1) and not later than eighteen months after the said 0
date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the court
shall, on being satisfied, after hearing the parties and after making
such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized
and that the averments in the petition are true, pass a decree of
divorce declaring the marriage to be dissolved with effect from the 35
date of the decree.”,

2»

9. In section 14 of the Hindu Marriage Act— है

(i) in sub-section @—

(a) for the words “unless at the date of the presentation of
the petition three years have elapsed”, the words “unless at the #
date of the presentation of the petition one year has
shall be substituted;

(७) in the proviso,—

(1) for the words “before three years have elapsed”, thé
words “before one year has elapsed” shall be substituted; 4


» 5

|. (2) for the words “expiry of three years", the words
i “expiry of one year” shall be substituted;

(3) for the words “expiration of the said three years",
the words “expiration of the said one year” shall be substi-
tuted;

(ii) in sub-section (2),—

(a) for the words “expiration of three years", the words
“expiration of one year” shall be substituted;

(b) for the words “said three years”, the words “said one
year” shall be substituted,

10. In section 15 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the proviso shall be
omitted.

11. For section 16 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely: —

15 “16. (1) Notwithstanding that a marriage is null and void under
section 11, any child of such marriage who would have been legiti-
mate if the marriage had been valid, shall be legitimate, whether
such child is born before or after the commencement of the Marriage
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976, and whether or not a decree of nullity
20 ig granted in respect of that marriage under this Act and whether or
not the marriage is held to be void otherwise than on a petition under
this Act.
(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted in respect of a voidable
marriage under section 12, any child begotten or conceived before the
25 decree is made, who would have been the legitimate child of the
parties to the marriage if at the date of the decree it had been dis-
solved instead of being annulled, shall be deemed to be their legiti-
mate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
30 shall be construed as conferring upon any child of a marriage which
is null and void or which is annulled by a decree of nullity under
section 12, any rights in or to the property of any person, other than
the parents, in any case where, but for the passing of this Act, such
child would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such
35 rights by reason of his not being the legitimate child of his parents.”.
12 For section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—

“9, Every petition under this Act shall be presented to the dis-
trict court within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil
40. jurisdiction—

(i) the marriage was solemnized, or
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the
petition, resides, or

Substitu-
tion of
new sec-
tion for
section 19.

Court to
which
Petition
shall be
presented,


Amend.
™ent
Of sec.

Tnsertion
of new

21A, 218
and ३10.
Power to
transfer

Petitions
in certain

५ : ; —

ii) the parties to the marriage last resided togey » OY

(iti) the pa itioner is residing at the time of the Present,

(tv) the Lm a case where the respondent is, at that Pa
of the sppniere ‘bis territories to which this Act ex, Le he
residing outs: d of as being alive for a period of seven Yeary
not = prs persons who would naturally hay, oft
more by

© heard f hin, 5
if he were alive.". हि
tion 20 of the Hindu Marriage Act, in Sub-Section (7), for
the take also state”, the words and figures 8nd, exe,

Pt in .

tition under section 11, shall also state” shall be Substituted.
ty

= 14. After section 21 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the following ction,

8 erted, namely: —

ited

Of together by the district
earlier Petition wag Presented,

clause (by of sub-section (2) applies, the
Vernment, as the case may be, Competent under the 3;
cedure, 1908 to transfer any suit or Proceeding from
in which the late, Petition has been presented to
the distri in earlier petition ig Pending, shall exer-
transfer such later petition as if it had been em-
Powered so to do under the sai ‘Ode. .

21B, (1) The trial of & Petit)

i n Under this Act shall, so peg gat
Y With the interests of justice in respect
trial, be continued from da Y until its conclusion unless ae
adjournment of the ‘rial beyond the following day #
necessary for Feasons to be recorded,


7

| Every petition under this Act shall be tried ag expeditiously
as possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude the tril within

nix months from the date of service of notice of the petition on the
respondent,

(3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously
ax possible, and endeavour shall be made to conclude the hearing
within three months from the date of service of notice of appeal on
the respondent.

210, Notwithstanding anything in any enactment to the contrary, Docu-
no document shall be inadmissible in evidence in any proceeding at mentory
the trial of a petition under this Act on the ground that It is not duly *¥idence
stamped or registered,”,

15, For section 22 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the following section Substitu-
shall be substituted, namely: — tion of
new sec-
tion for
section
22,

“22. (1) Every proceeding under this Act shail be conducted in Proceed-
camera and it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish ings to
any matter in relation to any stich proceeding except a judgment i
of the High Court or of the Supreme Court printed or published with and may
the previous permission of the Court, not be

printed or
(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contraven- published,

tion of the provisions contained in sub-section (1), he shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.”,

16, In section 23 of the Hindu Marriage Act— Amend-
(a) in sub-section (1) — pel

(i) in clause (a), after the words “the petitioner”, the tion 23,
brackets, words, letters and figure “[except in cases where the
relief is sought by him on the ground specified in sub-clause (a),
sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of clause (ii) of section 5)”
shall be inserted;

(ii) in clause (b), the words, brackets, letter and figures “in
clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 10, or” shall be omitted;

(iti) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely: —

“(bb) when a divoree is sought on the ground of mutual
consent, such consent has not been obtained by force, fraud
or undue influence, and”;

(iv) in clause (c), for the words “the petition”, the words,
brackets and figures “the petition (not being a petition pre-
sented under section 11)” shall be substituted;

0 (b) to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be added at
the end, namely: —

“Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
apply to any proceeding wherein relief is sought on any of the
grounds specified in clause (ii), clause (iii), clause (i), clause
(v), clause (vi) or clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 13.";

’


Inser-
tion of
new sec.
tion 234.
Relief
for
Tespon-
dent in
divorce
and
other
Proceed-
ings,

Amend.
ment of
sec.

tion 25,

Substitu-
tion of
new sec.
tions

for sec-
tion 28.

Appesls
decrees

and
orders.

8

ded, the fo) |
(c) after sub-section (2) as so amended, owing Nha
tions shall be inserted, namely: —

“ ‘or the purpose of aiding the court in brings F
such 44 the court may, if Paes —— So desire be
the court thinks it just and proper so to igh Hourn the it
ings for a reasonable period not exceeding — days Feit ed. .

by the parties jn thi. Tete,
the matter to any person named by P # behaly
to any person nominated by the court if the Parties fajj tot or
any person, with directions to report to the court as ty Whe ory
reconciliation can be and has been, effected and the court shay
disposing of the proceeding have due regard to the Teport to

4) In every case where a marriage is dissolveg by a
of Poon the court passing the decree shalt give ® copy tte
free of cost to each of the parties.”. ereog

17. After section 23 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the following Seetion
shall be inserted, namely; — 18

“23A. In any Proceeding for divorce or judicial Separation op
restitution of conjugal rights, the respondent MAY Not only oppose
the relief sought on the ground of petitioner's adultery, Cruelty op
desertion, but also make a counter-claim for any relief js
Act on that ground; and if the petitioner's adultery, cruelty or. हु
tion is proved, the court may give to the respondent any relief under
this Act to which he or she would have been entitled if he or she haq
presented a petition seeking such relief on that ground,”,

18. In section 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act—
(a) in sub-section (1),—

this ,,

5

(i) the words “, while the applicant remains unmarried,”
shall be omitted;

(ii) for the words “and the conduct of the parties”, the
words “, the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of 30
the case” shall be substituted;

(0) in sub-section (3), for the words “it shall reseind the order’
the words “it may at the instance of the other party vary, modify

19. For section 28 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the following sections
shell be substituted, namely: —



9

| Orders made by the court in any proceeding under this Act,
under section 25 or section 26 of this Act shall, subject to the pro-
visions of sub-section (3), be appealable if they aze not in the nature
of interim orders, and every such appeal shall lie to the court to
which appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in
5 exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.

(3) There shall be no appeal under this section on the subject
of costs only.

(4) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a
period of thirty days from the date of the decree or order.

238A. All decrees and orders made by the court in any proceeding
under this Act shall be enforced in the like manner as the decrees and
orders of the court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdic-
tion for the time being are enforced.”.

CHAPTER पा
AMENDMENTS TO THE SPECIAL Manatace Act, 1954

20. In section 2 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (hereinafter refer-
red to as the Special Marriage Act), for clause (e), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—

‘(e) “district court” means, in any area for which there is a city
civil court, that court, and in any other area, the principal civil
court of original jurisdiction, and includes any other civil court
which may be specified by the State Government by notification in the
Official Gazette as having jurisdiction in respect of the matters
a5 dealt with in this Act;’.

21. In section 4 of the Special Marriage Act, for clause (b), the fol-
lowing clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(b) neither party—

(i) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in conse-
quence of unsoundness of mind; or

zn

(ii) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been
suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to such an
extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of child-

ren; or

(iii), has been subject to recurrent attacas of insanity cr
epilepsy;”.

22. In Chapter IV of the Special Marriage Act, after section 21, the
following section shall be inserted. namely:—

“921A. Where the marriage is solemnized under this Act of any
Person who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion
with a person who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
Teligion, section 19 and section 21 shall not apply and so much of
Section 20 as creates a disability shall also not apply.”.

Enforce-
ment of
decrees

orders.

Amend-
ment

of sec-
tion 2,

ment
of sec-
tion 4.

Inser-
tion of
new sec~
tion 212.

in certain
cases.


Amend-
ment

of pec-
lion 22,

Amend-
ment of
section
23.

ment
of sec.
tion 24.

‘Substitu-
tion of
new sec.
tion for

Legiti-
macy of
children
of void

voidable
marri-

ment
of sec~
tion 27.

10
tion 22 of the Special Marriage Act, the following हक,
23. To section

Ly: —

> the end, name!

nation shall be added at ५ qontion arises whether there hag Sing
peice drawal from the society, the burden

hall be on the person who hag with.
|]

“Kaplanation.
reasonable excuse for Ww!
proving reasonable excuse sl
drawn from the society.”. .

3 Marriage Act, in sub-section (
es meme pagar 1 and figure “sub-section 0)"
a Richa date and letter “and sub-section (1A)" shall be inserteg

25. In section 24 of the Special Marriage Act, is sub-section (1), tor
the word “and may be so declared", the words “and may, on a _ ty
tion presented by either party thereto against the other party, be ६६
declared” shall be substituted.

26. For section 26 of the Special Marriage Act, the following Section

shal] be substituted, namely:— §

“26. (1) Notwithstanding that a marriage is null and void
under section 24, any child of such marriage who would have been
legitimate if the marriage had been valid, shall be legitimate, whe.
ther such child is born before or after the commencement of the
Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976, and whether or not ar
decree of nullity is granted in respect of that marriage under this
Act and whether or not the marriage is held to be void otherwise
than on 8 petition under this Act,

(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted’ ih respect of a void-

has been dissolved instead of being annulled, shall be deemed to
be their legitimate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity.

under section 25, any rights in or to the n
हे property of any person,
other than the parents, in any case where, but for the passing of

27. In section 27 of the Special Marriage Act, in sub-section (1),—-

(०) for clauses (q ‘
substituted, २० ) and (७), the following clauses shall be e


(D) Bas deserted the petitioner for a cwalinuous period of

mot bess than two years immediately Preceding the presenta
than af the petition: orm,

(>) & claws (©), the proviso shall be omitted:

< (©) fer clauses ६०) and 06), the following clauses shall be sub-
है stitetad, namely: —

१६०) bas been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffer-
ig continuously or intermittently from mental disorder of such
के kind and tw such an extent that the petitioner cannot reason:

- ably be expected to live with the respondent.

Explewation—In this clause —

६०) the expression “mental disorder” means mental
Winess, arrested or incomplete development of mind, psy-
chopathic disorder or any other disorder or disability of
mind and inchades schizophrenia;

@ the expression “psychopathic disorder” means a per
sistent disorder or disability of mind (whether or not in-
uding submormality of intelligence) which results in
abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on

x the part of the respondent, and whether or not it requires
or is susceptible to medical treatment; or

() has been suffering from venereal disease in a communt-
cable form; or’;

(व) im clause (9), the words “for a period of not less than three
25 years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition” shall be
omitted;

ry

(e) after clause (hk), the following Explanation shall be inserted.
namely: —

“Explanation—In this sub-section, the expression “deser-

x tion” means desertion of the petitioner by the other party to the

marriage without reasonable cause and without the consent or

agsinst the wish of such party, and includes the wilful neglect

of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage and its gram-

matics) variations and cognate expressions shall be construed ac-
cordingty;’;

(f) the words “and by the wife on the ground that her husband
| has since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, s0-
! domy or bestiality” occurring at the end shall be omitted;

(9) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be in-
* serted, namely: —

“(I1A) A wife may also present a petition for divorce to the
district court on the ground. —

74

(i) that her husband has, since the solemnization of the
marriage, been guilty af rape, sodomy or bestiality;

ee


Insertion
of new
section
272.

Alternate
relief in
divorce

ings

Amend.
ment of
section

ment of
Section

> |
12

nder section 18 of the Hing,
(ii) at दर कप ‘Act, 1956, or in . Proceeding Atop,
tions and कट the Code of Criminal Proce Py: 1973 (op Unde,
section 125 a ding section 488 of the Code of Crimingy Proce
the correspo! apcren nt order, as the case may he, hag ten
dure, a A the husband awarding maintenance to a!
passed age natanding that she was living apart and tha;
wife notwiths' such decree or order, cohabitation bety,

ee we been resumed for one year or upwardg»

28. After section 27 of the Special Marriage Act as 80 amendeg

का + the ६
following section shall be inserted, namely:

« proceeding under this Act, on a petition for
iat: aches by a decree of divorce, except in so far ne
petition is founded on the ground mentioned in clause (७)
of sub-section (I) of section 27, the court may, if it considers jt just
0 to do having regard to the circumstances of the case, pass insteag
a decree for judicial separation.”.

29. In section 28 of the Special Marriage Act, in sub-section (2), for
the words, brackets and figure “On the motion of both the Parties made
not earlier than one year after the date of the presentation of the Peti- 35
tion referred to in sub-section (1) and not later than two years”, the
words, brackets and figure “On the motion of both the parties made not
eatlier than six months after the date of the presentation of the petition

referred to in subsection (1) and not later than eighteen months” shall
be substituted.

“a 35
30. In section 29 of the Special Marriage Act,—

(i) in sub-section (),--

(०) for the words “unless at the date of the presentation of
passed”, the words “unless at the

“before three years have passed”, the
Words “before one year has passed” shall be substituted;

(2) for the words « ds ँ
“, expiry of three rs”, the wor
©xpiry of one year” shall be substituted, न

(8) in Sub-section (2) —
(०) tor the Words « ords
“expiration of ong veers Pitation of three years”, the W
Shall be i
(0) tor wbeeinte;

the “
eur” shall be subetitnseal® three years”, the words “gaid धर


we

~~

18

gi. In section $0 of the Special Marriage Act, the words “and one year Amend-
शक elapsed thereafter but not sooner,” shall be omitted. ment of
section 30

2, For sub-section (1) of section 31 of the Special Marriage Act, the Amend
gollowing subsection shall be substituted, namely:— ment of
5 section 31

“(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter V1 shall be

presented to the district court within the Jocal limits of whose original
civil jurisdiction—

(i) the marriage was solemnized; of

(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the
Baw petition resides; or

(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together, or

{iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation
of the petition, in a case where the respondent is at that time re-
siding outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has

15 not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years by
those who would naturally have heard of him if he were alive.”.

33. For section 33 of the Special Marriage Act, the following section

Substitu-
shall be substituted, namely; —

tion of
new sec-
tion for
section 33.

“3, (1) Every proceeding under this Act shall be conducted in Proceed-
2० camera and it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish —
any matter in relation to any such proceeding except 8 judgment of in camera
the High Court or of the Supreme Court printed or published with and may
the previous permission of the Court. not be

printed,
(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contraven- or pub-

25 tion of the provisions contained in sub-section (1) he shall be punish- lished,
able with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.”.

44. In section 34 of the Special Marriage Act,— Amend-
ment of
section 34,
(a) in sub-section (1), in clause (b), for the words “where the
greund of the petition is adultery, the petitioner has not in any
30 oenner been accessory to or connived at or condoned the adultery,”,
the words, brackets, letters and figures “where the petition is founded
on the ground specified in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section
27, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to oF cole
nived at or condoned the act of sexual intercourse referred to
35 therein,” shall be substituted;

(b) to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be added at
the end, namely:—

“Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
apply to any proceeding wherein relief is sought on any of the


Substitu-
tion of

new sec-
tion for

section 35.

Relief for
Tespon-
dent in
divorce
and other
proceed-
ings.

Amend-
meént of

Section 37,

Substitu-
tion of
new
sections
for

Section 39,

Appeal,
from
decrees
and
orders,

4 ¥
ds specified in clause (०), clause (७), clause ,
©) and Clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section Ra ag

(c) after sub-section (2) as so amended, the following :
. 80६,
tions shall be inserted, namely:— tu,

“(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in brin, in,
such Rte tact the court may, if gx Pe 80 des; J Abe
the court thinks it just and proper so » adjourn
ceedings for a reasonable period not exceeding fifteen dat 2०
refer the matter to any Person named by the Parties in ig
half or to any person nominated by the court if the be.
to name any person, with directions to report to the
whether reconciliation can be and has been, effected and the me by
Shall in disposing of the Proceeding have due Tegard to then
port,

(4) In every case where @ marriage is dissolveg by a है
of divorce, the court ‘passing the decree shall give 9 copy theres i]
free of cost to each of the parties.”,

35, For section 35 of the Special Marriage Act. the following S2etion

shall be substituted, namely; —

tion seeking such relief on that ground.”,
36. In section 37 of the Special Marriage Act,—

(०) in sub-section (1), for the words “and the conduct of the
parties”, the words “the conduct of the parties and other circumstan- 3
ces of the case” shall be substituted

rescind any such order and in such manner as the court may dee™
just” shall be substituted. ¥

“39. (1) All decrees made by the court in any proceeding unde
Chapter V or Chapter ‘VI shall, subject to the provisions of sub-$
tion (3), be appealable as decrees of the court mada in the art
of its original citi} jurisdiction, and such appeal shall lie to the ९००
to which sPisAtes ctilintlty: Ne trcen, the, पड an, cot #
in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.


~~ "

(2) Orders made by the court in any proceeding under unis Act,
section ST or section 38 shall, subject to the provisions of sub-
tion (3), be appealable if they are not interim orders, and such
hall lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the
decisions of the court given in the exercise of its original civil juris-
diction.
(3) There shall be no appeal under this section on the subject
of costs only.
(4 Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within #
period ot thirty days from the date of the decree or order.

$8A. All decrees and orders made by the court in any proceed- Enforce-
ing under Chapter V or Chapter VI shall be enforced in the like Ment of
manner as the decrees and orders of the court made in the exercise ang

of its original civil jurisdiction for the time being are enforced.”. orders

4

38 After section 40 of the Special Marriage Act, the following sec- yeh
tons shall be inserted, namely:— vectics
40A, 408

and 400.

“$A. (1) Where— Power to
transfer
(a) a petition under this Act has been presented to the dis- petitions

us

triet court having jurisdiction by a party to the marriage praying in certain
x for a decree for judicial separation under section 23 or for a =
decree of divorce under section 27, and
(b) any other petition under this Act has been presented
thereafter by the other party to the marriage praying for decree
for judicial separation under section 23, or for decree of divorce
2s under section 27 on any ground whether in the same district court
or in different district court, in the same State or in a different
State,

the petition shall be dealt with as specified in sub-section (2).
(2) In a case where sub-section (1) applies —

= (a) if the petitions are presented to the same district court,
both the petitions shall be tried and heard together by that dis-
trict court,

(b) if the petitions are presented to different district courts,
the petition presented later shall be transferred to the district
35 court in which the earlier petition was presented and both the
petitions shall be heard and disposed of together by the district
court in which the earlier petition was presented.

(8) In a case where clause (b) of sub-section (2) applies, the
court or the Government, as the case may be, competent under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to transfer any suit ar proceeding from
the district court in which the later petition has been presented to
the district court in which the earlier petition is pending, shall exer-
tise its powers to transfer such later petition as if it had been em-
Powered so to do under the said Code.



Special
provision

relating te
trial ord
वैध कक
of peti
tions
under the
Act.

tary
evidence,

Special
Provision
asto

6
der this Act shat)
(a petition un + 90 १६
408. (1) The trial 0! the interests of justice in 1 ay
practicable consistently er to day until its conclusion, act
t of the trial beyond the following the
iy
b

trial, be continued from de
court finds the adjournmen soe

be necessary for reasons to be
3 Act shall be tried ag ७
2) Every petition under this pedi
as posuible and endeavour shall be made to conclude the tria} voy
six months fram the date of service of notice of the Petition x ॥७
re

respondent.
(3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard ag EXPeditiguy

as possible, and endeavour shall be made to conclude the
within three months from the date of service of natice of se n
Pea] on

i

the respondent.
400, Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment
the contrary, no document shall be inadmissible in evidence jn to

proceeding at the trial of a petition under this Act on the gromy y

that it is not duly stamped or registered.”.
39. (1) All petitions and proceedings in causes and matters ma
soi which are pending in any court at the commencement of
rriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976, shall be d
Pag pce a e dealt with and decided 35
(i) if it is a petition or proceeding under th i
Hindu Marri
be, as if it had been originally बा लक

Act, then so far as may
therein under the Hindu Marriage Act, as amended by this Act:

amendment is necessary to give effect to the Provisions of sub-section (1).
any such amendment

may incl

poo Soe ude ber amendment ‘ conversion of a petition ar proceeding for

। Separation into a petition or Proceeding, as the case may be, fot
ऊँ


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (25 of 1955), became law on the 18th
May, 1955. It applies to all Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs. It
applies - to all other persons who are not Muslims, Christians, Pars.s
or Jews ess they establish that they were not governed b; Hindu
Jaw, custom of usage prior to the Act. हे

Sirce the passing of the Hindu Marriage Act, vario'

amending the same as well as the Special Maatlags Act, nt owe a
ceived from some Members of Parliament and the general public, The
Special Marriage Act, 1954, being a civil law applicable to all, has neces-
sarily seth pace with any reform of matrimonial laws. The Law

was requested to examine the matter and they have pre:
seuted the Fifty-ninth Report which contains their recommendations. The
Bill seeks to amend both the Acts aforesaid so as to implsment, with
necessary modifications, the recommendations contained in that Report.
The Committee on Status of Women in India have generally supported the
amendments proposed by the Law Commission and suggested, inter alia,
the incorporation of a suitable provision for mutual consent in the Hindu
Marriage Act more or less on the lines of a provision in that behalf in see
tion 28 of the Special Marriage ‘Act. It is, however, felt that when once
the patties have chosen to move the court for divoree by mutual consents

it is not necessary to make them wait

obtain relief, This period of waiting is, therefore, proposed to be reduced
from one year to six months. The Committee has further suggested that
having regard to the frequent violations of the provisions of the Child Mar-
riage Restraint Act, it is necessary to provide in the Hindu Marriage Act a
suitable provision conferring the right of repudiation on girls who are
subject to such marriages, whether the marriage was consummated 07
not, The right of repudiation is proposed to be conferred on such girls
subject to their the same before attaining ee ae pe
To avoid multi of litigation and consequent 9, it

posed to पे repo law in relation to all pending proceedings
under the relevant Acts. Notes on clauses ap) ४

the changes proposed to the statutes. The objects of the legislation हे
mainly, (1) to liberalise the provisions relating to divorce; (2) to enable
expeditious disposal of proc eedings under the ‘Act; and (3) to remove
certain anomalies and handicaps that have come to light after the

of the Acts.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above-mentioned purposes.

H, R. GOKHALE.

New Deva;
The 11th March, 1976.

7


Notes on clauses
tion 5 of the Hj
. seeks to amend sec
Clause 2——This clause

indy
du marriage by Me,
nditions for a Hin Substig,
riage Act relating to sl ra uae clear the circumstances in Which, a
clause (ii) thereof 90 Ua,

dness of mind. mental disorder, insanity OF epllepay shall 7५०1५,
sount ”

& marriage. r
Clause 3—Sub-clause (a
section (1) of section 9 to el ee
excuse for withdrawing from ane
withdrawn from the society of other. हर sons
Sub-cl: i ti 2) section 9 as 1६
b) seeks to omit sub-section ( lias
a aa restricting the scope of defence of reasonable Ping
available to the respondent.
ti b-section (1) of
4—This clause seeks to substitute sul ror
10 bia of make the grounds on which a decree for judicial separatin
may be passed identical to that required in respect of a decree for diverge,

—This clause seeks to amend section 11 relating ४७
Sains be oe make it clear that the petition may be presenteg on
during the lifetime of the spouse.

Clause 6—One of the grounds for avoiding the marriage under
section 12 is “impotence at the time of the marriage”. Clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 12 is proposed to be amended go as to enable the
spouse to avoid a marriage where the same has not been consummated
due to the impotence of the other party.

Clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12 is also proposed to be
amended so as to provide that “fraud” as to the nature of the ceremony
of marriage as to any material fact or circumstance concerning the
respondent shall constitute a ground for avoiding marriage,

Clause 7.—Sub-clause (a)—Sub-clause (1) of section 18 of the Act
spells out the grounds on which a decree of divorce may be sought
One of the grounds is “living in adultery”. The same is sought to be
substituted so as to make it clear that a single act of voluntary sexual
intercourse by either party with any person other than his or het
spouse shall constitute a ground for the other party. Cruelty, and
desertion (for 3 continuous period of not less than two years) are als

eks to insert a new Explanation in
Brea that the burden of proving Feasongs
society shall be on the person Who -

live with the respondent, as in the case of mental disorder, —S

difficult to Predicate with certain # This
has, therefore, been suitably expanded tt 18 incurable. This हाथ

nee (6) —Sub-section (1A) of section 13 provides that o
हुआ ™ay apply for a decree of divorce if (४०: ७

for restitution of conjugal btn po for judicial separation or 8 ake


sub-clause (c) —New sub-clause (11) is being inserted in sub-section
| of section 13 50 as to provide that a wife may seck divorce if &
period of one year has lapsed after the passing of an order or decree
rereding maintenance to the wife under the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act, 1956 or under section 125 of the Code of Criminal
procedure, 1973, and if there has not been any reconciliation during that
period. Sub-clause (iv) is being inserted to the same sub-section so as
to confer on girls who have been married before attaining the age of
15 years. 8 right of repudiation before attaining the age of 18 years.
Clause 8—New section 13A js proposed to be inserted to provide that
under certain circumstances the court may, while dealing with a peti-
tion for divorce, have a discretion to grant a decree for judicial separa-
tion instead, New section 13B seeks to provide for divorce by mutual
consent. ; के
Clause 9.—Section 14 of the Hindu Marriage Act provides that no
petition for divorce shall ordinarily be presented within three years of
marriage. This clause seeks to amend section 14 so as to reduce the
said period from three years to one year.

Clause 10—This clause seeks to do away with the waiting period of
one year after a decree of divorce.

Clause 11.—This clause seeks to substitute section 16 so as to clarify
the intention and to remove difficulties in interpretation.

Clause 12—Section 19 of the Act provides that petition shall be pre-
sented to the district court within the limits of whose ordinary civil
jurisdiction the marriage was solemnised or the husband and wife reside
or last resided together. That section is sought to be substituted so as
to enable the parties to institute proceedings in the court within whose
ordinary original jurisdiction—

(i) the marriage was solemnized;

(ii) the respondent resides at the time of the presentation of
the petition;

(i) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or

(iv) the petitioner resides, in a case where the respondent has
not been heard of or resides outside the territories to which the Act
extends.

Clause 13.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Act to pro-
vide that in the case of void marriages the petition need not contain
averment to the effect that there is no collusion between the parties.

Clause 14.—This clause geeks to insert new sections 21A, 21B and
21C so as 10 provide—

(i) that where proceedings seeking relief of judicial separation
or divorce are filed in different courts, the court wherein the peti-
tion was earlier presented shall try and dispose of all the matters
(New section 21A);

(ii) for expeditious disposal of proceedings (New section 218);

(iii) for admissibility of documents even if not duly stamped
OF registered (New section 21C),


. ™

Clause tute section 22
15.—This clause seeks to substi a
ting to conduct of proceeding in camera so a8 to make it
all proceedings under the Act.

Clause 16—This clause seeks to amend Section 23 5, a5 ६७ ‘

the
१७१६

के
i) that in a case where the petitioner 18 insang \
dpe teat disorder, the question of the petitioner «°° &% वक्ष
tage of his or her own wrong or disability shall not ating © Bttvan.
When a divorce is sought on the ground ‘of mutual conser! that
Consent has not been obtained by force, fraud or undue fog ३७७
(See sub-clause (a) ]; 0९५५५
(8) that in the case of void matriages the Westion of
is not relevant (Sec. sub-clause (a)]; COlltaigg
(#ii) that in certain cases where the grounds Telieg Upon
such that it does not call even for an attempted Feconciliation, ate
Section (2) of that section shall not apply [See sub-clause oy
(ip) that the court may adjourn the proceedin 8 and Tele the
matter to any person to attempt reconciliation and Teport [See 5 my
Clause (९) J;
(0) that the court shall ive a copy of every decree of divans
free of cost to each of the parties.

Clause 17.—This clause seeks to insert new Section 234
to avoid multiplicity of proceedings. It is Proposed that where a
ceeding is initiated by a Party on the ground of adul

Clause 19.—This clause seeks to substitute section 28 to Clarify the
Previsions relating to appeal and enforcement of decrees and orders.

Clause 20—This clause seeks to amend clause (e) of section 2 of the

Special Marriage Act SO as to give a more comprehensive definition of
the term “district court”,

the Act. Clause (b) js being widened so as to make it clear that eon
party shall be persons suffering from unsoundness of mind, ™'
disorder, insanity or epilepsy.

Clause 22—In view of Section 19 of the Act, when a Hindu, Bud-

Ghist, Sikh or Jaina marries under the Special Marriage Act, it autom®
tically effects his severance fro:

to any the person to whom the weet
Disabilities Removal Act, 1950 applies. Section 21 provides that

sion to properties of persons marrying under the Act shall be 7०
by the provisions of the Indian Succession Act. Now section 24 ॥#

t
proposed for providing that Section 19, section 21 and such 2१08
section 20 ag Creates a disability shall no’


| clause seeks to insert an Explanation to section 22

pear Act to clarify that the burden of proving reasonable excuse for
af awing from the society shall he on the person who has withdrawn
ae m the society of the other,

Clause 24.—This amendment is consequential to the insertion of new
gabesection (1A) in section 27 of the Act,

Clause 25.—This clause seeks to amend section 24 relating to void
marriages 50 0s 10 make it clear that a petition may be presented only
quring the lifetime of the spouse.

Clause 26.—This clause seeks to substitute section 26 so as to clarify
the intention and to remove difficulties in interpretation.

27—Sub-section (1) of section 27 of the Act spells out the
grounds on which a decree of divorce may be sought. Clause (e) of
{his sub-section regarding the ground of adultery is proposed to be
recast to make it clear that a single act of voluntary sexual intercourse
by either party with any person other than his or her spouse shall
constitute a ground in favour of the other party. [wide sub-clause (a)].

Clause (b) of this sub-section relating to desertion is proposed to be
modified to say that desertion for a continuous period of not less than
two years immediately before presentation of the petition shall consti-
tute a ground for divorce [vide sub-clause (a).

In clause (c) of this sub-section, the proviso is proposed to be omit-
ted so as to eliminate the requirement that three years’ imprisonment
must have been undergone [vide sub-clause (b)].

Clause (e) of this sub-section provides that if a party has been
incurably of unsound mind for a continuous period of not less than
three years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition, the
requirement regarding minimum period is proposed to be dispensed
with. Further, this ground does not cover cases where the mental dis-
order (continuous or intermittent) is of such a kind and to such an
extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with
the respondent, as in the case of mental disorder, it is very difficult to
predicate with certainty that it is incurable, This ground has, there-
fore, been suitably expanded, Similarly, in clauses (९) and (f) of this
sub-section also, the requirement of minimum period is proposed to be
dispensed with [vide sub-clauses (c) and (d)].

The new Explanation, proposed to be inserted, spells out the mean-
ing of the expression “desertion” [vide sub-clause (९) 1].

New sub-clause (1A) is proposed to be inserted so as to provide that
- wife may also seek divorce if a period of one year has elapsed after
+6 passing of an order or a decree awarding maintenance to the wife
under the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, or in a proceed-
the under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and if
— not been any reconciliation during that period [vide sub-

(g)}.

Pe 22288 28—This clause seeks to insert new section 27A so as to ए70-
with t under certain circumstances the court may, while deating
j & petition for divorce, have discretion to grant « decree for
ज्वाला separation instead.



Clause 29.—Section 28 of the Act provides by
consent. This clause seeks to amend section 28 so as to Thay
period of waiting after presentation of a petition thereundact® thy
making a further motion in court from one year to six months Beton,

Clause 30—Section 29 of the Act prohibits the filing of peti
diverce within three years of marriage except under exceptions = tng
stances. This clause seeks to reduce this period from three Years,

year. Oe

Clause 31.—This clause seeks to do away with the waiting
one year after a decree of divorce. Petiog oe

Clause 32.—Sub-section (1) of section 31 provides that
shal] be presented to the district court within the limits of whose fewest
tion the marriage was solemnized or the husband and wife reside or tag,
resided together. This section is sought to be substituted so as ty i
the parties to institute proceedings in the court within whose orgie
original jurisdiction— nary

(i) the marriage was solemnized;

(ii) the respondent resides at the time of the presentation ot
the petition;

(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or

(iv) the petitioner resides in a case where the respondent hay
not been heard of or resides outside the territories to which the Act
extends.

Clause 33.—This clause seeks to substitute section 33 of the Act relat-
ing to the conduct of proceedings in camera so as to make it obligatory in
all proceedings under the Act.

Clause 34.—Sub-section (2) of section 34 provides that before granting
relief under this Act the court of the first instance shall make every ९०
deavour to bring about reconciliation. It is proposed that this require
ment is unnecessary in cases where grounds relied upon are such as not
to call for reconciliation. The court is also being enabled to adjourn pre
ceedings and refer the matter to any person to attempt reconciliation 07
repert. It is also proposed to give a copy of the decree of divorce free of

cost to each of the parties. The section is proposed to be amended for
these purposes.

Clause 35.—Section 35 is proposed to be amended so as to provide (i
where a proceeding is initiated by a party on the ground of adt! ht
ernelty or desertion, the respondent may not only oppose the raliet et

but may mske 8 counter-claim for any relief under the Ast
ground.
Clause 36.=This clause seeks to amend section 37 of the A®t we

deals with permanent alimony and maintenance) so as to clarify
tention and to eliminate difficulties in interpretation.
the
clarify

Clause 37.—This clause seeks to substitute section 39 to
provisions relating te appeal and enforcement of decrees and o"d"™


क्र

$8.—Thin clause seeks to insert new nections 40A, 408 and 400
ome provide—
v

0) that where proceedings soeking relief of judicial separation
and divorce are filed in different courts, the court wherein the peti-
tion WAS earlier presented shall try and dispose of all the metters
(New section 40A);

(3) for expeditious disposal ef proceedings (New section 4081;

(७) for admissibility of documents even if not duly stamped oF
registered (New section 490).

Clause 39.—This clause secks to provide that all petitions and proceed-
ings under the Hindu Marriage Act and the Special Marriage Act as are
pending at the commencement of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act,
1976, shall be dealt with in accordance with the law as amended.


> |

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

i] which seeks to amend section 23

आर आस आज आज clause 34 which seeks to amend seca Bag
the Special Marriage Act, 1954, inter alia, provide that {., 4
whane-a morengp to-diassived by. a.denrve of diveren, the colt? धर
Se deerve shall give # copy theteo! fresiot eet, to east ag 4° Pie,
Such copies would, in most cases, be carbon copies, 80 far Pig
States are converned, ever this small expenditure will: be 18५, ** ५५
their respective Consolidated Fund. 4 5 tee ator wera 4
would technically involve expenditure (107 010 (००७०॥१४॥६४ ‘pa
india and such expenditure in the granting of copies in relation’ भ॑
Union territories cannot be properly estimated, However, the »
om eee anomene make ne Oe ae
will be no non-recurring expenditure.


मा

ANNEXURE
Exrracts FROM THe Hiypu Maratace Act, 1955
(25 o 1955)
. . . * .

5. A marriage may be solemnized between any two Hindus, if the Condi-

goulowing conditions are fulfilled, namely; — tons
कै zt कि | जा 78
Marriage.

(i) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic at the time of the
marriage; ’

* * * . .

9, (1) When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable Restity -
excuse, Withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may tion of ‘
apply, by petition to the district court, for restitution of conjugal rights and ama
the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such न
petition and that there is no legal ground why the application should not

be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.

(2) Nothing shall be pleaded in answer to a petition for restitution of
conjugal rights which shall not be a ground for judicial separation or for
nullity of marriage or for divorce. .

10. (7) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or after Judicial
the commencement of this Act, may present a petition to the district court separa
praying for a decree for judicial separation on the ground that the other
party—

(a) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not les
than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the peti-
tion; or - ५ ल्‍्क

(b) has treated the petitioner with such cruelty as to cause a
reasonable apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that it will be
harmful or injurious for the petitioner to live with the other party;
or

(c) has, for a period of not less than one year immediately pre-
ceding the presentation of the petition, been suffering from a virulent
form of leprosy; or

(@) has, for a period of not less than three years immediately pre-
ceding the presentation of the petition, been suffering from venereal
disease in a communicable form, the disease not having been con-
‘racted from the petitioner; or

(९) has been continuously of unsound mind for a period of not

less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the
Petition; or

(f) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had sexual
‘Stercourse with any person other than his or her spouse.


Void
marriages.

Voidable
marriages.

Divorce.

26 ‘

, ‘ the expression “desertion

Explanation—In this section, ,
grammatical variations and cognate protean means the 4. With
the petitioner by the other party to the marriage without seer पे
cause and without the consent or against the wish of such ty, way
cludes the wilful neglect of the petitioner by the other party ang
marriage,

. - ° . e

11, Any marriage solemnized after the commencement -
shall be null and void and may, on a petition presenteq by eithat’® by
thereto, be so declared by a decree of nullity if it contravenes fs Party
the conditions specified in clauses (i), (iv) and (v) of Section in het

i ized, whether before or ५
12, (1) Any marriage solemnize wi
mencement of this Act, shall be voidable and may be annulled copy Sam,
of nullity on any of the following grounds, namely:— 4९७७

(a) that the respondent was impotent at the time of the m be
and continued to be so until the institution of the Proceedin ४) ५
. * * * e

(०) that the consent of the petitioner, or where the Consent
the guardian in marriage of the petitioner is required under of
the consent of such guardian was obtained by force or fraud; ho

. = . 4

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no pey.
tion for annulling a marriage—

(9) on the ground specified in clause (a) of sub-section (7) shat
be entertained unless the court is satisfied—

(ii) that marital intercourse with the consent of, the peti
tioner has not taken place since the discovery by the petitine
of the existence of the grounds for a decree,

13. (1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the (12०
Mencement of this Act, may, on a petition presented by either the husben!

or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce on the ground thet the
other party— ;

() is living in adultery; or : + pe

() has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religii
or


27
has renounced the world by entering any religious order; or

(vii) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven
years or more by those persons who would naturally have heard of
it, had that party been alive,

(1A) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or after
the commencement of this Act, may also present a petition for the disso-
jution of the marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground—

(i) that there has been no resumption of cohabitation as between
; the parties to the marriage for a period of two years or upwards after
the passing of a decree for judicial separation in a proceeding to

+ which they were parties; or

(ii) that there has been no restitution of conjugal rights as bet-
ween the parties to the marriage for a period of two years or upwards
after the passing of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights in a
proceeding to which they were parties;

(2) A wife may also present a petition ‘for the dissolution of her
marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground—

. * * * .

(ii) that the husband has, since the solemnization of the
marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.

14, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, it shall not
be competent for any court to entertain any petition for dissolution of a
marriage by a decree of divorce, unless at the date of the presentation
of the petition three years have elapsed since the date of the marriage:

Provided that the court may, upon application made to it in accord-
ance with such rules as may be made by the High Court in that behalf,
allow a petition to be presented before three years have elapsed since
the date of the marriage on the ground that the case is one of exceptional
hardship to the petitioner or of exceptional depravity on the part of the
respondent, but, if it appears to the court at the hearing of the petition
that the petitioner obtained leave to present the petition by any misrepre-
sentation or concealment of the nature of the case, the court may, if it pro-
hounces a decree, do so subject to the condition that the decree shall not
have effect until after the expiry of three years from the date of the mar-
Mage or may dismiss the petition without prejudice to any petition which
may be brought after the expiration of the sald three years upon the same
or substantially the same facts as those alleged In support of the petition
9 dismissed.

(2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to
Present a petition for divorte before the expiration of three years from

date of the marriage, the court shall have regard to the interest of
‘ny children of the marrisge and to the question whether there is a rea-
“snable probability of a reconciliation between the parties before the
‘ation of the said three years.

Pi Whien a marriage has heen dissolved by a decree of divorce and
right, there is no right of appeal against the decree or, if there fs such a
hay ‘Of appeal, the time for appealing has expired without an appeal
a ng been presented, or an appeal has been. presented but has been
wn it shall be-lawful for elther party. to the marriage to marry

No peti-
tien for
divorce to
be pre-
sented
within

years of
marriage,

Divorced
persons
when may
marry


Legiti-
macy of
children
of

void and
voidable

marriages,

Court to
which
petition
should be

Contents
and veri-
fication of
petitions,

t shall not be lawful for the respective

date of such marriage at least Otle Fertig |
2 decree in the court of the first instanet red

Provided that i
marry again apr at “er
elapsed from the date o

16. Where a decree of nullity is granted in respect of any Mate

aon section 11 or section 12, any child begotten or conceived befor te
doc ig made who would have been the legitimate child of the ban’ the
ths misstags if it had been dissolved instead of having been deg’ ५
null and void or annulled by a decree of nullity Lepr be deemed पथ
their legitimate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity; be

Provi that nothing contained in this section shall be ¢
imeme ae any child of a marriage which is declared ny 2०१
or annulled by a decree of nullity any rights in or to the pro 7 of ‘Sig
person other than the parents in any case where, but for the Passing
this Act, such child would have been incapable of Possessing or ot
any such rights by reason of his not being the legitimate child Citing ot he
parents.

19. Every petition under this Act shall be presented to the
court within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil j
the marriage was solemnized or the husband and wife reside OF last
resided together.

20. (1) Every petition presented under this Act shall state as
as the nature of the case permits the facts on which. the claim to reliet is
founded and shall also state that there is no collusion between the peti-
tioner and the other party to the marriage,

22. (1) A proceeding under this Act shall be conducted in camera it
either party so desires or if the court so thinks.fit to do, and it shall not
be lawful for any person to print or publish any matter in relation to
any such proceeding except with the previous permission of the court

(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of
the provisions contained in sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees,

23. (1) In any proceeding under this Act, whether defended or 7४,
if the court is satisfied that—

(a) any of the gtounds for granting relief exists and the petitioner
is not tm any way" taking advantage of his or her own wre के
disability for the Purpose of such relief, and

(b) where the
clause (f) of sub-section (1

‘c) th हे हे 'फांगा witt
the pile besser 's not presented or prosecuted ‘in coll
ondent, |

* के . is ihe


~ 29 कर
on and in such a case, but not otherwise, the court shall decree such
* aly.
relief accordin,

@ Before proceeding to grant any relief under this act, it shall be

duty of the court in the first instance, in every case where it is

possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstances of the

case, 0 make every se आधा to bring about a reconciliation between the

:

* e * . .

25. (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under this Act may, at the Perma-
time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent thereto, on applica- nent
tion made to it for the purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the ate,
case may be, order that the respondent shall, while the applicant remains  mainte-
unmarried, pay to the applicant for her or his maintenance and support nance.
such gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceed-
ing the life of the applicant as, having regard to the respondent's own
income and other property, if any, the income and other property of the
applicant and the conduct of the parties, it may seem to the court to be
just, and any such payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on
the immovable property of the respondent.

. * . . .

(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order
has been made under this section has re-married or, if such party is the
wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband,
that he has had sexual jntercourse with any Woman outside wedlock, it
shall rescind the order.

. * . . *

28, All decrees and orders made by the court in any proceeding Enforce-
under this Act shall be enforced in like manner as the decrees and ment of,
orders of the court made in the exercise of the original civil jurisdiction nd
are enforced, and may be appealed from under any law for the time appeal
being in force: decrees

a

Provided that there shall be no appeal on the subject of costs only. par ney

* . * . *

Extracts From THE SpeciaL Manniacr Act, 1954

(43 or 1954)
. . . * .
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
. . . . .
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires — Defini-

J १ . . *. tions,


ee  च

. t” means the principal civil cou,
(०) ,“distrigt cour ity civil court °t
Jurisdiction and where there is a city that Sourt; lay
के

. bd 2 bs
CHAPTER II
SOLEMNIZATION OF sPEcIAL MARRIAGES
न 4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law

for th
nization of marria © ॥
tions being in force relating to the solemi ; 2 my, tt
lating to betes cing tes persons may be solemnized under this Act, if ag att
lemniza-

at ७६ , h
tion of Of the marriage the following conditions are Sar namely: "Me ty,

*Pecial . . क्र “
(७) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic;
. bd ad . ७
° s * . के
CHAPTER V
RESTITUTION OF consUGAIL, RIGHTS AND JupIcrar, SEPARATION
Restitu- 22. When either the husband or the wife has, without TeASONabIe oy

tion of cuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieveg

dis Tuy

conjugal apply by petition to the trict court for restitution of conjuga rig
rights. and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statement, mare
Such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the Application

Judicial 23. (1) & Petition for judicial Separation may ४९ Presented to the
separa- district court either by the husband or the wife—
tion, (०) on any of the Srounds specified in sub-section (1) of
».Section 27 on which a petition for divorce might have been presented:
or

ba 0 200 ॑नढछ solemnized under this Act shall be null a

marriages en eee tiene at ol
(9 any of the Conditions specified in clauses (a), (b), (0)
(4) of section 4 has not been fulfilled; or

(ii) me cr nindent was impotest at the time of the marriage #!
2६ the: me of the institution ०६ the ta

* * Py " *

Legiti- 28. Where a decree of nullity is Sranted in respect of any marris

25, any child jotten before the ie
made who would have been the legttionate ein of the parties 1°
of void if it haa =o
& marriage been dissolveg instead of being declared be
voidable legitimate ca BY ५ decree of rainy fein, declared ४
marriages, legitimate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity: *


——
at

provided that auger contained in this section shall be construed
ot upon apy © of a marriage which 18 declared to be 4
ey ot annulled by a decree of nullity any rights in or to the ee bere
soy P son other than the parents in any case where, but for npc
of Oe this Act, such child would have been intapable of ssi eget
ink ving 803 such rights by reason of his not being the 11 पद 6 bala

है pis paren

n Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made
jpereunder 8 pation 8 divorce may be presented to the 11010 Court
either py the husband or the wife on the ground that the respondent—

(a) has since the solempization of the marri commi'
adultery; OF Bal (व

(0) has deserted the petitioner without cause for
at Jeast three years immediately preceding the pn ayy =
petition; oF

(०) is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or
more for an offence as defined in the Indian Penal Code:

Provided that divorce shall not be granted ता this ground, unless
the respondent has prior to the presentation of the petition undergone
at least three years’ imprisonment out of the said period of seven
years; or

(d) has since the solemnization of the marriage treated the peti-
tioner with cruelty; or

(९) has been incurably of unsound mind for a continuous period
of not Jess than three years immediately preceding the presentation
of the petition; or

(f) has for a period of not Jess than three year! immediately

preceding the presentation of the petition been suffering from
venereal disease in 8 communicable form, the disease not having

been contracted from the petitioner; or
three years inimediately

(9) has for a period of not less than
petition been suffering from lep-

preceding the presentation of the Pe
Tosy, the disease not having been contracted from the petitioner; or

(h) hs not been heard of as being alive for a period © ०!
years or more by those persons who would naturally have heard of

the respondent if the respondent had been alive;

* * .

bah by the wife on the ground that her husband has, since the sdlemni-
of the marriage, been guilty of 729९, sodomy or bestiality.

C * *

3. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the ules made
thereunder, a beret 3) dive may be presented to the district court
Kl, the parties together on the ground that they have been living
Able tely for a period of one year OF more, that they have not been

to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the

"arriage should be dissolved.

<

Divorce,

Divorce
by mu-

consent.


- 3

(2) On the motion of both the parties made not eartie,

te cay gad dang ऋायारभाट पारा, iE gaits head
section (1) and not later than y district

Petition ts not withdrawn in the meantime, the district cour: tied
axing satisfied, after bearing the parties and after making gut,
that qninks St, that a marriage bas been solemnized under thi,
mop apd rgd me 2 जय Lowderenhor nd
Marriage to be dissolved with effect from the date of the dec,

as ane Betton for divorce shall be presented to the distr,
at the date of the presentation of the Petition thre. Year
doe Corian inte of entering the certificate of marriage inst Be

age Certificate Book: Mary,
allow at that the district court may, upon application being
the HOw $ Petition to be presented before three years hae Made 1,

cen eround that the case is one of exceptional hardship ear ms
tit appears ५ he mal Gepravity on the part of the reopende’?
if it appears to the district court at the

Petitioner obtained leave to present the petition misrepresent,
{ion or concealment of the nature of the ease, the या, it
it pronounces eer Tes, do $0 subject to the condition that the =?”
san एण have effect until after the expiry of date
of whic, nx, MaY dismiss the petition, without prejudice
petition, w the zmay be brought after the expiration of the wag?
rapport at ten eae» OF substantially the same, facts as thece

i
F
F
PRs


हल

33
x. (1)In any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI, whether de- uty of
fended or not, if the court is satisfied that— court in
* * a - e passing
decrees,

(b) where the ground of the petition is adultery, the petitioner
bas not in any manner been accessory to or connived at or con-
doned the adultery, or, where the ground of the petition is cruelty,
the petitioner has not in any manner condoned the cruelty; and

. क्र * . °

(2) Before proceeding to grant any relief under this Act it shall be
the duty of the court in the first instance, in every case where it is
possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstances of the
case, to make every endeavour to bring about a reconciliation between
the parties.

35, If in any proceeding for divorce, the respondent opposes the relief Relief to
sought on the ground of the petitioner's adultery, cruelty or desertion, — "¢spon-
the court may give to the respondent the same relief to which he or she es
would have been entitled if he or she had presented a petition seeking for
such relief. divorce.

37. (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under Chapter V or Chapter Perma-
VI may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent to ent ali-
the decree, on application made to it for the purpose, order that the hus- एफ and
band shall secure to the wife for her maintenance and support, if neces- ance.
sary, by a charge on the husband's property, such gross sum or such
monthly or periodical payment of money for a term not exceeding her
life, as, having regard to her own property, if any, her husband's pro-
perty and ability and the conduct of the parties, it may seem to the
court to be just.

(3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an
order has been made under this section has remarried or is not leading
chaste life, 1६ shall rescind the order.

० * * * .

39, All decrees and orders made by the court in any proceeding under —Enforce-
Chapter V or Chapter VI shall be enforced in like manner as the decrees net et
and orders of the Court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdie- on

are enforced and may be appealed from under the law for the time gecrees
हैं 9 force; and ¥
ithi o

Provided that every such appeal shall be instituted within a period
of ninety days from the date of the decree or order,

e * * * .


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Speciay
Marriage Act, 1954.

The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of
the Constitution of India, recommended the consideration of the
Bill by the Rajya Sabha.

8. N. BANERJEE,
: Secretary-General.

(Shri H.R. Gokhale, Minister of Law, Justice and Company गे