Bill No.  XXIII of  2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010
Short title,
commencement.
and
applicability.
5
THE MARRIAGE LAW BILL,  2010
A
BILL
to remove the discrimination between man and woman in the matter of marriage and
divorce in the existing laws, to ensure equality between them and confer dignity and
humane treatment to women and to strengthen family and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
Whereas, article 16 of Universal Declaration of Human Rights requires that every
Member State should accord equal treatment to man and woman in the matter of marriage and
divorce;
And whereas, article 15 of the Constitution of India prohibits discrimination against
any citizen on grounds of religion and sex;
And whereas article 44 of the Constitution directs the State to enact uniform civil code
which includes uniform law regarding marriage and divorce.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Marriage Law Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3) it shall apply to all the citizens of India.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and expressions used
but not defined herein shall, mutatis mutandis have the same meanings respectively assigned
to them in the laws relating to marriage and divorce which are in force at the time of the
coming into force of this Act.
3. (1) No man whose wife is living, shall marry another woman and no woman whose
husband is living, shall marry another man except as expressly provided in this Act.
(2) Any marriage in contravention of sub-section ( 1) shall be void and the man
or woman who marries in violation of sub-section ( 1) shall be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be punished for the offence of adultery under section 494 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860.
4. Subject to the provisions of this Act, and to the rules made thereunder, a petition for
divorce may be presented to the District Court or the family court as the case may be, either
by the husband or the wife on the ground that his wife or her husband as the case may be:—
(a) has after the solemnization of the marriage had voluntary sexual intercourse
with any person other than his or her spouse; or
(b) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition; or
(c) is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or more for an
offence as defined in the Indian Penal Code, 1860; or
(d) has since the solemnization of the marriage treated the petitioner with
cruelty; or
(e) has been suffering from incurable and communicable disease which makes it
unsafe for the spouse to live with him or her; or
(f) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or
intermittently from mental disorder of such a kind and to such an extent that the
petitioner cannot be reasonably expected to live with the respondent.
Explanation.— In this sub-section;
(i) the expression "mental disorder" means mental illness, arrested or
incomplete development of mind, psychopathic disorder or any other disorder
or disability of mind and includes schizopherenia,
(ii) the expression "psychopathic disorder" means a persistent disorder
or disability of mind (whether or not including subnormality of intelligence)
which results in a abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on
the part of the respondent, and whether or not it requires or is susceptible to
medical treatment.
(g) has been suffering from any venereal disease in a communicable form including
AIDS;
(h) has been suffering from leprosy, the disease not having been contracted
from the petitioner; and
(i) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by
those persons who would naturally have heard of the respondent, if the respondent
has been alive.
Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression "desertion" means desertion
of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage without reasonable cause and
without the consent or against the wish of such party, and includes the willful neglect
of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage, and its grammatical variations and
cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly.
Definition.
Restriction
on marriage
when spouse
is alive.
Petition for
divorce.
45 of 1860.

3
5. A wife may also present a petition for divorce to the District Court on the ground that
her husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or
bestiality.
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a petition
for divorce may be presented to the District Court by both the parties together on the ground
that they have been living separately for a period of one year or more, that they have not
been able to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be
dissolved.
(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of
the presentation of the petition referred to in sub-section ( 1) and not later than eighteen
months after the said date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the district court
shall, on being satisfied, after hearing the parties and after making such inquiry as it thinks
fit, that a marriage has been solemnized under this Act, and that the averments in the petition
are true, pass a decree declaring the marriage be dissolved with effect from the date of the
decree.
7. No petition for divorce shall be presented unless as on the date of the presentation
of the petition three years have elapsed from the date of marriage.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in any other law for the time
being in force:—
(1) A man can take a second wife with the consent of his wife and with the
permission of the court which could be given on any one or more grounds on which
divorce can be granted under section 4 of this Act or on the ground of physical
disability caused on account of any accident or any illness or for any reasons whatsoever
which renders her unfit for discharging her duties, responsibilities and obligations as
the wife.
(2) In every petition for divorce presented by the husband under section 4 or for
permission to take a second wife under section 9, if the court comes to the conclusion
that the petitioner is entitled to the decree of divorce on any one of the grounds on
which it could be given under section 4, or permission to take a second wife could be
granted under section 8, the court shall in the first instance pass a preliminary decree
granting divorce or permission to take a second wife as the case may be.
(3) The wife against whom the preliminary decree is passed under section 8,
shall be entitled to prefer an appeal against such decree except in cases in which she
had given her consent, to the High Court within a period of thirty days from the date of
the preliminary decree.
(4) It shall, however, be open to the wife not to prefer any appeal against such
preliminary decree and to give consent to the husband to take a second wife and if, the
wife files such consent before the court within thirty days from the date of the preliminary
decree, the Court shall set aside the preliminary decree for divorce and grant permission
to the husband to take a second wife.
(5) If neither an appeal is filed by the wife to the High Court nor the consent is
filed, consenting to the husband taking a second wife within the prescribed period, the
Court shall proceed to pass final decree for divorce:
Provided that before passing final decree, the Court shall give paramount
consideration to the interest of child/children of the petitioner and respondent and
shall pass appropriate orders for the protection of their interest in every respect including
their health, education and maintenance:
Provided further that before passing a decree of divorce or appropriate orders
which directly affects the children, the Court shall give notice and opportunity of
hearing to the person who is interested in the welfare of the children of the spouse.
Petition for
divorce by
wife.
Divorce
by mutual
consent.
Restriction on
presentation
of petition for
divorce.
Second
marriage with
the permission
of the court.

4
9. (1) A wife shall be entitled to file a petition before the District Court according
permission to her husband to take a second wife only on the ground that she is medically
certified as incapable of child bearing or she has been incapacitated for discharging her
duties and obligations as required by a wife on account of any accident or any illness or for
any reasons whatsoever.
(2) the permission under sub-section ( 1) shall be given by the Court if, the Court is
satisfied that the application made, is out of her free will and desire and not on account of any
force, fraud or undue influence brought to bear on her by the husband or any one on his
behalf.
10. (1) In case, a permission is granted to a man to take a second wife under section 8
or 9 of the Act, the wife shall have the option either to live with the husband or to live
separately and claim maintenance from the husband for herself and for her children, if any,
from the husband, if she has no sufficient source of livelihood.
(2) The quantum of maintenance, however, shall be determined by the Court having
due regard to the requirement of the wife and/or children and also having due regard to the
financial capacity of the husband on an application made by the wife and/or children as the
case may be.
11. (1) A wife shall be, with the permission of the competent court, entitled to take a
second husband if,—
(a) her husband has been convicted for an offence and sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for more than seven years; or
(b) her husband is suffering from incurable and communicable venereal
diseases including AIDS and thereby, incompetent and unsuitable to lead a conjugal
life; or
(c) he joins ascetic order and shuns married life; or
(d) he is guilty of such cruelty which makes it impracticable to the wife to live
with him; or
(e) he has been absconding for more than seven years; and
(f) he has been certified by a competent medical authority that he is impotent.
(2) Notwithstanding the taking of a second husband with the permission of the Courts
on the grounds mentioned in this section, her right for any share in the property of her first
husband or any right flowing from her relationship with her first husband including the right
of their children if any, shall remain unaffected.
(3) Whenever a petition is filed by a wife seeking permission to take a second husband,
the court shall consider the grounds urged with great circumspection and grant permission
after recording a finding that the ground has been made out beyond reasonable doubt.
12. In all cases in which permission is given to a man to take a second wife or permission
is given to a woman to take a second husband their right to share in the property of the
spouse concerned or any right flowing from the relationship as spouse including the right of
their children if any, shall remain unaffected.
13. Only the highest court of original civil jurisdiction in the district other than the
High Court alone shall have jurisdiction to entertain and decide all the petitions presented
under any of the provisions of this Act.
14. At the time of the proceedings of the Court, in each case only parties to that cases
and their counsel and such other persons, with the permission of the court shall be present
in the Court.
Permission to
take a second
wife on the
application of
the wife.
Maintenance
allowance.
Permission to
take a second
husband.
Right in the
property of
the spouse
to remain
unaffected
even on taking
second spouse.
Jurisdiction.
Presence
during
proceedings in
the Court.

5
5
15. (1) An appeal shall lie to a Division Bench of the High Court against all or any of the
orders passed by the Court having original jurisdiction both on questions of law and fact.
(2) The High Court shall have all the powers of the first appellate Court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 both in respect of making any interim order as well as passing the
final orders.
16. All religious aspects of the marriage in all the personal laws of the citizens belonging
to different religions shall remain unaffected.
17. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any thing contained
in any of the laws in force as on the date of commencement of this Act, including the Muslim
Personal Law Application Act, 1937 and the Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act, 1939 and all
the laws continued by virtue of Article 372 of the Constitution as also any usage, custom or
practice.
18. (1) The Central Government shall have the power to frame rules after previous
publication generally for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters namely:—
(a) the procedure to be adopted by the Court in the petitions presented under
the provisions of this Act;
(b) the form and manner in which any restriction, the type of restriction and
particulars of information required to be entered in the registers, in respect of all the
proceedings under the Act;
(c) fees that may be levied in respect of petitions and/or applications under the
Act;
(d) manner in which public notice may be given in cases in which the whereabouts
of the respondent is not known; and
(e) any other matters, which may be or required to be prescribed.
5 of 1908.
Appeal.
26 of 1937.
8 of 1939.
Religious
aspects of
Marriage
remain
unaffected.
Act to have
overriding
effects.
Power to
make rules.

6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Prior to the date of commencement of the Constitution, there were different laws
governing marriage and divorce as applicable to different classes of citizens. All those laws
were continued by virtue of  Article 372 of the Constitution insofar as they are consistent
with the provisions of the Constitution. One of the main objectives of the Constitution as
enshrined in the Preamble is that the State shall be secular and shall ensure equality for all
citizens and to secure Social Justice. Article 14 is an injunction to the State not to deny
equality before law. Article 15 in particular prohibits discrimination against any citizen on
grounds of religion or sex.
Article 44 of the Constitution read with Article 37 of the Constitution makes it the
fundamental duty of the State to secure for the citizens a Uniform Civil Code. As held by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of S.R. Bommai Vs. Union of India. 1994 (3) SCC1 it is part
of secular character of our Constitution. There are laws such as those relating to rights of
individuals in family property, night to succession, minority, guardianship, marriage and
divorce which fall within the scope of the expression 'Civil Code'. Of all these, Marriage and
Divorce are the most important. On this topic, there are both post constitution as well as pre-
constitutional laws such as. The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Special Marriage Act, 1954
[Act Nos. 32 of 1963, 33 of 1969, 29 of 1970 and 68 of 1976]. The Indian Christian Marriage
Act, 1872, The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936. The Muslims Marriage and  Divorce
Act 1951 as applicable to different class of citizens have been made.
However, as regards the Personal Laws of Muslims, concerning marriage and divorce,
no law has been enacted by the Parliament after the commencement of the Constitution. The
Muslim Personal Law relating to marriage and divorce enables a man to take four wives at a
time and further it confers a unilateral and absolute right on the husband to divorce his wife
by his own order called 'talaq'. These provisions of Muslim Personal Law relating to Marriage
and Divorce are discriminatory against women only on ground of sex. It is also discriminatory
only on the ground of religion. Equality as between man and woman and dignity of individual
citizen is the very fundamental aspect of equality and social justice. The fundamental right
guaranteed under Article 15 inter alia prohibits discrimination on the ground of sex or
religion. Further, the Uniform Law on the topic of Marriage and Divorce is essential for the
purpose of national integration, as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mohd.
Ahmed Khan Vs. Shah Bano Begum— AIR 1985 SC 955 and in its recent judgment is Sarala
Mudgal [1995 (3) SCC 635].
Despite the words of wisdom coming from the highest court and the Constitutional
mandate, they are subordinated to religion dominated politics. Therefore, it is high time that
supremacy of the Constitution must prevail. It is also matter of common knowledge that
ordinarily no woman relishes the idea of her husband having another wife and Muslim
women are no exception to this. But they are being discriminated against both on grounds of
religion and sex and males are favoured to the detriment of the interest of women and thereby
causing gender discrimination.
Therefore, this Bill is intended to put an end to the discrimination against women on
grounds of sex, and religion by incorporating the rule of monogamy subject to the exceptions
as expressly provided for in the Act. The provisions regarding divorce incorporated in this
Act is, in terms of Section 27 and 28 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
Monogamy as an invariable rule in exceptional cases causes great hardship both to
the husband and wife, who are unwilling for divorce but second marriage has become
necessary in the interest of both and the family. To illustrate, in a case where husband and
wife love each other, and are leading a happly life, unfortunately on account of a motor

7
accident, the wife loses both her legs, and therefore, unable to discharge her obligations as
a wife, and therefore desires that her husband should take a second wife. But the existing law
does not permit that and for that purpose has to seek a divorce of the first wife though they
do not want it and which would result in inflicting greater injury than already suffered on
account of accident or in a case where it is medically proved that the wife is not child bearing
and therefore, the wife herself desires and gives consent to her husband taking a second
wife, the law does not permit, which is unbearable to both.
Therefore, exception to monogamy is provided for, for all in order to avoid divorce, in
cases in which either the wife or the husband or both do not want divorce even in cases in
which a ground for divorce is made out. In such cases, provision has been made to the effect
that with the consent of the wife only, according permission to the husband to take a second
wife is provided for. This is intended to safeguard the interest of wife who does not like to be
a divorcee, not only by maintaining her status as wife but also protecting all her rights under
the law, as wife.
Further, in cases in which the wife is not child bearing or has become incapcitated for
discharging her duties and obligations as a wife, she is given the right to seek permission of
the Court for her husband taking a second wife with the object of continuity of the family.
Provision has also been made for enabling a wife to take a second husband as provided in
Section 11. In substance, this law is meant not only to ensure complete national integration
which is essential for protecting and strengthening the feeling of fraternity among the people
and unity and integrity of the National but also in protecting the interests of both husband,
wife and their family.
Hence, this Bill.
M. RAMA JOIS

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Bill. It will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of legislative
power is of normal character.
8

GMGIPMRND—2350RS(S5)—03-05-2010.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to remove the discrimination between man and woman in the matter of marriage and
divorce in the existing laws, to ensure equality between them and confer
dignity and humane treatment to women and to strengthen
family and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri M. Rama Jois, M.P.)