AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XXIII of 2025 
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
      BE  it  enacted  by  Parliament in the  Seventy-sixth Year  of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 
53 of 1972. 5 2. In section 11 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), in clause ( 1), in sub -clause (a), the first and second
provisos and the Explanation shall be omitted. 
Amendment of 
section 11. 

2 
 
Substitution of 
section 62. 
 
Declaration of 
certain wild 
animals to be 
vermin. 
 
 3. For section 62 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“The Central Government may, on the recommendations  of the 
State Government,  by notification, declare any wild animal specified 
in Schedule I  and II to be vermin for any area and for such period as 
may be specified therein; and so long as such notification is in force, 
such wild animal shall be deemed not to be included in Schedule I  or 
Schedule II, as the case may be, for such area and for such period as 
may be specified in the notification.” 
5 
 
 
 
  
 
  

3 
 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
     The number of attacks on human beings by wild animals is increasing 
exponentially. The existing Wild L ife Protection Act with its extremely rigid 
provisions has made the removal of dangerous wild animals an impossibility. The 
amendments to the act in 2002 have further increased its rigidity resulting in a 
situation in which the Wild L ife wardens are unable to act to protect human lives. 
There is an urgent need to correct this anomaly.  
    The extreme diversity of India also demands decentralisation in forest 
management practices and the States should be given the power to decide upon the 
declaration of any animal as vermin if it becomes a threat to human life, livelihood 
and property. 
     Hence, this Bill.  
              V. SIVADASAN. 
 
 
 
   
 

4 
 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972 
               (53 OF 1972) 
 
  *                               *                               *                            *                             * 
Hunting of 
wild animals 
to be permitted 
in certain 
cases. 
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force 
and subject to the provisions of Chapter IV,— 
(a) the Chief Wild Life Warden may, if he is satisfied that any wild 
animal specified in Schedule I has become dangerous to human life or is so 
disabled or diseased as to be beyond recovery, by Order in writing and stating 
the reasons therefor, permit any person to hunt such animal or cause such 
animal to be hunted; 
Provided that no wild animal shall be ordered to be killed unless t he 
Chief Wild Life Warden is satisfied that such animal cannot be captured, 
tranquilised or translocated: 
Provided further that no such captured animal shall be kept in captivity 
unless the Chief Wild Life Warden is satisfied that such animal cannot be 
rehabilitated in the wild and the reasons for the same are recorded in writing. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause ( a), the process of capture or 
translocation, as the case may be, of such animal shall be made in such manner 
as to cause minimum trauma to the said animal 
  *                               *                               *                            *                             *  
Declaration of 
certain wild 
animals to be 
vermin. 
62. The Central Government may, by notification, declare any wild animal specified in 
Schedule II to be vermin for any area and for such period as may be specified therein 
and so long as such notification is in force, such wild animal shall be deemed not 
to be included in Schedule II for such area and for such period as specified in the 
notification. 
*                               *                               *                            *                             * 
 
 
 
  

 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–293–08.12.2025 
