1
THE  ARMED  FORCES  SPECIAL  POWERS  (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 and the Armed Forces
(Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act, 1990.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Armed Foces Special Powers (Amendment)
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958, in section 6, the following provisions
shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government shall take a decision on sanction for
institution of prosecution, suit or any other legal proceeding within three months of
receiving a request for the same, failing which the sanction shall be deemed to have
been given and where such sanction is expressly denied, it shall be communicated,
along with the reasons, to the complaints and families of the victims, if any:
Provided further that no such sanction for institution of any prosecution, suit or
any other legal proceeding shall be required if there is allegation of commission of
Amendment of
section 6.
Bill No. XXII of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE  4TH AUGUST, 2017
Short title and
commencement.
28 of 1958. 5
10

2
Amendment
of section 7.
sexual offence under section 354B, section 375, section 376, section 376A,
section 376C or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code, 1860".
3. In the Armed Forces (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act, 1990, in section 7, the
following provisions shall inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government shall take a decision on sanction for
institution of prosecution suit or any other legal proceeding within three months of
receiving a request for the same, failing which the sanction shall be deemed to have
been given and where such sanction is expressly denied, it shall be communicated,
along with the reasons, to the complaints and families of the victims, if any:
Provided further that no such sanction for institution of any prosecution, suit
or any other legal proceeding shall be required if there is allegation of commission of
sexual offence under section 354B, section 375, section 376, sections 376A,
section 376C or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code, 1860".
45 of 1860.
21 of 1990.
45 of 1860.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act (AFPSA), 1958 and the Armed Forces (Jammu
& Kashmir) Special Powers Act, 1990 have been in operation in several North-Eastern and
Jammu and Kashmir States of the country for many years now. The rise of insurgency and
militancy in these States had necessitated the enforcement of this Act in order to enable
armed forces to aid the civilian police forces in maintenance of law and order.
Over the years, however, the Acts have attracted widespread criticism for breeding a
culture of impunity with serious allegations of grievous offences like murder, rape, fake
encounters,enforced disappearances having been committed in the name of counter-
insurgency operations. One of the reasons for such criticism has been the requirement of
sanction from Central Government for launching prosecution against any member of Armed
Forces under the AFSPA. Because such sanction does not come in a timely manner or does
not come at all, there is hardly any accountability for the offences committed.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Naga People's Movement of Human Rights
notes that, 'In order that the people may feel assured that there is an effective check against
misuse or abuse of powers by the members of the armed forces it is necessary that a complaint
containing an allegation about misuse or abuse of the powers conferred under the Central
Act, AFSPA should be thoroughly inquired into and, if it is found that there is substance in
the allegation, the victim should be suitably compensated by the State and the requisite
sanction under section 6 of the AFSPA should be granted for instruction of prosecution'.
In yet another writ petition asking for investigation for 1528 cases of enforced
disappearances in Manipur (Extra judicial Execution Victim Families Association Vs. Union of
India), the Hon'ble Supreme Court notes that, 'The law is therefore very clear that if an
offence is committed even by army personnel, there is no concept of absolute immunity from
trail by the criminal court constituted under the code of criminal procedure. To contend that
this would have a deleterious and demoralizing impact on the security forces is certainly one
way of looking at it, but from the point of view of a citizen, living under the shadow of a gun
that can be wielded with impunity, outright acceptance of the proposition advanced is
equally unsettling and demoralizing particularly in a constitutional democracy like ours'.
The Justice Santosh Hegde Committee constituted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the above with petition recommended that the Central Government be given a reasonable
time limit to pass order on sanction under the AFSPA, preferably within three months from
the date of its receipt of the request of the prosecution, failing which its sanction shall be
presumed.
The situation attains an alarming level of seriousness when the offences committeed
are sexual in nature which clearly have an element of subjugation of the opposite gender and
require severe condemnation. The Justice Verma Committee recommended that there should
be no need for sanction for initiating prosecution in certain sexual offences and stated in its
report that, 'we notice that impunity for systematic or isolated sexual violence in the process
of Internal Security duties is being legitimized by the AFSPA.'
Therefore, the Bill intends to prescribe a time limit for decision on sanction failing
which the sanction shall be deemed to have been given and where it has been denied, it must
be supported with reasons in writing. In case of sexual offences though, there should be no
need of prior sanction.
Hence, this Bill
HUSAIN DALWAI
3

EXTRACT  FROM  THE  ARMED  FORCES  (JAMMU  AND  KASHMIR)
SPECIAL  POWERS  ACT, 1990
(21 OF 1990)
* * * * * * *
7. No prosecution, suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted, except with the
previous sanction of the Central Government, against any person in respect of anything
done or purported to be done in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act.
* * * * * * *
Protection of
persons acting
in good faith
under this Act.
4

GMGIPMRND—1771RS(S3)—04.08.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 and the Armed Forces
(Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act, 1990.
————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, M.P.)