AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 26TH JULY, 2024
Bill No.XXIII of 2024 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
            BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: – 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement 
5 
2. For article 3 of the Constitution, the following shall be substituted,
namely: ––
Substitution of 
article 3. 
10 
“3. (1) Parliament may by law––
(a) form a new State by separation of territory from any State  or
by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting
any territory to a part of any State;
(b) increase the area of any State;
(c) diminish the area of any State;
(d) alter the boundaries of any State;
(e) alter the name of any State;
Formation of 
new States   
and alteration 
of areas, 
boundaries or 
names of 
existing States. 
15 

2 
Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in either 
House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President and 
unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill affects the area, 
boundaries or name of any of the States, the Bill has been referred by the 
President to the Legislative Assembly of that State for its approval 
within such period as may be specified in the reference. 
(2) The
 Legislative Assembly of the State, to whom the Bill has been
referred as per clause (1),  may either approve or reject the Bill by a 
majority of votes of the members present and voting, within such period 
as may be specified in the reference. 
(3) Th
e Bill, so referred, if rejected by the Legislative Assembly of
the State to which it had been referred by the President, shall not be 
introduced in either House of Parliament. 
Ex
planation I.––In this article, in sub -clauses (a) to (e) of clause (1), 
“State” includes a Union territory, but in the proviso to clause (1) and 
clauses (2) and (3), “State” does not include a Union territory without 
legislature. 
Explanation II. ––The power conferred on Parliament by sub- clause 
(a) of clause (1) includes the power to form a new State or Union
territory by uniting a part of any State or Union Territory to any other
State or Union territory, subject to the provisions of clauses (2) and
(3).”.
5 
10 
15 
20 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 3 of the Draft Constitution of India 1948 provided that a 
Bill which would form a new State, or increase or diminish the area of 
any State or alter the name or boundaries of any State shall not be 
introduced in either House of Parliament unless––– 
“(
a)  Either- 
(i) A representation in that behalf has been made to the
President by a majority of the representatives of the
territory in the Legisla ture of the State from which the
territory is to be separated or excluded; or
(ii) A resolution in that behalf has been passed by the
Legislature of any State whose boundaries or name will be
affected by the proposal to be contained in the Bill; and
(b) Where the proposal contained in the Bill affects the
boundaries or name of any State, other than a State for the time
being specified in Part III of the First Schedule, the views of the
Legislature of the State both with respect to the proposal t o
introduce the Bill and with respect to the provisions thereof have
been ascertained by the President; and where such proposal
affects the boundaries or name of any State for the time being
specified in Part III of the First Schedule, the previous consent
of the State to the proposal has been obtained.”.
In the Constituent Assembly, Prof. K.T. Shah was of the opinion 
that such proposals must originate in the State Legislature itself and not 
in the Parliament. He rightly argued that, in a democratic regime, 
people affected must be consulted first and a drastic measure such as 
redrawing boundaries of a State must not be laid out in a top- down 
approach. 
D
r. Ambedkar then moved an amendment which was adopted 
and made part of the existing article 3 of the Constitution. The proviso 
required that the views of the State Legislature be “ascertained” by the 
President – 
‘
Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in 
either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the 
President and unless– 
(a) where the proposal contained in the Bill affects the
boundaries or name of any State or States for the time
being specified in Part I of the First Schedule, the
views of the Legislature of the State, or as the case
may be, of each of the States both with r espect to th
e
pr
oposal to introduce the Bill and with respect to the
provisions thereof have been ascertained  by th e
President; and
(b) where such proposal affects the boundaries or name
of any State or States for the time being specified in
Part III of the Fi rst Schedule, the previous consent  of
t
he State, or as the case maybe, of each of the States
to the proposal has been obtained’.”

4 
Dr. Ambedkar believed that Central Governments would respect 
federal principles and naturally consult the States first before 
jeopardizing their status. However, by way of the Constitution (Fifth 
Amendment) Act, 1955, this aspect of ascertainment of views was 
substituted. The amended provis o, which forms part of the existing 
article, provides that State Legislatures are only required to convey their 
views on the recommendation. The article, in its current shape and 
form, does not give any weightage to the views of the Legislature of the 
State whose boundary or name is proposed to be altered  and neither  
does any consultation take place prior to the recommendation. 
T
he entire exercise and the article enabling such an exercise is a 
clear aberration of the scheme of Cooperative Federalism. 
T
he Bill, therefore, seeks to amend article 3 thereby providing for 
the President to refer the Bill to the Legislative Assembly of the State 
being re-organised for its approval and not merely its views. The State 
Legislative Assembly would have the power to either accept or reject 
such Bill by way of a simple majority. On rejection, the Bill would not 
be introduced in either House of Parliament  thereby emp owering the 
States to uphold the aspirations of the people by legitimately exercising 
their veto power in such proposals which they feel affect public interest.  
H
ence this Bill. 
TIRUCHI SIVA 

5 
ANNEXURE 
EX
TRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
*                   *                  *     *        * 
3. Parliament may by law—
(a) form a new State by separation of territory from any State or by
uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting any
territory to a part of any State;
(b) increase the area of any State;
(c) diminish the area of any State;
(d) alter the boundaries of any State;
(e) alter the name of any State:
Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in either 
House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President 
and unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill affects the area, 
boundaries or name of any of the States, the Bill has been referred by 
the President to the Legislature of that State for expressing its views 
thereon within such period as may be specified in the reference or 
within such further period as the President may allow and the period so 
specified or allowed has expired. 
E
xplanation I.—In this article, in clauses (a) to (e), “State” includes 
a Union territory, but in the proviso, “State” does not include a Union 
territory. 
E
xplanation II.—The power conferr ed on Parliament by clause (a) 
includes the power to form a new State or Union territory by uniting a 
part of any State or Union territory to any other State or Union territory. 
Formation of new 
States and 
alteration of areas, 
boundaries or 
names of exist ing 
States. 
*                   *                  *      *         *

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
_____________ 
(Shri Tiruchi Siva, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)─172─31.07.2024. 