AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill_No. XXIII of 2000

THE NEGLECTED, ABANDONED AND INDIGENT
WIDOWS (WELFARE) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures to be initiated by the Central and State Governments
for the rehabilitation of neglected, abandoned, infirm, old, sick or handicapped
widows residing either with their relatives or languishing in the ashrams of
Vrindavan, Mathura, Varanasi or such other places of the country by establishing

an Authority at the Central and State levels for the purpose and for matters con-
nected therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Neglected, Abandoned and Indigent Widows Shor title,

(Welfare) Act, 2000. extent and है
(2) It extends to the whole of India. ment.

(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.

(a) “abandoned widow” means a widow who has been deserted or left by her
relatives to fend for herself or at the mercy of her own or the God;

(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;


(c) “authority” means Central Widows Welfare Authority established under
section 3 of this Act;

(@ “indigent Widow” means a poor widow having no source of income with or
without deperdent minor children and having no adult earning kin to look after her
and her children;* .

(©) “infirm widow” means a widow stricken with infirmity due to old age, physical
deformity, sickness or disease, mental imbalance and who lives uncared for;

(f “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “widow” means a woman whose husband has died after her marriage.

Establishment 3. (7) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the commencement

recat of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Central Widows Welfare

Welfare Authority with its headquarter at Hyderabad in the State of Andhra Pradesh.

Authority. (2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue
and be sued.

(3) The Authority shaJl establish its branch in every State and Union Territory in

such manner, as may be prescribed.

Composition 4. The Authority shall consist of, —

of

Authority. (a) a Chairperson, who shall be the Minister incharge of the Union Ministry of

Social Justice and Empowerment;

(6) a Vice-Chairperson preferably a widow to be appointed by the Central Gov-
ernment;

(c) three Members of Parliament of whom twa shall be from Lok Sabha and one
from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective presiding officers of each
House;

(d) two members representing the Department of Women and Child Development
to be appointed by the Central Government;

(e) not more than three members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Government of States, by rotation in alphabetical order, to
represent the Governments of the States;

(0 three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
Non-Governmental Organisations working for the welfare of widows.

Officers and 5, The Authority may appoint such number of officers and employees as may be
employees overs of necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority and carrying out the purposes
the Authority. of this Act in such a manner as may be prescribed.

Funds to be 6. The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation
provided by made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority for
Cente at carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Welfare Fund. 7. The Authority shall have a Welfare Fund for the widows known as Widows Welfare
Fund to which shall be credited all receipts from the Central Government, State Govern-
ments, other institutions, organisations, body corporates both public and private and the
individuals for the welfare and rehabilitation of neglected, abandoned, infirm, old, sick or
handicapped widows.

Functions of 8. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,

the Autiority. the Authority shall promote and provide, by such measures, as it thinks fit, rehabilitation and
welfare of neglected, abandoned, infirm, old, sick or handicapped widows residing either

10

20

45


10

15

20

25

30

35

40

with their relatives or languishing in the ashrams of Vrindavan, Mathura, Varanasi or such
other places of the country chanting bhajans for their survival or homeless widows with or
without children.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (/), the Au-
thority shall,—

(@) maintain district, block and villagewise register of widows in such manner
as may be prescribed;

(6) collect and get verified the antecedents of every widow in order to assess
her need for assistance in such manner as may be prescribed;

(©) give wide publicity through the electronic and print media about the reha-
bilitation and welfare schemes framed by the Authority.

9. The Authority shall provide the needy widows registered under this Act and
on application prescribed for the purpose,—

(a) an amount not exceeding rupee one thousand five hundred per month
in case the widow is infirm or is having one or more dependent children or
rupee one thousand per month, in case she has no dependent child; as subsistence
allowance;

(2) residential or hostel accommodation free of cost to every widow hav-
ing no such accommodation;

(c) free education including technical education to dependent children of
such widows;

(4) such other financial assistance as may be prescribed, if the widow is
indigent, abandoned and neglected by her near and dear ones;

(e) gainful employment as per her calibre qualifications and abilities;
@ free vocational education and training wherever necessary;

(80 such other facilities as may be necessary for the rehabilitation, wel-
fare, proper development and maintenance of a respected life in society:

Provided that if a widow covered under this Act gets gainful employment
or remarries, the facilities provided to her under this Act shall be withdrawn
from the date she gets employment or remarries, as the case may be.

10. The appropriate Government shall co-ordinate with the Authority in carrying out
the purposes of this Act.

11. The appropriate Government in co-ordination with the Authority shall undertake
a census of the abandoned bhajan chanting widows residing within its territorial jurisdic-
tion and formulate a policy for them.

12. The appropriate Government shall trace the heir of the widow who has abandoned
or forced such widow to leave the household and claim maintenance under the law for the
time being in force on behalf of such widow, with or without her consent.

13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being application to the widows.

14, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Subsistence
allowance and
other facilities.

Appropriate
Government
to co-ordinate
with the
Authority.
Census of
abandoned
widows

Appropriate
Government to
claim
maintenance:
from heir of
the widow.
Over-riding
effect of the
Act.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There are more than three crore widows in our country which is nearly three percent
of our population. More than fifty percent of these widows are in the age group of 60 years
and above. Quite a good number of these widows are abandoned and they are languishing
in the bhajan ashrams of various parts of the country particularly in Mathura, Vrindavan,
Varanasi etc. and leading a miserable life. Most of the widows do not have means to support
themselves and their dependent children and they are an exploited lot. To survive they work
as housemaids and do all sorts of works but many of them are unable to work as such as they
are stricken with infirmity due to old age or physical deformity or serious and prolonged
ailment and in many cases they are mentally deranged. Such hapless widows can be seen
begging in the streets. Many young widows are forced into prostitution. Many widows are
dis wned by their in-laws and parents and are left to fend for themselves. Their position

mes more vulnerable if they have dependent children to support and who are also
driven out of the homes with the widows. The position of widows is more serious in semi
urban and rural areas where they are treated as bad omen and are not allowed to participate
in any auspicious function in the household. Since majority of them are illiterate they remain
the worst exploited lot physically, mentally and socially. Our democracy is wedded to the
ideals of a welfare State so it is the duty of the State to rehabilitate the needy and hapless
widows and prepare and implement welfare measures for them.

It is, therefore, proposed that an independent Authority be created to exclusively look
after the welfare of hapless and needy widows so that they are not forced into begging or
prostitution and they lead a respectable life in the society.

Hence this Bill.
SOLIPETA RAMACHANDRA REDDY


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Central Widows Welfare
Authority. Clause 5 provides for the officers and employees of the Authority. Clause6 provides
for the funds to be provided by Central Government. Clause 9 provides for the subsistence
allowance and other facilities. The Bill if enacted and brought into force will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one
hundred fifty crores may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.

A sum of Rupee One Hundred Crores may also be involved as non-recurring

expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for the welfare measures to be initiated by the Central and State Governments
for the rehabilitation of neglected, abandoned, infirm, old, sick or handicapped wid-
ows residing either with their relatives or languishing in the ashrams of Vrindavan,
Mathura, Varanasi or such other places of the country by establishing an authority at
the Central and State levels for purpose and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—54RS1—10.04.2000.