1
THE REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
(As passed by the Rajya Sabha)
A
BILL
further to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Act,
2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in the long title, for the words “births and deaths”, the words “births, marriages
and deaths” shall be substituted.
3.  In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words “Births and
Deaths”, the words “Births, Marriages and Deaths” shall be substituted.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of long title.
18 of 1969.
.
Amendment
of section 1.
Bill No. XXII-C of  2012
AS PASSED BY  THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 13TH AUGUST, 2013.
5
10

2
4. Throughout the principal Act (except sections 8, 9, 10 and 20), for the words “births
and deaths”, “births or deaths”, “every birth and of every death” wherever they occur, the
words “births, marriages and deaths”, “births or marriages or deaths” and “every birth,
every marriage and of every death”, as the case may be, shall respectively be substituted;
and such other consequential amendments as the rules of grammar may require shall also be
made.
5.  After section 1 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“1A. (1) Every person shall get his marriage registered under this Act or the
Anand Marriage Act, 1909 or under any other law for the time being in force (including
State Act).
(2) The parties to the marriage, whose marriage has been registered under this
Act, shall not be required to get their marriage registered under the Anand Marriage
Act, 1909 or any other law for the time being in force (including State Act).
(3) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any person who has registered
his marriage under any other law for the time being in force including a State Act
providing for registration of marriages or with any other authority under that law and
nothing contained in this Act shall affect the validity of the marriages registered under
that law.”.
6.  In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (d), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(da) “marriage” means and includes a marriage solemnized between a male and
a female belonging to any caste or religion or tribe under any law for the time being in
force and includes marriages solemnized under any custom or usage in any form or
manner recognised by law or the marriage registered under any law for the time being
in force and also includes remarriage;’.
7.  In section 7 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely: —
“
(2A) Every Registrar shall, on payment of prescribed fee, enter in the register
maintained for the purpose, all information given to him under section 8 or section 8A
or section 9 and shall also take steps to inform himself carefully of every marriage
which takes place in his jurisdiction and to ascertain and register the particulars
required to be registered.”.
8.  After section 8 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“8A. (1) For the purposes of facilitating the proof of marriages, the parties to the
marriages, who intend to get their marriage registered under this Act shall, either
themselves, or from the persons specified below, give or cause to be given, either
orally or in writing, according to the best of their knowledge and belief, within such
time as may be prescribed, information and requisite documents and fees to the Registrar
of the several particulars required to be entered in the forms prescribed by the State
Government under sub-section (1) of section 16, 
—
(a) in respect of marriage in a house, whether residential or non-residential,
not being any place referred to in clauses (b) and (c), the head of the house, and
in the absence of any such person, the oldest adult male person present therein
during the said period;
(b) in respect of marriage in a temple, church, mosque, synagogue or such
other religious place, the priest or such other person, by whatever name called,
officiating such marriage or the trustee or any other person in charge thereof;
Substitution
of reference
to certain
expressions
by certain
other
expressions.
Insertion of
new section
1A.
Application
of provisions
relating to
registration of
marriages
under this
Act.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 7.
Persons
required to
register
marriages.
Insertion of
new sections
8A and 8B.
7 of 1909.
7 of 1909.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) in respect of marriage in a place specifically used for conducting
marriages, including marriage halls, choultry, chattram, hotels or such other
place, the person in charge thereof;
(d) in respect of marriage in an open place or field or ground, the headman
or other corresponding officer in the case of a village and the officer in charge of
the local police station elsewhere;
(e) in any other place, such person as may be prescribed.
 ( 2) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the State
Government, having regard to the conditions obtaining in a registration division, may,
by order, require that for such period as may be specified in the order, any person
specified by the State Government by designation in this behalf, shall give or cause to
be given information regarding marriages in a house referred to in clause ( a) of
sub-section (1) instead of the persons specified in that clause.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act, the State Government
may make rules providing that the parties to a marriage may have particulars relating to
their marriage entered in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.
8B. The Registrar shall not refuse to register any marriage for which a duly filled
up and signed form has been received by him except on such grounds as may be
prescribed:
    Provided that different grounds may be specified by rules for different class or
classes of persons to marriage. ”.
9.  After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“10A. (1) Upon the request made by parties to the marriage who intend to get
their marriage registered under this Act, it shall be the duty of the persons referred to
in clauses (a) to (e) of sub section (1) of section  8A to give necessary information and
documents relating to such marriage to  the Registrar  within such time and in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) In any area, the State Government, having regard to the facilities available
therein in this behalf, may require that a certificate as to marriage shall be obtained by
the Registrar from such person and in such form as may be prescribed.”.
 10. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:
—
“13. (1) Any birth or marriage or death, as the case may be, of which information
is given to the Registrar after the expiry of the period specified therefor, but within
thirty days of its occurrence, shall be registered on payment of such late fee as may be
prescribed.
(2) Any birth or marriage or death,
 as the case may be,  of which delayed
information is given to the Registrar after thirty days but within one year of its occurrence
shall be registered only with the written permission of the prescribed authority and on
payment of the prescribed fee and the production of an affidavit made before a notary
public or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the State Government.
(3) Any birth or marriage or death, as the case may be, which has not been
registered within one year of its occurrence, shall be registered only on an order made
by a Magistrate of the first class after verifying the correctness of the birth or marriage
or death and on payment of the prescribed fee.
(4) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to any action that
may be taken against a person for failure on his part to register any birth or marriage or
death within the time specified therefor and any such birth or marriage or death, as the
case may be, may be registered during the pendency of any such action.”.
Refusal to
register
marriage.
Duty of certain
persons to
inform
marriages.
Substitution of
new section
for section 13.
Delayed
registration
of birth,
marriages or
deaths.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
11.  For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: —
“15. If it is proved to the satisfaction of the Registrar that any entry of a birth or
marriage or death in any register kept by him under this Act is erroneous in form or
substance, or has been fraudulently or improperly made, he may, subject to such rules
as may be made by the State Government with respect to the conditions on which and
the circumstances in which such entries may be corrected or cancelled, correct the
error or cancel the entry by suitable entry in the margin, without any alteration of the
original entry, and shall sign the marginal entry and add thereto the date of the correction
or cancellation.”.
12.  For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: 
—
“17. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the State Government, including
rules relating to the payment of fees and postal charges, any person may —
(a)   cause a search to be made by the Registrar for any entry in a register
of births, marriages and deaths; and
(b)   obtain an extract from such register relating to any birth or marriage or
death:
Provided that no extract relating to any death, issued to any person, shall disclose
the particulars regarding the cause of death as entered in the register.
 (2) All extracts given under this section shall be certified by the Registrar or any
other officer authorised by the State Government to give such extracts as provided in
section 76 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, and shall be admissible in evidence for the
purpose of proving the birth or marriage or death to which the entry relates.”.
13.  For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely: 
—
“21. The Registrar may either orally or in writing require any person to furnish
any information within his knowledge in connection with a birth or marriage or death in
the locality within which such person resides and that person shall be bound to
comply with such requisition.”.
14. In section 23 of the principal Act, 
—
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words and figures “sections 8 and 9”,
the words, figures and letter “section 8 or section 8A or section 9” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3A) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of
section 10A, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.”.
15. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall inserted, namely:—
“29A. The provisions of this Act relating to registration of marriage shall be in
addition to, and not in derogation of,  any other law for the time being in force and the
registration of marriages of the parties under this Act shall not be deemed to affect any
right recognised or acquired by any such party under any law, custom or usage.
Substitution of
new section
for section 15.
Correction or
cancellation
of entry in
the register of
births or
marriages or
deaths.
Substitution of
new section
for section 17.
Search of
births,
marriages and
deaths
register.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 21.
Power of
Registrar to
obtain
information
regarding
birth or
marriage or
death.
Amendment
of section 23.
Insertion of
new section
29A.
1 of 1872.
Registration of
marriages not
to affect rights
of parties to
marriage.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
16. In section 30 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-—
‘‘(aa) the fee under sub-section  (2A) of section 7;’’;
(ii) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ba) the period within which information should be given to the Registrar
under sub-section (1) of section 8A;
(bb) the persons under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 8A;
 (bc) the manner and the conditions under sub-section (3) of section 8A;
(bd) the grounds under section 8B;”;
(iii) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(ca) the time and the manner for giving information under sub-section (1)
of section 10A;
(cb) the persons from whom and the form in which certificate shall be
obtained under sub-section (2) of section 10A.”.
17.  After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“30A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions for implementation of the provisions of this Act and for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
 (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct
that any of the provisions of this Act specified in the notification
—
 (a) shall not apply to any marriages solemnized under any Act for the time
being in force or any custom or usage recognised in law;
(b) shall apply to any marriages solemnized under any Act for the time
being in force or any custom or usage recognised in law,
with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the
notification.”.
18. In section 31 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply to any matter or
law relating to marriages including  the Anand Marriage Act, 1909 or any State law or
to any rules or notification or order making provisions for registration of marriages in
any State.”.
Amendment
of section 30.
Insertion of
new section
30A.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Amendment
of section 31.
7 of 1909.
5
10
15
20
25
30

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969.
————
(As passed by the Rajya Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—1963RS(S4)—13-08-2013.