1
THE  COMPULSORY  YOGA  AND  SPORTS  EDUCATION
IN SCHOOLS  BILL,  2018
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory yoga and sports education from primary to senior secondary
level in all the schools throughout the country in order to prepare talent of sports
from school level and thereby ensuring good health of students and for making it
obligatory for the Central and State Governments to provide requisite infrastructure
for the purpose and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Yoga and Sports Education in Schools
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XXIII of  2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
the State, and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) “school” includes Government school Government aided school or a private
school which imparts education;
(d) “sports infrastructure” means requisite resources for playing such as
playground with necessary facilities, articles of sports, sports instructors etc. and
requisite environment as are required necessary in the school; and
(e) “yoga” means yoga postures or asanas and such other yoga exercises as
would promote control of the body by bringing in flexibility, strength and endurance
and of mind by enhancing alertness and meditation.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than one year of
the commencement of  the Act, formulate a National Policy for providing yoga and sports
education in all schools of the country and ensuring requisite infrastructure and other
facilities required for yoga and sports.
(2) The national policy referred to in sub-section (1) shall provide for,—
(i) imparting free yoga and sports education to all the students as per their
ability and physical condition in all the schools;
(ii) encouraging yoga, sports and sports education and creating awareness of
the importance of yoga and sports among the schools students;
(iii) ensuring the availability of yoga teacher and sports instructor in all the
schools;
(iv) releasing adequate funds for infrastructure development for yoga and sports
education in all the schools;
(v) incorporating yoga and sports as compulsory subjects in all the schools;
(vi) preparing standard and qualitative syllabus for yoga and sports education
as per the age and physcial capacity of the students under the guidance of experts and
universalisation thereof;
(vii) providing scholarship and stipend to those students whose performance in
yoga and sports has been outstanding;
(viii) giving weightage to marks obtained in yoga and sports for admission in
colleges, universities, and institutions of national importance;
(ix) giving preference to the outstanding sports persons in direct recruitment
under the Central and State Government services; and
(x) such other provisions, as the Central Government may deem fit and necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the National
Policy formulated under section 3 of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall review the progress and quality of yoga and
sports education being imparted by the schools form time to time, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
5. Any school which violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable for punitive
action by the appropriate Government, including withdrawal of recognition of the school in
such manner and with such condition, as may be prescribed.
National
policy for
Yoga and
Sports
education and
infrastructure
thereof.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
National
policy.
Definitions.
Penal
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide requisite funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Yoga is being practiced in our country since the time immomerial for good health and
longevity. It keeps the body and mind healthy and sound and its various asanaas cure even
serious diseases. Now, yoga is not confined to India only but has become international and
International yoga Day is held every year throughout the world. It is felt that yoga should be
introduced right from the childhood to make it a part and parcel of everyones life. Similarly,
various sports activities make us healthy, fit and fine and they are essential for the overall
development of people in particular, the children and youth. Some sports are even very
rewarding and outstanding sportpersons of these sports earn enormous Wealth in their
career. Many international sports events such as Olympics, Common wealth Games, Asian—
Championships etc. are held from time-to-time and winning in these events brings laurels for
the country. Thus, the process of sports must start from the school itself to prepare talents
for national and international events.
Our country is having the highest number of youth and majority of them are sports
lovers. In fact, there is no dearth of talent in various sports in the country. The only
shortcomings is that they seldom get proper resources, training and well equipped
infrastructure to sharpen their talent to become international sportspersons. It is felt that
compulsory yoga and sports education in schools will definitely identify talent and make our
nation excel in the global sports and competitions, apart from building a fit and healthy
nation.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR  DHOOT

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for imparting free yoga and sports education in all schools,
adequate  funds for infrastructure development and scholarship and stipends for outstanding
students in yoga and sports. Clause 6 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to quantify the
actual expenditure at this juncture, but it is estimated that a sum of rupees one lakh crore may
be as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two lakh crore may also be involved
for creating various assets throughout the country.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory yoga and sports education from primary to senior secondary level
in all the schools throughout the country in order to prepare talent of sports from
school level and thereby ensuring good health of students and for making it obliga-
tory for the Central and State Government to provide requisite infrastructure for the
purpose and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—817RS(S3)—25-06-2019.