Bill No. XXII of 2018
THE FARMERS' RIGHT TO GUARANTEED REMUNERATIVE
MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICES FOR AGRICULTURAL
COMMODITIES BILL, 2018
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY : DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
1. Short Title, extent and commencemenrt.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
G
UARANTEED REMUNERATIVE MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICES FOR ALL AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES
3. Right of Every Farmer to Guaranteed Remunerative Miniumum Suport Prices for all
Agricultural Commodities.
4. Comprehensive estimation of cost of production of all agricultural commodities.
5. Determination of Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Price.
6. Notifications of Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Price.
7. Power of State Governments to notify bonus.
CHAPTER III
C
ENTRAL FARMERS' AGRICULTURAL COSTS AND REMUNERATIVE PRICE GUARANTEE COMMISSION
8. Constitution of the Central Farmers' Agricultural Costs and Remunerative Price Guarantee
Commission.
9. Term of the Commission and conditions of service of the members.
10. Powers and functions of the Commission.
11. Transparent functioning and Annual Report to be laid before the Parliament.
12. Accounts and Audit.
CHAPTER IV
S
TATE FARMERS' AGRICULTURAL COSTS AND REMUNERATIVE PRICE GUARANTEE COMMISSION
13. Constitutions of the State Farmers' Agricultural Coasts and Remunerative Price Guarantee
Commission.
14. Terms of the State Commission and conditions of service of the Members.
15. Powers and functions of the State Commission.
16. State Compensation Fund.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 20TH JULY, 2018

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF GUARANTEED REMUNERATIVE MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICES
17. Bar on auction or offer of price below Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support
Prices.
18. Obligation on the Government to open Procurement Centres.
19. Timely and Effective Market Intervention by State Government.
20. Measures to regulate imports of agricultural commodities.
21. Other measures to prevent distress sales.
22. Investments on Farmer Producer Organisations.
23. Measures to reduce and regulate input costs.
24. Designating and notifying the responsible public authorities.
25. Identification of real cultivators and ensuring that they benefit.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
26. Offences and Penalties under this Act for traders.
27. Entitlement of farmers to compensation for not obtaining GRMSP; Entitlement of farmers
to punitive compensation for delay in payment; Block level Grievance Redressal
Committee and Order for compensation to be paid to farmers through DBT.
28. Offences and Penalties under this Act, for designated public servants and authorities.
CHAPTER VII
O
BLIGA TIONS OF CENTRAL AND STATE GOVERNMENTS
29. Obligation of Central Government to reserve, provide and spend adequate funds;
Obligation of State Governments to reserve, provide and spend adequate funds.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
30. Overriding effect of Act.
31. Members and Staff of Commissions deemed to be Public Servants.
32. Power to remove difficulties.
33. Power to make rules.
(ii)
C
LAUSES

1
THE FARMERS’ RIGHT TO GUARANTEED REMUNERATIVE
MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICES FOR AGRICULTURAL
COMMODITIES BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to confer right on all farmers to obtain Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support
Prices with minimum fifty percent profit margin over comprehensive cost of
production, upon sale of agricultural commodities and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS safeguarding the right to livelihood is essential for the realization of right to
life under article 21 of the Constitution of India;
AND WHEREAS article 38(2) of the Constitution provides that the State shall, in particular,
strive to minimize the inequalities in income and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in
status, facilities and opportunities not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups
of people residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations;
Bill No. XXII of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 20TH JULY, 2018

2
AND WHEREAS article 39 (a) of the Constitution provides that the State shall direct its
policies towards securing that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an
adequate means of livelihood;
A
ND WHEREAS article 43 of the Constitution of India provides that the State shall
endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or economic organization, or in any other way, to
all workers, agricultural, industrial or therwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring
a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure, and social and cultural opportunities;
A
ND WHEREAS farmers do not get adequate return of their investment and toil despite
good production, and therefore their conditions is steadily deteriorating and many farmers
are committing suicide every year;
A
ND WHEREAS consumer interests have been justifiably protected through National
Food Security Act, 2013 and Essential Commodities Act, 1955 so that adequate food is
affordable and available for needy citizens and should continue to be so;
A
ND WHEREAS the input costs in agriculture are increasing beyond the meager means
of farmers;
AND WHEREAS the price realized by farmers for their agricultural commodities is not
providing sufficient returns above the cost of production to provide income even to sustain
basic needs of the household;
A
ND WHEREAS the National Farmers Commission had recommended a principle for
remunerative prices, to be fixed with a minimum profit margin of at least fifty percent over and
above the comprehensive cost of production;
A
ND WHEREAS ensuring adequate returns in agriculture is essential to safeguarding the
food security and food sovereignty of the nation, especially in the context of shrinking
landholdings and decreasing livelihood opportunites;
A
ND WHEREAS the government is obligated to prevent farmer suicides;
AND WHEREAS in the Seventh Schedule to the constitution Social Security is listed at
entry no. 23 of List III (Concurrent List), the subject of Trade and Commerce in, and the
production, supply and distribution of food stuffs, cattle fodder, raw cotton, raw jute at entry
no. 33 in List III, the subject of Price Control is lited at entry no. 34 in List III and any refund
payable for difference between prices realized in the market on production of receipts should
be paid from any bank under Negotiable Instruments Act is covered under Banking which is
listed at 45 of List I (Union List);
A
ND WHEREAS for the above reasons, it is essential to provide farmers with a right to
Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices for all agricultural commodites;
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY—DEFINITIONS & INTERPRETATIONS
1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers' Right to Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum
Support Prices for Agricultural Commodities Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force within one month of the enactment, with the Central
Government issuing a notification in the Official Gazette.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural commodity" means all cereals, all millets, all pulses, all oilseeds,
all fibre crops, all horticulture crops of fruits and vegetables, all specie crops, all tuber
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5
10

3
crops, all medicinal plants, all varieties of milk, all minor forest produce, floriculture,
grass, fodder grass and free produce, nursery produce, all plantation produce, all
livestock and animal products like meat and mutton, eggs and poultry, all fishery
produce like fish mussel, marine fish, freshwater aquatic produce, honey, silkworm
cocoons, and all such other primary produce and agricultural commodity with all its
cognate expressions;
(b) "agricultural expert" includes a person by virtue of academic qualification or
with proven work record and having at least 15 years practical or management experience
in agriculture-related sectors;
(c) "Central Commission" means the Central Farmers' Agricultural Costs and
Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission constituted under Section 8;
(d) "Committee" means the Block Level Grievance redressal Committee
constituted under section 28;
(e) "Cost of Production" is the comprehensive cost as estimated under section 4;
(f) "farmer" includes a person engaged in the economic and livelihood activity of
agriculture in terms of growing crops, or producing other primary agricultural
commodities with or without land ownership, and shall also include all agricultural
operational holdes, cultivators, agriculture labourers, sharecroppers, tenants, poultry
and livestock rearers, fishers, beekeepers, pastoralists, non-corporate planters and
planting labourers as well as forest-produce-gatherers, farmers groups, Producer
Cooperative, or Self-help groups doing cultivation on collectively owned or leased-in
land and women farmers.
(g) "fund" means the State Compensation Fund to be maintained and administered
by the State Commission as per section 16;
(h) "Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Price" means the price that
ensures a minimum fifty per cent profit margin over and above the comprehensive cost
of production of a given agricultural commodity as determined under section 5 and
notified under section 6, to which shall be added the Bonus announced by the State
Government wherein the comprehensive cost of production at the State level is covered
with at least a fifty per cent profit margin over and above such cost of production; and
in the case of standing (plantation) crops, as specifically determined by the Central
Commission;
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a state, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(j) "market" means regulated markets, systems of procurement of agricultural
commodities run by State procurement agencies, consumer/service cooperative,
corporations as well as contract farming arrangements, formal or informal, that different
entities have, for procuring agricultural commodities from farmers, including milk
collection centers, and procurement centers opened by different public sector agencies
and other market yards run by government agencies including Panchayats and
cooperatives and includes private markets;
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(l) "Schedule" means the schedule appended to this Act;
(m) "State Commission" means the Commissions set up at the State level as per
section 13 of this Act;
(n) "trader"  means any individual, or any other entity including sole
proprietorship, a partnership firm, public sector or corporate entity, that purchases
agrciultural commodities from farmers directly.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Right of
every farmer
to Guaranteed
Remunerative
Minimum
Support Price
for all
agricultural
commodities.
CHAPTER II
GUARANTEED REMUNERATIVE MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE FOR ALL AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES
3. (1) Every farmer, throughout India, shall be entitled to a "Guaranteed Remunerative
Minimum Support Price" as a right against sale of any agricultural commodity.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure purchase or procurement at or above the
guaranteed remunerative minimum support price, utilizing mechanisms as specified in
Chapter V .
4. (1) The Central Government, through the Central Commission, shall institute robust,
comprehensive and accurate system for estimation of Comprehensive Cost of Production, as
defined in the Schedule for all agricultural commodities;
(2) The cost estimation shall be comprehensive and inclusive of all paid-out costs, as
well as imputed costs including family labour at skilled wage rates applicable to the State or
region, rental value of land, interest on assets and remuneration calculated for managerial
functions performed by the farm household in addition to depreciation of assets and other
components as listed in the Schedule:
Provided that the calcualtions shall also take into account the period of each  crop into
consideration:
Provided further that for those commodities where the system of cost estimation does
not exist, the Central Government shall institute such systems that require data collection on
a timely base:
Provided also that the yield data used to arrive at Comprehensive Cost of Production
shall be as per the Schedule;
(3) The estimation of data, methodolgy, sampling, statistical analyses etc. as specified
in the Schedule shall be periodically reviewed and corrections made and implemented by the
Central Government.
5. The Central Commission shall recommend the GRMSP to the Central Government by
ensuring a profit margin of at least fifty per cent over the comprehensive cost of production
estimated for each agricultural commodity based on the Schedule:
Provided that additional incentives for particular commodities may be recommended
by the Central Commission over and above the GRMSP as per social and environmental
policy imperatives.
6. As soon as may be, but within a month of the receipt of recommendation of the
Central Commission, Central Government shall notify the Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum
Support Prices of all agricultural commodities as per the recommendations of the Central
Commission:
Provided  that the Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices shall be notified
by the Central Government on or before February 28th of every year for the ensuing Kharif
production season and on or before July 31st of every year for the ensuing Rabi production
season.
7. Nothing shall preclude the State Governments from notifying a Bonus in addition
to the Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices notified by the Central Government,
within 15 days after receiving a recommendation from State Commission:
Provided that the additional cost of the Bonus shall be borne by the State Government.
Comprehensive
Estimation of
Cost of
Production of
all
agricultural
commodities.
Determination
of Guaranteed
Remunerative
Minimum
Support
Price.
Notification
of Guaranteed
Remunerative
Minimum
Support
Prices.
Power of
State
Government
to notify
Bonus.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
CHAPTER III
CENTRAL FARMERS' AGRICULTURAL COSTS AND REMUNERATIVE PRICE GUARANTEE COMMISSION
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute
an autonomous body corporate to be known as the Central Farmers' Agricultural Costs and
Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission for the purpose of exercising the powers and
performing the functions under this Act, and for recommending and implementing the
Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices for all agricultural commodities;
(2) The Central Commission shall consist of,—
(a) Chairperson (full time), who shall be a farmer and well qualified and experienced
in agricultural economics and conversant with various agricultural faculties;
(b) Members as follows :—
(i) five representatives of farmers, including representatives of farmers
organisations and persons, including women, with proven record of having
worked on farmers' issues and good knowledge of agricultural economy,
representing as far as possible from the different regions of the India—Non-
official Members;
(ii) three agricultural experts—having requisite academic qualification in
agricultural economics or any faculty incidental thereto, and with at least 15 years
of experience in the field of expertise—Non-official Members;
(iii) an official not less than the rank of Joint Secretary, from the Department
of Agriculture, Co-operation & Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmer's Welfare—Member;
(iv) an official of Ministry of Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers' Welfare
of rank not less than that of Deputy Secretary—Member Secretary.
(c) One of the Members shall be designated as Vice Chairperson so that
proceedings are not affected in the absence of the Chairperson for any reason.
(3) The Chairperson and Members shall be nominated by the President of India on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of (i) the Prime Minister who shall be
the Chairperson, (ii) the Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha or the leader of the single largest
group or party in opposition in Lok Sabha, (iii) the Union Cabinet Minister for Agriculture:
Provided that such nominations shall take into consideration equitable regional
representation from across the country, sectoral representation (cultivation, plantation,
livestock, fisheries, agricultural labour, forest-produce-gathering) and gender, and social
background (SC, ST etc.) especially for sub-section (2) (b) (i) and (ii) above, and on a
rotational basis for representation of different States every time the Central Commission is
re-constituted or vacancies filled.
(4) the Central Government shall ensure that no Member including Chairperson
represents any conflict of interest pertaining to the discharge of their functions.
(5) The Chairperson and the Members of the Central Commission shall not be a sitting
Member of Parliament or Member of State Legislature of any State or Union Territory, as the
case may be, or hold any other office of profit;
(6) The Central Government shall appoint such officers and staff members as may be
necessary, to assist the Central Commission in such manner as may be prescribed.
(7) In the discharge of their duties, the Member Secretary and other officers and staff
referred to in sub-section (7) above shall be subject to the administrative control of the
Central Commission, represented by the Chairperson.
Constitution
of the
Central
Commission.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
9. (1) The term of the Central Commission each time it is constituted shall be for five
years;
(2) the process for re-constitution of the succeeding Central Commission shall be
initiated a clear ten months before the expiry of the tenure of an existing Central Commission
for smooth transition and for perpetual succession of the Central Commission:
Provided that any of the Members may be re-nominated to the succeeding  Central
Commission;
(3) The Chairperson and the Non-official Members specified in section 8 shall not be
removed from this office except after due enquiry made by a sitting judge of the High Court
of Delhi and recommended as such to the President.
(4) A member may, by writing under his hand and addressed to the President resign his
office at any time.
(5) A vacancy arising by reason of resigning of any member of the Central Commission
under sub-section (4) or otherwise shall be filled up in accordance with the provisions
contained in section 8 of this Act within six months' time:
Provided that the person so appointed shall hold office only for the remaining period
of term of the person, in whose place he is appointed.
(6) the Central Government may remove any Member, if he,—
(a) is declared as undischarged insolvent or debtor:
(b) becomes incapable of continuing as such, due to physical or mental disability;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction;
(d) has been convicted for an offence, which in the opinion of  the Central
Government involves moral turpitude or financial irregularities;
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, abused his official position so
as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to public interest:
Provided that in the case of the Chairperson and Non-official members, such removal
shall be made only after due enquiry and recommendation made as specified in sub-section (3)
above.
(4) The Central Commission shall regulate its own procedure for the conduct of its
business with principles of participation, transparency and equity incorporated, and shall
also have periodic consultations organized with representatives of State Commissions, State
Governments, and farmers' organisations across the country;
(5) The salary and allowances, and the other conditions of service of the Chairperson
and Members shall be such, as may be prescribed.
10.  (1) The Central Commission shall have all such powers as are necessary for
achieving the objects of this Act, and in particular;
(a) to recommend Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices for all
agricultural commodities, which provide a profit margin of at least fifty per cent over
and above the comprehensive cost of production:
Provided that such recommendations may include additional incentives for
fulfilling social or environmental policy imperatives:
Provided further that the Central Commission may also take into consideration
the Recommendations of the State Commissions while finalizing its recommendation
to the Central Government:
Term of the
Central
Commission
and
conditions of
service of the
members.
Powers and
functions of
the Central
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
Provided also that the Central Government shall not notify GRMSP below the
recommendations of the Central Commission.
(b) to recommended all other such measures that will assure a remunerative and
stable price environment for farmers, including improvements in the storage and
marketing infrastructure and procedures, as well as adequate and appropriate support
to producer organisations;
(c) to monitor the prices being realised by farmers for various agricultural
commodities all over the country and send prompt advisories to all concerned agencies
and departments for taking effective action;
(d) to recommended to the Central Government the regulation of cost of
agricultural inputs including seeds, fertilisers, pesticides, electricity, diesel, farm
equipment etc.
(2) it shall be mandatory for the Central Government to consult the Central Commission
on all international trade agreements which affect agriculture directly or indirectly, and report
to the Central Commission the reasons for not considering its comments or recommendations.
(3) The Central Commission shall submit its  recommendations for Guaranteed
Remunerative Minimum Support Prices of all agricultural commodities for each year before
15th  February for the upcoming Kharif season of that year and before 15th July for the
upcoming rabi season of that year.
11.  (1) The Central Commission shall publish all relevant information including the
cost estimations, basis of Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices, market price
trends and ensuing  action or recommenations, minutes of its meetings or sittings and any
other material on its website;
(2) The Central Commission shall prepare an annual report of its functioning of that
year under this Act and the same shall be submitted to the  Central Government in such form
on or before such date as may be prescribed;
(3) The Annual Report submitted to the Central Government under sub-section (2)
above shall be laid before both the Houses of Parliament as soon as may be and certainly in
the ensuing Session of the Parliament, after the same is received by the Central Government.
12. (1) The Central Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare annual statements of accounts, in such form as may be prescribed;
(2) The accounts of the Central Commission shall be audited annually and the audited
report shall be placed before each House of Parliament, along with the Annual Report by the
Central Government.
CHAPTER IV
S
TATE FARMERS' AGRICULTURAL COSTS AND REMUNERATIVE PRICE GUARANTEE COMMISSION
13. (1) The Every State Government shall, within six months after the commencement
of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an autonomous body corporate
to be known as the State Farmers' Agricultural Costs and Remunerative Price Guarantee
Commission for the purpose of exercising the powers and performing the functions under
this Act, and recommending and implementing the Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum
Support Prices for all agricultural commodities in the respective State;
(2) The State Commission shall consist of:
(a) Chairperson (fulltime), who shall be a farmer and well qualified and experienced
in agricultural economics and conversant with various agricultural faculties;
(b) Members as follows,—
(i) Five Representatives of farmers, including representatives of farmers'
organisations and persons, including women, with proven record of having
Publishing of
information
by Central
Commissiond
and Annual
Report.
Accounts and
Audit.
Constitution
of State
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
worked on farmers' issues representing different regions of the State—
Non-Official Members;
(ii) One agriculture expert or research scientist having track record in
Agriculture , Agro-economics, and highly qualified in Agri-science faculties, with
at least 15 years of experience in the field of expertise—Non-Official Member;
(iii) Four officials from the Department of Agriculture/ Horticulture/ Animal
Husbandry/ Fisheries recommended by Director of Agriculture/ Horticulture/
Animal Husbandry/ Fisheries or equivalent—Member;
 (iv) One Official Member of Department of Agricultural Marketing (or the
equivalent department as exists in the given State).— Member Secretary.
(c) One of the Members shall be designated as Vice-Chairperson so that
proceedings are not affected in the absence of the Chairperson for any reason.
(3) The Chairperson and Members shall be nominated by the Governor of a State
based on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of the (i) Chief Minister
of the State who shall be the Chairperson, (ii) Leader of Opposition in the State Assembly or
the leader of the single largest group or party in opposition in the State Assembly, (iii) the
Minister for Agriculture of the State:
Provided that such nominations shall take into consideration equitable regional
representation from across the State, sectoral representation and gender, and social background
(SC, ST etc.) for sub-section (2) above, and on a rotational basis for representation of
different regions within a State every time the State Commission is re-constituted or vacancies
filled.
(4) The State Government shall ensure that no Member including Chairperson
represents any conflict of interest pertaining to the discharge of their functions.
(5) The State Government shall  appoint as many officers and staff members as may be
necessary, to assist the State Commission in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) In discharge of their duties, the Member Secretary and other officers and  staff
referred to in sub-section (6) shall be subject to the administrative control of the State
Commission represented by the Chairperson.
14. ( 1) The term of the State Commission shall be five years. The process for
re-constitution of the succeeding State Commission shall be initiated by the State Government
at least ten months before the end of the tenure of an ongoing State Commission:
Provided that, the State Government may extend the term of an existing State
Commission, if deemed necessary;
(2) The Chairperson and the Non-official members specified in Section 13 shall not be
removed from his office except after due enquiry made by the sitting judge of the State High
Court and recommended as such to the State Government;
(3) A member may, by writing under his hand and addressed to the State Government,
resign his office at any time.
(4) A vacancy arising by reason of resignation of any member of the State Commission
under sub-section (3) above or otherwise shall be filled up in accordance with the provisions
contained in Section 13 of  this Act:
Provided that the person so appointed shall hold office only for the remaining period
of term of the person in whose place he is appointed.
(5) The State Government may remove any member, if he—
(a) is declared as un-discharged insolvent or debtor;
Term of the
State
Commission
and
conditions of
service of the
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(b) becomes incapable of continuing as such, due to physical or mental disability;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction;
(d) has been convicted for an offence, which in the opinion of the State
Government involves moral turpitude or financial irregularities;
(e) has, in the opinion of the State Government, abused his official position so as
to render his continuance in office prejudicial to public interest:
Provided that in the case of Chairperson and Non-official members such removal
shall be made only after due enquiry and recommendation made as specified in
sub-section (2) above.
(6) The State Commission shall regulate its own procedure for the conduct of its
business based on principles of participation, transparency and equity, and shall include
periodic consultations with representatives of farmers' organisations from various regions
of the State representing different sectoral interests.
(7) The salary and allowances, and the other conditions of service of the Chairperson
and Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(8) The headquarters of the State Commission shall be at the capital of the State.
(9) The Chairperson and the Members of the State Commission shall not be a Mamber
of Parliament or Member of State Legislature of any State or Union Territory, as the case may
be, or hold any office of profit.
15. (1) The State Commission shall have all such powers as are necessary for achieving
the objects of this Act, and in particular,—
(a) to recommend to the Central Commission the Guaranteed Remunerative
Minimum Support Prices of all agriculture commodities from State for each year, having
regard to the factors mentioned in the Schedule, ensuring that such recommendation
is made before 31st January for the upcoming Kharif season and before 30th June for
the upcoming Rabi season;
(b) to recommend to the respective State Government higher prices that shall be
fixed as the State level Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices (SGRMSP)
which includes a Bonus as specified in Section 7 that shall be applicable only within
that State, over and above the GRMSP notified by the Central Government:
Provided that such a recommendation shall take into account a minimum fifty
percent profit margin over any higher cost of production in the State, and other policy
considerations of incentivising particular crops and commodities for balanced and
sustainable agricultural growth and for this purpose the State Commission shall ensure
that it recommends GRMSPs for those agricultural commodities which might have
been left out by the Central Commission for any reason;
(c) to monitor the price situation in various markets on a regular basis and to
send advisories based on such monitoring, for appropriate action to be taken, and
oversee the implementation of such advisories by the State Government for their
efficacy.
(d) to inquire into failures to discharge duties, on particular public servants and
authorities as well as contract farming cases, and recommend penalties to be imposed
as per Section 28 of this Act.
(e) to send recommendations to the Central Commission on related matters from
the State;
Powers and
functions of
the State
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(f) to maintain a fund as per Section 16, for paying compensation to farmers, as
ordered by the Block Level Committee, for non-receipt of GRMSP or delayed payment
for sale as specified in Section 27;
(g) to recommend to the State Government regulation of cost of all agricultural
inputs including seeds, fertilisers, pesticides, electricity, diesel, farm equipment etc.
(2) The State Commission shall publish all relevant information including its cost
estimations, basis for Bonus recommendations, market price trends and ensuing action or
recommendations, inquiry reports as per sub-section (1) above, minutes of its meetings or
sittings and any other material on its website;
(3) The State Government shall prepare an annual report of its functioning of that year
under this Act and the same shall be submitted to the State Government in such form on or
before such date as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Annual Report submitted to the State Government by the State
Commission shall be laid before the State Legislature as soon as may be and certainly in the
ensuing Session of the Legislature, after the same is received by the State Government.
(4) The State Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed;
(5) The accounts of the State Commission shall be audited annually and the audited
report shall be placed before the State legislature, along with the Annual Report.
16. The State Commissions shall constitute and maintain a Fund to be known as the
State Compensation Fund, which shall receive allocations from the Central Government and
the moneys imposed as fines and penalties for offences under the Act, shall be credited to
the Fund:
Provided that the Fund shall be utilized for compensation payments to farmers as
required, as specified under Section 27.
CHAPTER V
I
MPLEMENTATION OF GUARANTEED REMUNERATIVE MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICES
17. (1) In all agricultural markets of different forms, including Agriculture Produce
Market Committee markets throughout the country, the auction or offer price for every
agricultural commodity shall begin with the Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support
Prices as the floor price and no auction shall be allowed below the said price;
(2) Any agreement entered into orally or by any other means, between purchaser
traders or commission agents that directly or indirectly results in bid rigging or collusive
bidding, that limits, controls or attempts to control the sale or price of or trade in agriculture
commodities or provision of services in the market or outside market with intent to suppress
the prices, shall be presumed to have an appreciable adverse effect on Guaranteed
Remunerative Minimum Support Prices and any such agreement is prohibited and shall be
liable for penalties mentioned in section 26, including cancellation of license by the concerned
authorities on complaint by the aggrieved farmers or public interest groups or upon suo-
motu monitoring, and surveillance by designated public authorities.
(3) No trader, including a trader in any contract farming arrangement, shall purchase
any commodity below the Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Price and any trader
resorting to purchase below Guranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices shall be
liable for penalties mentioned in section 26 and his license or contract shall be cancelled by
the State Government's designated authority, upon due inquiry into any complaint by the
aggrieved farmers.
State
Compensation
Fund.
Bar on
auction or
offer of price
below
Guarnteed
Remunerative
Minimum
Support
Prices.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
18. (1) The Central Government shall open adequate number of procurement centers
for all commodities to ensure procurement, either directly, or through designated procurement
agencies or through traders bodies, self-help groups of Farmers Producer Organisations, in
a localized manner, for various food schemes and for commodity corporations, at or above
Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices;
(2) The Central Government shall make adequate arrangements for effective procurement
at least four weeks before the beginning of the harvest of the particular crop including
storage facilities and transportation including weighing scales, gunny bags, testing and
other required equipments etc. for such procurement operations:
Provided that instant, same-date payment shall be made directly to the farmer by the
procurement agency:
Provided further that sufficient publicity shall be given regarding the procurement
centre operations within the jurisdiction of such a centre.
19. The Central Government shall formulate an effective market intervention scheme
for implementation by State Governments within two days of fall in market prices, in all
perishable and other notified commodities, including potatoes, onions, tomatoes, plantation
commodities etc. and shall provide sufficient financial outlays to ensure purchases at
Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices and instant payments to the farmers.
20. The Central Government shall take measures to prevent import of subsidized
agricultural commodities by enhancing import duties and other measures to ensure that the
landing price of agricultural commodities from other countries is at least equal to Guaranteed
Remunerative Minimum Support Prices at any given point of time.
21. The appropriate Government shall implement effective schemes to prevent farmers
from selling agricultural commodities to low cost due to financial compulsion, including
massive increase in access to stortage facilities to enable all farmers to store their produce
and sell at a time of remunerative prices, schemes like negotiable warehouse receipts which
enable the farmers to access finance of at least seventy-five  per cent of the value of the
stored crop valued at Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices or market value
whichever is higher and adequate storage facilities and agro-processing facilities for traders
especially for perishable products to guard against withdrawal of buyers from the market.
22. The appropriate Government shall create a fund to make investments in organizing
farmers into Farmers/Workers' Producing Cooperatives, and other Farmer Producer
Organisations (FPOs), with sufficient infrastructure and financial capital to run their market
enterprises including processed, value-added produce, in a tax-free atmosphere:
Provided that Additional incentives shall be provided to women farmers' FPOs.
23. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to reduce the cost of production
by reducing the input costs through subsidies on inputs, like seed, fertilizer, pesticide,
electricity, diesel, farm equipment etc., and by promoting low-cost sustainable methods of
agriculture.
24. The appropriate Government shall designate and notify specific public authorities
at all levels, beginning from the block level, who shall be the persons responsible for
implementation of GRMSP including monitoring the prices paid by traders, taking punitive
action against them for contravening clauses in the Act, opening procurement centres on
time, taking up Market intervention on time, paying compensation in time etc..
25. The State Governments shall implement effective mechanism for identifying the
actual cultivators including tenant farmers, sharecroppers, women farmers and adivasis, by
registering and issuing them a means of identification, and ensuring that they get the benefit
of Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices through procurement and market
intervention and other mechanisms specified in this Act.
Central
Government
to open
Procurement
Centres.
Timely and
effective
market
intervention
by State
Government.
Central
Government
to regulate
imports of
agricultural
commodities.
Other
measures to
prevent
distress sales.
Investments
on Farmer
Producer
Organisations.
Measures to
reduce and
regulate input
costs.
Designating
and notifying
the
responsible
public
authorities.
Identification
of real
cultivators.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
CHAPTER VI
PENALTIES AND COMPENSA TION
26. Whoever contravenes the provisions of Section 17 shall be liable for punishment
as follows:
(a) for first offence, with imprisonment  for a period of three months and with a
fine equal to twice the total deficit suffered by the farmer on account of the violation;
(b) for second offence, with imprisonment for a period of six months and with a
fine equal to twice the total deficit suffered by the farmer on account of the violation;
(c) for third time offence, with imprisonment for a period of one year and with fine
equal to three times the total deficit suffered by the farmer on account of the violation
covered under Section 17(3);
(2) All such fine amounts shall be deposited with the Fund specified in section 16.
27. (1) Any farmer who is not paid the Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support
Price for sale of agricultural commodities by a trader shall be entitled to a compensation from
the Fund, which shall at least be the difference between the GRMSP and price obtained by
the farmer;
(2) Any farmer who does not get instant direct payment that fuly covers the total value
of the commodity sold at GRMSP to any buyer including government procurement agencies,
shall be entitlted to a delay compensation at the rate of fifteen per cent per annum on the total
payment due from the buyer, for every month of delay;
28. (1) The State Governments shall set up a three Member Block Grievance Redressal
Committee  under the adminstrative control of the State Commission, to receive and resolve
individual complaints from farmers under sub-section (1) and (2) above, in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Block level representative each from the agriculture
and marketing departments, in addition to a farmers' representative.
(3) The Committee shall follow a simple verification procedure, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Committee shall resolve each complaint within one month of receiving
it;
(4) The Committee shall issue Orders for compensation to be paid by the State
Commission from the State Compensation Fund held by it;
29. The public servants and authorities as specified in section 24, found guilty by the
State Commision for not discharging their duties viz., lack of effective monitoring, failure to
promptly initiate action against traders purchasing below Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum
Support Prices, lack of effective market intervention and also failure to provide compensation,
without reasonable cause of found to be willfully neglecting their duty, shall be liable for
punishment with imprisonment for a period of six months and with fine equal to at least one
month's salary, which shall be deducted from his salary.
CHAPTER VII
OBLIGATIONS ON THE CENTRAL AND STATE GOVERNMENTS
30. (1) The Central Government shall, after the appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf provide the requisite funds for carrying at the purpose of this Act:
Provided that the adequacy and utilization of the financial outlays shall be reviewed
by the Central Commission on an annual basis and the Central Commission may recommend
lower or higher or similar outlays for the subsequent budget.
(2) The State Governments shall provide adequate outlays, for the State Commission
to function effectively and also to meet the obligations of fixing the Bonus over and above
the notified Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices.
Penalties.
Entitlement
of Farmer to
Compensation.
Block level
Grievance
Redressal
Committee to
resolve
farmers
complaints.
Penalty on
public servant
or authorities.
Central
Government
and State
Governments
provide funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
31. The Provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsist-
ent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
32. Every member of the Central Commission and the State Commission and the other
officers and staff appointed under sub-section (6) of section 8 and sub-section (5) of section
13 shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
33. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, as appear it to be necessary for the removal of the difficulty;
(2) Every order made under this section, as soon as may be after it as made, shall be laid
before each House of Parliament.
34. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 (2) Every rule made under  this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both House agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification on annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Members of
the
Commission
shall be Public
Servants.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
Overriding
effect of Act.
5
10
15
20
25
45 of 1860.

SCHEDULE
1. METHOLOGY: Methodology adopted for cost estimation shall e cost-accounting
based with opportunity costs fully included for various resources, capital items and services,
in addition to interest on fixed capital etc.
2. COST COMPONENTS: The cost components will cover both in cash and kind
costs, in addition to imputed value of some inputs, services and assets/resources, and all of
them shall be included in the Estimation of Comprehensive Cost of Production.
a. Paid Out Costs
(i) Hired labour—human, animal, machinery;
(ii) Maintenance expenses on owned animals and machinery for the entire year
and not limited to only their utilization time;
(iii) Actual Expenses on material inputs such as seed (home grown and
purchased), fertilizer, manure (owned and purchased), pesticides including insecticides
and weedicides, irrigation;
(iv) Depreciation on implement and farm buildings (such as cattle sheds, pump
sheds, machine sheds, storage sheds, tractor etc.);
(v) Land revenue and other taxes;
(vi) Rent paid for leased-in land at actual rates;
(vii) Interest paid on credit borrowed;
(viii) Insurance premium paid;
(ix) Processing, Transport and Marketing costs (like cleaning, grading, drying,
packaging, marketing, transportation, time spent for all these post-harvest activities,
mandi taxes) etc.
(x) Miscellaneous expenses.
b. Imputed Costs
(i) Value of Family Labour—at currently prevalent skilled wage rates notified by
the Government for that area, or market wage rates for skilled workers, whichever is
higher and with complete labour assessment for all days of family labour and not just
data pertaining to chosen agricultural operations;
(ii) Rent of owned land at prevailing market value without any ceilings of fair
rents applied as under any other legislation;
(iii) Interest on owned fixed capital at prevalent market value;
(iv) Interest on working capital, including the cost of borrowing (in terms of time
and paperwork), at actuals including from non-institutional sources—such interest
charges will be applied to the full life of crop season;
(v) Risk margin of 10% over Cost of Cultivation per hectare;
(vi) Managerial cost, at 10% of the Cost of Cultivation arrived at, by using all the
above cost components, with the methodology specified in Projected Costs below.
c. Projected Costs
In the context of time lags between data collection and estimation of comprehensive
cost of production for recommendations of GRMSPs for a given season, it is mandated that
14

15
projected costs shall use a Composite Variable Input Index using rate of inflation of different
inputs with the same being applied to fixed costs also in addition to applying it to the
increase in the quantum of utilization of the input. Interest and Depreciation on fixed capital
shall be projected using the rate of inflation in construction material. Land rent shall be
projected by raising it by index number (WPI) of agricultural commodities which is the main
determinant of variation in land rent.
In the case of plantation crops, separate procedures to be drawn up to apportion initial
costs over the plantation crop annual period, in addition to maintenance costs with built-in-
losses.
3. YIELD DATA THAT IS TO BE USED FOR CONVERTING COST OF CULTIV A TION
TO COST OF PRODUCTION: This shall be based on a reconciliation between crop cutting
experiments-based data from Departments of Agriculture/Horticulture and what is collected
from a sample set of farmers for Cost Estimations.
4. SAMPLE FOR DATA COLLECTION: Two villages from each selected block are to
be taken with number of operational holdings selected from 3 size classes of less than
1 hectares, 1-2 hectares and more than 2 hectares to be 3, 2 and 1 respectively (six sample
units from each village). In each State, two strata to be used for drawing sample—one, for
major crops and another for minor crops, to selected blocks or tehsils, with the same approach
to be extended to selection of villages within selected block or tehsil. A minimum sample size
of at least 500 operational holdings is to be maintained State-wise. Every district shall have
blocks/tehsils selected so that district-wise data analysis for Cost of Production is evolved.
Sample shall be proportionate to irrigated and unirrigated area under the crop.
5. A VERAGING OF COST A T THE NA TIONAL LEVEL: The guiding principle for this
shall be to strike a balance between efficiency consideration and maximum coverage of
farmers. Bulkline cost comprising 75% of farmers [(50+100)/2] shall be used to arrive at
Comprehensive Cost.
At the State Level:
(a)All the above shall be applicable to the State Level Cost Estimations too. Averaging
of Cost at the State Level shall be based on Bulkline Average from different agro-ecological
regions within the State;
(b)GRMSP Bonus shall be based on ensuring that at least 50% of the State level
average comprehensive cost of production is covered, in addition to any other policy
incentives that the State Commission may provide.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
1. More than 55 per cent of India's population is principally dependent on agriculture
of their livelihood, and the past two decads, since 1995, have recorded more than 300,000
farmers' suicides. Government of India's data shows 12,602 farmers killd themselves in 2015
along, mostly owing to economic distress. Indebtedness was responsible for 38.7 per cent of
suicides, while crop failure or the inability to sell produce lead to another 19.5 per cent of
suicides. More than 43 per cent of farmers who killed themselves in 2015 had small holdings.
2. Data reveals that very often, even the cost of production is not recovered by
farmers in realized prices, whereas the farm family has living expenses being investments in
farming. At present, the Commission on Agricultural Costs and Prices, for determing the
Minimum Support Price (MSP), considers (1) Demand and supply; (2) Cost of Production;
(3) Price trends in the market, both domestic and international; (4) Inter-crop price parity;
(5) terms of trade between agriculture and non-agriculture; (6) Likely implication of MSP on
consumers of that product. Using these various parameters, MSP is often fixed even below
the cost of production, ignoring the Right to Life and Livelihood of the producer.
3. Meanwhile, the food prices for consumers, especially those who are poor, have
been secured at affordable rates through at least two legislation in the country—Food
Security Act 2013 and Essential Commodities Act 1955. Therefore, there is every reason for
price determination of farmers to take the sole mandate of securing adequate net returns to a
farmer, over and above the comprehensive cost of production, rather than considering other
parameters.
4. In view of the above, to uphold the Right to Life and Livelihood of farmers, which
is their fundamental right, it is proposed to constitute National and State Farmers Agricultural
Costs and Remunerative Price Guarantee Commissions which shall be autonomous body
corporates, which shall, once appointed, not be under the control of the Central or State
Governments and their determination of the comprehensive cost of production of the
agriculture produce plus at least 50 per cent profit margin as a Guaranteed Remunerative
Minimum Support Prices of each and every agricultural commodity shall be final.
5. To confer such a right to Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices for sale
of all agricultural commodities of all farmers, it is found expedient to regulate the prices
offered by traders, and to lay down rules for public authorities for accountable functioning.
6. For such a right to be actualized for all farmers Central and State Government are to
be obligated to ensure purchase/procurement at or above GRMSP.
7. Further, input costs should be regulated, and overall cost of cultivation to be brought
down by large scale establishment of sustainable agriculture.
8. The Central Government takes decisions related to export and import of agricultural
commodities keeping in view various factors. It is proposed that before taking such decisions,
the Government should consult the Commission, and also take steps to ensure that the
landing price of any imported commodity is not below the Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum
Support Prices fixed for that commodity within India at that point of time.
9. It is felt that the right to Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices which
includes at least 50 per cent profit margin over the comprehensive cost of production will
boost the morale of the farmer, who would be able to live comfortably, invest in her/his
agricultural enterprise thereby potentially increasing productivity and production to ensure
national food security and sovereignty, and would be albe to avoid falling into a debt trap.
Hence this Bill.
K.K. RAGESH
16

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Section 4 of the Bill inter alia provides for instituting robust, accurate systems for
cost estimations to be instituted for all agricultural commodities on a timely basis.
Section 8 and 9 provides for constitution of the Central Farmers' Agricultural Costs
and Remunerative Price Guarantee Commission and ensuing expenditure.
Section 18 provides for opening adequate number of procurement centres for all
commodities.
Section 19 provides for formulation by Central Government timely and effective market
intervention by State Governments.
Section 21 provides for taking up various measures such as setting up of storage
facilities, agro-processing facilities etc. to prevent distress sales.
Section 22 provides for investing on Farmer Producer Organisations and provide them
with a tax-free atmosphere.
Section 29 provides for adequate funds by the Central Government for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
However, it is not possible at this stage as to the exact amount which is likely to be incurred
towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the purpose.
17

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Section 33 of the BIll emprowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
18

MGIPMRND—911RS(S3)—23-07-2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to confer right on all farmers to obtain Guaranteed Remunerative Minimum Support Prices
with minimum fifty per cent profit margin over comprehensive cost of production, upon
sale of agricultural commodities and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  K.K. Ragesh,  M.P .)