4
Bill No. XXII-F of 2010
 
THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJYA SABHA ON 3RD MAY, 2012
LOK SABHA ON 30TH AUGUST, 2012)
ASSENTED TO
ON 11TH SEPTEMBER, 2012
ACT NO. 36 OF 2012

1
THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to amend the Chemical Weapons Convention Act, 2000.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as  follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Chemical Weapons Convention (Amendment)
Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  XXII-F of  2010

2
2. In the Chemical Weapons Convention Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 9, in sub-section (1),—
(a) after the words “National Authority”, the words “or of the Central
Government” shall be inserted;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that such officers shall fulfil the prescribed criteria.”.
3. For section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"16. No person shall transfer to,  or receive from,  a State which is not a party  to
the Convention or any person who is not a citizen of a State Party, any Toxic Chemical
or Precursor listed in Schedule 2 in the  Annex on Chemicals to the Convention.".
4. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), in the opening portion, for the words "Every person who
is", the words "Subject to such exemptions and thresholds as may be prescribed,
every person who is" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), in the opening portion, for the words "No person,  who
after the commencement of this Act", the words "Subject to such exemptions and
thresholds as may be prescribed, no person, who after the coming into force of this
section" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (4), after the words "a certificate of registration", the words
"subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed'' shall be inserted;
(d) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(6) Every person, to whom a certificate of registration is granted under
sub-section (4), shall furnish to the Central Government periodically, or, as and
when required, such information, declaration or return as may be prescribed.''.
5. In section 42 of the principal Act, for the words "any  person", the words "a State
which is not a State Party or any person" shall be substituted.
6. In section 56 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ba) the criteria which the officers are required to fulfil under sub-section
(1) of section 9”;
(b) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(c) the exemptions and  thresholds  under sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of
section 18, the form of application, the particulars to be contained in the
application form, the form of certificate of registration, the manner of making
application, the amount of fee payable, the procedure to be followed in granting
or cancelling certificate of registration under sub-section (3) of section 18, the
terms and conditions for granting a certificate of registration under sub-section (4)
of section 18, the period for which a renewed certificate of registration may be
issued and the amount of fee payable therefor under sub-section (5) of section
18 and information, declaration or return to be furnished under sub-section (6)
of that section;''.
Amendment
of section 9.
Substitution of
new section
for section
16.
Restriction on
transfer of
Toxic
Chemical or
Precursor
listed in
Schedule 2.
Amendment
of section 18.
34 of 2000.
Amendment
of   section
42.
Amendment
of section 56.

GMGIPMRND—2939LS(S3)—19-09-2012.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Chemical Weapons Convention Act, 2000.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)