Asy
INT
PRODUCED INT R, ;
ERASYA Say
SABHA

13 SEP ४७%

Bill No. XXXIf of 1996

THE CHILDREN BORN OF PROSTITUTES, WOMEN JAIL INMATES AND MENTALL
‘ARDED WOMEN (UPBRINGING AND WELFARE) BILL, 1996 .

ILL OR REY:
A
BILL ’
maintenance and upbringing of children born of prostitutes
led women by the Central and State

to provide for the custody,
women jail inmates and
Governments and for matters conne:

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-seven!

mentally ill or retard
cted therewith and incidental thereto.

th year of the Republic of India as

follows:— |
1. (1) This Act may be called the Children Born of Prostitutes, Women Jail Inmates Sto tte
en (Upbringing and Welfare) Acts 1996. रु

and Mentally ill or Retarded Wom!
Definitions.

3 (2) Itextends to the whole of India.
xt otherwise requires: —

ment” means in the case 0
Central Governments
. » chall
uprostitution shal! |
ee (Prevention) Act.

“prostitute” a” 7
Immoral raffic

the Government

2. In this Act unless the conte:
fa State.

(व) “appropriate Govern
of that State and in other cases. the

1986, 10  (b) “brothel”,
respectively assigned to them in

6 the meanings ,
1956:


2 है 4

(c) “child” means a boy or girl who has not attained the age Of te, |
n

(वी “Fit Institution” means any institution not being a police Stati 8;
found fit by the appropriate Government to receive and take care of a chil 0 OF jit
to its care and protection on the terms and conditions specified by that a en Sted
Government, हु 70०४६

(९) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act: 5

() “Special Home” means and institution established or Cettified
appropriate Government under section 4; 1 010) the

(g) “woman jail inmate” means any woman undergoing jai
fi a j g 8 jail term for tore
than five years.

a)
Appropriate

3. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being ;
Government “ force, the appropriate Government shall take custody of every child who is born हि कि
फल एज accompanying a prostitute in a brothel, woman jail inmate or mentally ill or retarded
prostitutes, Women whether admitted as an indoor patient in a mental hospital or not in such Manner

women jail in- as.may be prescribed. 5
mates and men-

tally retarded (2) Every child taken custody of by the appropriate Government under sub-section
women. (J) shall be sent to the Special Homes established under sub-section (/) of section 4 by
such Government in such manner as may be prescribed.

Establishment of 4. (1) The appropriate Government shall established and maintain as many

Special Homes Special Homes as may be necessary for the reception of children taken custoday of by 2

and recognition ; .
of Fit Institu- it under section 3.

tions.

(2) Where the appropriate Government is of the opinion that any Non Governmental
Institution maintained by a Non Governmental organisation is fit for the reception of the
children to be sent there under this Act, it may certify such institution as a Fit Institution
for the purposes of this Act.

(3) Every Special Home to which a child is sent under this Act shall not only
provide the child with accommodation, maintenance and facilities for education,
vocational training and rehabilitation, but also provide him with facilities for the
development of his character and abilities and such other functions as may be
prescribed to ensure all round growth and devetopment of his personality. *

(4) The appropriate Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the
management of the Special Homes and Fit Institutions of the NGO's, including the standards
and the nature of services to be maintained by them and the circumstances under W ad
and the manner in which the certification of a Fit Institution of the NGOs may be grant s
or withdrawn. हु

(5) The rules made under sub-section (4) may also pravide for the classification
separation of children on the basis of age and atmosphere prevalent in their ५३४०
their reception in the Special Home,

Penalty for cru- 5, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time sero
eltytochildtga. whoever, having actual charge of or control over a child governed by the Lane (0 caus?
‘Act assaults, abandons, exposes or wilfully neglects the child in a manner lik las ment
such child unnecessary mental o physical suffering shail be punishable with ime so wit
which shall not be less than one year .but which may extend 10 three years
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, - है

in force.
infor

Penalty for em- 6. Whoever employees or uses say child governed by the provisions 0... 018
हे ] ७७ punisha

ployment of the purposes of begging of causes any such child to beg shall be P' ait iso

ee imprisonment which shall net be 1058 thaa two years but may extend to five ¥

with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees:


3

हि whoever exploits any child governed by the provisions of this Act shall be
jshable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with
pon

fine- 6
8. (0) The Central Government shall create a Welfare Fund under such names

ao think fit for the welfare and rehabilitation of the children under this Act
gs i rovide initial funds of rupees fifty crores to the Funds after the appropriation
and) फ Parliament by law in this behalf and thereafter the Central and State

le हि 5
moo ernmentS shall contribute to the Fund in such proportion and in such manner as

may be prescribed.
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund such voluntary donations, contributions or
gubscriptions as may be made by any individual or organisation.

(3) The Fund constituted under sub-section (/) shall be administered in such manner
and for such purposes as may be prescribed.

9, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules

5 for carrying out the purposes of this Act,

j
1
i
1
i

Penalty for
exploitation of
children.

Constitution of
a Welfare Fund.

Power to make
tules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There are thousands of prostitutes in the flesh trade in almost all the Parts of the
country earning their livelihood through this immoral way. Though Prostitution is not
permitted under the law, this profession is going on unhindered not only in our country but
throughout the world. Despite the best eff 005 of the prostitutes, thousands of hapless Children
are born to them, These unfortunate children are forced by circumstances to live in the
inhuman surroundings of brothels and they become its part and parcel where the boy
ultimately becomes a pimp and the hapless git] a prostitute and the cycle goes on,

Similarly children are also born to women Jail inmates or at the time of their Sentence
they already have children in their laps. Such children of women jail inmates are also
forced by the circumstances to live alongwith their imprisoned mothers and are brought
up in the jails where they have to live amongst the criminals and antisocial elements, As
such the circumstances turn the innocent children towards crime and deprive them of
becoming a good citizen.

Another horrible place for the toddlers is the mental hospital. Many a times children
are born to mentally ill women undergoing treatment in a mental hospital. Such hapless
children too are forced to languish with their mothers in the mental hospitals. Similarly
mentally retarded women are also forced into motherhood by some beasts to satisfy their
lust.

The children are the future citizens of the country and to make them good citizens
they must grow in a good atmosphere. Our State being a welfare State, it is the duty of the
Union and State Governments to take care of the hapless children born to Prostitutes, jail
inmates and mentally ill and mentally retarded women who become the victim of somebody’s
lust or of circumstances so that their upbringing is ensured in a good atmosphere and their
future becomes safe. Hence it is proposed that the Government should take care of such
hapless children and open Special Homes for their upbringing where all facilities should
be provided to them to fulfil its welfare obligations towards these future citizens of the
country.

Hence this Bill.
SAROJ KHAPARDE


FINANC
‘TAL ME)
MORAN
DUM

Clause 4of the Bill
4 : provide
f Special es f $ that the g
on of a रन he the purpo: 10 appropriate (1
हलक elfare Fund by the ite of this Bill aidan shall
crore 5 central G se eran
enditure ra to the Fund, een jovernment नकल Bil provi a
n of rupees 1 110 Consolidat an t which shall provides for the
$ one hundred ९ ated Fund of and brought i ade
rores per ann India. It is e into operation tal
init a8 Fee $ estimated » will
s recurring ex that it
penditur may
€.

number 0
constituti
gum of Ul
involve ०५)
involve 8 sul
Asum of rupecs two l
५ 10101९00 ८
0 crores may also involve
as non recurrin
g expenditure


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for ८;

हि A हि भा
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only, ying

The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

TO PROVIDE FOR THE CUSTODY, MAINTENANCE AND UPBRINGING OF
CHILDREN BORN OF PROSTITUTES, WOMEN JAIL INMATES AND
MENTALLY ILL OR RETARDED WOMEN BY THE CENTRAL AND STATE
GOVERNMENTS AND FOR MATTERS CONNECTED THEREWITH AND
INCIDENTAL THERETO.

(Miss Saroj Khaparde, M.P)