Bill No. XXIII of  2022
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE RESERV ATION IN EMPLOYMENT IN DISINVESTED PUBLIC
SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to prevent the loss of job opportunities of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Backward Communities due to disinvestment of Public Sector Undertakings and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto .
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation in Employment in Disinvested  Public
Sector Undertakings  Act, 2022;
(2) It extends to the whole of India; and
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) "appropriate Government" means—
(i) in the case of a State, the Government of that State;
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST  APRIL, 2022
Definitions.
5
10

2
(ii) in the case of an Union Territory having its own legislature, the
Government of that Union Territory; and
(iii) in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "disinvested company" means a PSU of which more than fifty percent of
shares has been sold to private players as part of strategic disinvestment or sale of
shares;
(c) "disinvestment" means selling of shares of a PSU to non-governmental
organization or private companies or individuals etc. or privatizing the company; and
(d) "PSU" means a Public Sector Undertaking.
3. (1) The prevailing or pre-existing pattern of reservation in employment in a
PSU which is under disinvestment or is already disinvested shall be continued.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure the implementation of reservation
in employment in a disinvested PSU, as provided under sub-section (1).
(3) The appropriate Government shall make an agreement with the concerned
company management at the time of disinvestment of a PSU to fulfill the reservation in
employment as provided under sub-section (2).
Reservation
in
employment
in disinvested
PSU.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Communities are socially,
educationally and economically backward. The job reservation prevailing in Government
service and Public Sector Undertakings are the only assured job opportunities for these
sections. Reservation is not  implemented in Private Sector. When a Public Sector Undertaking
is disinvested, it needs to be ensured that reservation is continued as reservation in
employment has a major role in maintaining social justice.
Hence, this Bill.
K.  SOMAPRASAD
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent the loss of job opportunities of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Backward Communities due to disinvestment of Public Sector Undertakings
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri K. Somaprasad, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—54RS(S3)—04-04-2022.