THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 75 of the Constitution:—
(i) after clause (1B), the following clause shall be inserted, namely,—
“(1C) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party
against whom a petition for disqualification under the Tenth Schedule is pending
before the Competent Authority shall not be eligible to be included in the Council of
Ministers till the disqualification petition is set aside by the Competent Authority:
Provided that if a disqualification petition under the Tenth Schedule is filed
against a member of the Council of Ministers belonging to any political party, the
competent Authority under the Tenth Schedule shall take its decision within one
hundred and eighty days from date of filing such petition."
Short Title
and com-
mencement
Amendment
of article 75.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
ON THE  4TH AUGUST, 2017
Bill No.  XXIII  of 2017
5
10
15

2
(ii) after clause (4) the following clause shall be inserted namely,—
"(4A) A member of the either House of Parliament belonging to a political party
other than the political party to which the Prime Minister belongs shall submit a written
consent from the head of the Polical party to which he or she belongs for his or her
inclusion in the Council of Ministers to the President before taking oath of office and
of secrecy according to forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule."
3. In article 164 of the Constitution,—
(i) after clause (1B), the following clause shall be inserted namely,—
(1C) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State of either House of the
Legislature of a State having Legislative Council belonging to any political party
against whom a petition for disqualification under the Tenth Schedule is pending
before the Competent Authority shall not be eligible to be included in the Council of
Ministers till the disqualification petition is set aside by the Competent Authority:
Provided that if a disqualification petition under the Tenth Schedule is filed
against a member of the Council of Ministers belonging to any political party, the
competent authority under the Tenth Scheule  shall take its decision within one hundred
and eighty days from date of filing such petition.
(ii)  after clause (3) of the Constitution, the following clause shall be inserted namely,—
(3A) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of the
Legislature of a State having Legislative Council belonging to a political party other
than the political party to which the Chief Minister belongs shall submit a written
consent from the head of the Political Party to which he or she belongs for his or her
inclusion in the Council of Ministers to the Governor before taking oaths of office and
of secrecy according to forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
Amendment
of article
164.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In a democratic country, the political parties are the integral part. The political  parties
before the independence had formed with a firm ideology and strong basic  principle and any
action of any member in the party deviating from its basic principle is considered as anti-
party activity. However, over the period the political parties have given go bye to their basic
ideology and started changing the principles of the party over the particular issues. Differing
from other parties over the basic ideology is not seen in the activities of political parties
today and they are ready to mingle with other political parties having exactly opposite
ideology, based on issues and circumstances.
In the changing scenario, the members of political parties also changing loyalities
over the night and venturing into other political parties particularly in ruling for their personal
prospects. The parties in power also concentrating to achieve success by weakening the
opposition parties by attracting leaders and cadres from other parties  rather than strengthening
their own party by doing good to the people.
Though the Constitution was amended to curb this political evil of defection by
introducing Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, the new practice to keep pending the
disqualification petitions on the grounds of defection by the Chairman or Speaker for years
together is undesirable . During the pendency of these disqualification petitions, the defected
members are being offered remunerative political posts including post of a Minister apart
from Government contracts.
This Bill seeks to further amend Constitution to prohibit these defectors to enter into
the Ministerial berths. Further this Bill also seeks to insist a consent letter from the head of
the party to include its party's legislator into Cabinet to ensure member's loyalty to the party
during coalition Governments. Further, any legislator of party after joining the cabinet
ventures to anti-party activities, the party can file a disqualification petition before the
competent authority for his disqualification, which the competent authority has to decide in
one-hundred and eighty days.
Hence this Bill.
Dr.  K.V. P .  RAMACHANDRA RAO
3

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
—————
(Dr. K.V.P . Ramachandra Rao, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1769RS(S)—04-08-2017.