THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING OF GIRL CHILD FOR
COMMERCIAL PURPOSES BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of trafficking of girl child for commercial purposes by forcing
her into flesh trade through various means and making her available for hiring or for
taking possession by her client for promiscuous sexual acts in the garb of adventurous
tourism or otherwise and for providing deterrent punishment including capital
punishment for such commercialization and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Trafficking of Girl Child for Commercial
Purposes Act, 2011.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XXII of  2011
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "commercial trafficking of girl child" includes pushing or forcing the girl child
into prostitution in order to earn money therefrom or using the girl child for any
unlawful or immoral purpose or procuring or supplying the girl child for such purpose
by charging or earning money or hiring or obtaining possession of a girl child for
promiscuous sexual purposes by any person including foreign tourists;
(c) "Girl child" means a female human being who is below the age of eighteen
years;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
commercial trafficking of girl child in any manner or purposes whatsoever, is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
whoever,—
(a) abets or induces, by any means including emotional blackmail, a girl child to
have sexual intercourse or unnatural sex with any person including foreign tourist in
return for money notwithstanding the family relation of such girl child with the accused
or under any prevailing custom shall be punished with rigorous impresonment for life
and also with fine which may extend to rupees two lakh;
(b) forces or pushes, by using any coercive or cruel means, any girl child into
prostitution or for unnatural sexual acts for earning money or otherwise shall be
punished with death;
(c) acts as a agent in commercial trafficking of girl child shall be punished with
imprisonment which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to life
imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh;
(d) lures, procures or kidnaps any girl child for commercial trafficking of such girl
child shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than ten years but may extend to life imprisonment and also with a fine which may
extend to rupees five lakh;
(e) owns or runs a brothel or uses any house, premises or hotel to keep a girl
child as prostitute or sex worker, such owner or manager by whatever name known
shall be punished with life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to rupees
five lakh;
(f) hires, procures or obtains possession of a girl child for promiscuous sexual
intercourse or indulge in unnatural sexual acts with her shall be punishable,
notwithstanding the foreign citizenship of the accused, with life imprisonment and
also with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh;
(g) dedicates a girl child as Devdasi  or Bhavin or by whatever name called, who
ultimately ends up in prostitution, notwithstanding that accused is a natural guardian
of the girl child or related to her in any manner shall be punished with imprisonment
which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten years and also with a fine
which may be extended to rupees two lakh.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of
commencement of this Act, formulate a national policy for the rescue, rehabilitation and
welfare measures for the girl child covered under this Act for being uniformally implemented
throughout the country.
Prohibition of
commercial
trafficking of
girl child.
45 of 1860.
104 of 1956.
Penalties.
Rescue,
Rehabilitation
and Welfare
measures.
5
10
1515
20
30
25
15
35
40
45

3
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the measures
referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) rescue of the girl child forced into commercial trafficking through the
local police by making it mandatory for the police to raid the brothels and such other
places within its territorial jurisdiction where the girl child is kept or has reasonable
grounds for believing that girl child is kept therein;
(b) taking custody of the rescued girl child and as far as practicable reunite
her with her family and in case she is homeless or without natural guardians provide
her board, lodging and other facilities in children home established by the appropriate
Government for the purpose;
(c) welfare measures like free medical care, education including vocational
technical and medical education and training wherever required;
(d) provision of employment in public employment through reservation and
other means;
(e) marrying the girl child when she becomes major and costs for which to be
borne by the appropriate Government;
(f) such other measures as may be deemed necessary for the welfare and
rehabilitation of the girl child covered under this Act.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
7. (1) The Offences under this Act shall be tried by the Fast Track Courts to ensure
expeditious trial of such offences.
(2) The trial shall be held in camera on daily basis till the case is decided and
judgement delivered.
(3) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Fast Track Courts
within its territorial jurisdiction as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for the establishment and running of Fast Track
Courts, Children Homes and for other purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non- bailable.
Offences to be
tried by Fast
Track Courts.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
2 of 1974.

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our country there was a time when girl child used to be worshipped as deity and this
ritual still persists in some parts particularly during Navratras. But the fact remain that the
girl child is most unwanted in our country to-day. Most families and married couples do not
want a daughter in the family and indulge in rampant sex determination tests and female
foeticides in the country resulting in huge gap in the sex ratio in most parts of the country
which is a major cause of concern. However, in case a girl child is born, she is neglected and
treated shabbily. The girl child of poor families  in a new phenomena are being pushed into
flesh trade for commercial gains and their trafficking is going on a very large scale in the name
of adventure tourism particularly in places of tourism importance in the country. Since, the
girl child prostitute fetch more money than the women prostitutes from the prospective
clients more and more adolescent girls are being forced into this centuries old profession by
the professional pimps, anti-social elements, organized criminal gangs, underworld dons,
brothel keepers, hoteliers, tour operators and in many cases even by their natural guardians
and near and dear ones. There are some tribes who traditionally subsist on prostitution and
they push their girls in this profession at their tender age. In other cases, the girls are
generally lured on the promise of a decent and luxurious life and then forced into trafficking.
Thousands of minor and adolescent girls go missing from various parts of the country every
year and most of them remain untraced. In fact these unfortunate girls are kidnapped for
prostitution for commercial gains. It has also been noticed that pimps become active when
the areas, mostly in villages and remote areas, are affected by natural calamities to lure the
poverty stricken girl child into their net for using them for commercial trafficking. Since the
earning in this trade is very high, the girls are even imported from our neighbouring countries
like Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, etc. for commercial trafficking by the gangs having
international connections. This commercialization is gaining momentum because adventure
tourism is also becoming popular throughout the globe and tourists do indulge in sex tourism
for which they spend large amount of money and the locals are always ready to provide them
with minor girls. Of course, we can not and should not blame all the tourists but it is happenings
in many parts of the country. Similarly, in some parts of our country, young girls are dedicated
to temples as Devdasi or Bhavin and then forced into flesh trade. Now the lives of these
innocent girls have been endangered due to spread of deadly AIDS and other sexually
transmitted diseases. In a welfare State  like ours, it has become necessary to stop this
trafficking of girl child for commercial purposes by the State by providing deterrent
punishment to the offenders including capital punishment so as to save the innocent girl
child from the clutches of cunning traffickers and also from AIDS and other sexually transmitted
diseases. The State has also to undertake their proper rehabilitation and welfare.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. AKHILESH DAS GUPTA
S3\E\BILL2011\RS\508RS

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for rehabilitation and other welfare measures for the girl
child who is rescued from prostitution. Clause 7 provides of the establishment of Fast Track
Courts for trying the offences. Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide funds for the establishment and running of Fast Track Courts, Children Homes, etc.
The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a sum of rupees ten thousand Crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty thousand Crore may also involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is  of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—958RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of trafficking of girl child for commercial purposes by forcing
her into flesh trade through various means and making her available for hiring or for
taking possession by her client for promiscuous sexual acts in the garb of adventurous
tourism or otherwise and for providing deterrent punishment including capital
punishment for such commercialization and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)