THE COMPULSORY MEDICAL TREATMENT IN EMERGENCY
CONDITION AND TO WOMEN IN LABOUR BY PRIVATE
HOSPITALS AND MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory medical treatment in emergency medical condition and to women
in labour by private hospitals and medical practitioners and matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Medical Treatment in Emergency
Condition and to Women in Labour by Private Hospital and Medical Practitioners Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill  No.  XXIII of  2008
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH FEBRUARY, 2009

2
(b) "emergency medical condition" means a state of severe pain or suffering in
which absence of medical treatment may cause serious injury to the body of a person
or death of the person or the newborn child in case of a woman in labour;
(c) "emergency medical treatment" means the appropriate action that is required
to be taken after examination of the person to stabilise his/her condition;
(d) "medical practitioner" means any person holding medical qualification
recognized under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and enrolled as such by the
appropriate authority;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "private hospital" includes private nursing homes, medical institutions and
clinics being run by a medical practitioner or a group of medical practitioners or a trust
or society.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of every private hospital and every medical practitioner to
immediately provide emergency medical treatment to any person in an emergency condition
or any woman in labour whenever such persons have come to or brought to the private
hospital or medical practitioner.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that no private hospital or medical
practitioner refuses to provide emergency medical treatment to any person in emergency
medical condition or a woman in labour by issuing appropriate directions in this regard.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of every private hospital and every medical practitioner to
immediately conduct an initial examination of the person in emergency medical condition or
the woman in labour and make all the efforts to stabilise the condition whenever any person
in emergency medical condition or women in labour have come or have been brought to such
hospital or medical practitioner.
(2) The private hospital or the medical practitioners shall not transfer the person, if
facilities for stabilization of the condition are available, till the time the condition of the
person is stabilized, unless the risk of transfer is taken by the person himself.
5. If the private hospital or medical practitioner does not have the facilities to stabilize
the condition of a person in emergency medical condition or woman in labour or does not
have facilities to provide treatment, the person shall be immediately transferred to the nearest
hospital or medical practitioner having such facilities after taking due precaution and
consulting the private hospital to which the person is being transferred.
6. Every private hospital and medical practitioners shall keep a separate record of the
emergency medical treatment given to persons in emergency medical condition or a women
in labour in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, publish
a scheme for reimbursement of the expenditure incurred by any private hospital or medical
practitioner in providing emergency medical treatment.
(2) Every private hospital or the medical practitioner providing emergency medical
treatment to any person in emergency medical condition or woman in labour shall in such
form and in such manner as provided in the scheme under sub section (1) send the claim for
reimbursement of the expenditure incurred in this regard.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made in this behalf, provide
such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
9. Whoever, contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to
two years or with fine, which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
Compulsory
Medical aid to
persons in
emergency
condition.
Hospital and
private
practitioner to
conduct initial
examination
and to stabilise
condition.
Condition
under which
the patient
may be
transferred to
the nearest
hospital.
Hospital or
private
practitioner to
keep record.
Reimbursement
of expenses.
Central Govt.
to provide
fund.
Penalty.
102 of 1956

3
10. Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of
business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment, if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to medical treatment in
emergency condition and woman in labour.
13. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Offences by
Companies.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The medical care system in our country besides not being very effective is also not
widely spread. Coupled with this in effective medical care system, it is the indifferent attitude
of the private hospitals and medical practitioners towards the persons in emergency medical
condition and women in labour, which is causing death of many persons whose lives could
be saved. The private hospitals and medical practitioners just escape from their responsibility
to provide immediate medical care to persons in emergency medical condition or women in
labour mainly because of the fact that the persons would not be able to pay their dues. This
is against the ethics of the medical profession. The first hour of a person in emergeny
condition, be it due to accident or outburst of a disease is most crucial for his life and if
proper medical aids is provided to him in that hour, his chances of survival increases
tremendously. Similarly, many women and newly-born children die in our country for want of
proper medical aid at appropriate time. Many private hospitals and medical practitioners
receive a lot of  concessions from the Government, but when it comes to serving the society
in a little way they usually back track. In a welfare state like ours, it is the responsibility of the
Government to come forward to provide medical help for the person in emergency condition
and women in labour. There should be a responsibility cast upon the private hospitals and
medical practitioners to provide emergency medical treatment to the person in medical
emergency and women in labour. These hospitals and medical practitioners should not
refuse treatment in such cases and must attempt to stabilize the condition of the person
before transferring him to an appropriate hospital. In order to encourage these hospitals and
medical practitioners to help such persons, the Government should bear the cost of the
treatment given by them to the persons in emergency or women in labour.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
KALRAJ MISHRA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall frame a scheme for the
reimbursement of the expenditure incurred by any private hospital or medical practitioner in
providing medical treatment in emergency condition or women in labour. Under this scheme,
the Central Government shall reimburse the aforesaid amount. Clause 8 provides that the
Central Government shall provide fund for the purpose of the Bill. It is estimated that a sum
of rupees hundred crore would be involved as annual recurring expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of normal character.
6

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory medical treatment in emergency medical condition and
to women in labour by private hospitals and medical practitioners and matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—660RS(S5)—13-02-2009.