THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 348 of the Constitution, for clause (2), the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
''(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the Governor of a State
may, after prior intimation to the President, authorize the use of the Hindi Language, or
any other language used for any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the
High Court having its principal seat in that State''.
Bill No. XXIII of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015
Short title, and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of article 348.5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our Father of Nation, Mahatma Gandhiji, was quoted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
that the baby takes its first lesson from its mother. It may be a sin against the motherland to
inflict upon her children a tongue other than their mother's for their mental development. It is
highly deplorable that no concrete steps have been taken in this regard till date.
Due to rising literacy level among common people and enhanced influence of electronic
and print media on the society, the participation on people in various judicial proceedings
has been rising very sharply now-a-days. Generally, people in states are not much conversant
and comfortable with English language. Allowing use of regional language under provisions
of article 348(2) of Constitution in various High Courts of concerned States may be helpful to
the Society to play greater role in our independent judicial system. For the aforesaid purpose,
article 348 (2) is required to be amended suitably for enabling the use of regional languages
in High Courts of concerned states.
Hence, this Bill.
MANSUKH  L.  MANDAVIYA
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
348. (1) * * * * *
''(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the Governor of a State
may, with previous consent of the President, authorize the use of the Hindi Language,
or any other language used for any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the
High Court having its principal seat in that State''.
Provided that nothing in this caluse shall apply to any judgement, decree or order
passed or made by such High Court
* * * * *
3
Language to
be used in the
Supreme
Court and in
the High
Courts and
for Acts,
Bills, etc.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3364RS(S3)—07-12-2015.