1
Short title and
commencement.
THE SUPREME COURT (ESTABLISHMENT OF A PERMANENT
BENCH AT NAGPUR) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at Nagpur.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court (Establishment of a Permanent Bench
at Nagpur) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be established a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at Nagpur with
such number of judges of Supreme Court as the Chief Justice may with the approval of
President decide, to exercise jurisdiction in respect of cases arising in the states of Kerala,
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Goa and Maharashtra and the Union Territories of Puducherry, Dadra and
Nagar Haveli,  Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands and such other territory as
may be notified by the Central Government with the approval of the Chief Justice:
Provided that the number of judges at the bench at Nagpur shall not be less than nine.
Establishment
of a
Permanent
Bench of
Supreme
Court at
Nagpur.
Bill No.  XXII  of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH NOVEMBER, 2014
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the seventh largest country in the world in terms of area. It is the second most
populated country next to China. However, there is only one bench of the Supreme Court to
decide cases arising in whole of the country. Article 130 of the Constitution says that the
Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places as the Chief Justice of India
may with the approval of the President from time to time appoint. The language of the article
clearly indicates that there was an intention of the founding fathers of the Constitution to
have more than one seat of the Supreme Court. But so far no thought has been given to the
idea of having another bench of the apex court despite the fact that the population of the
country which was around 35 crore at the time of independence has now swollen to over
120 crore and there is proportionate increase in the cases in the Supreme Court. Litigant
public has to travel thousands of kilometres to follow up their cases in the Supreme Court
which is seated in Delhi. This not only adds to their financial burden but also results in
wastage of a lot of time in travelling and staying in Delhi. The litigants in southern and
central part of the country find it inconvenient and expensive. Therefore, its high time that a
bench of the Supreme Court be established for the convenience of the public at large for
which Nagpur is the most appropriate place.
Geographically, Nagpur is the most ideal place for setting up the bench of the apex
court as it is almost at the centre of the country. A bench of the Supreme Court at Nagpur will
provide a big relief to the litigant public of southern as well as the central part of the country
and will provide them convenient and affordable justice.
Hence this Bill.
VIJAY JAWAHARLAL DARDA
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be a permanent bench of the Supreme
Court at Nagpur. The Bill, if enacted, will involved recurring expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India to the tune of rupees two crore per annum.
However, a non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore is also likely to
be involved.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at Nagpur
————
(Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, MP)
GMGIPMRND—3058RS(S3)—28-11-2014.