THE  ATROCITIES AGAINST WOMEN (PREVENTION, SPECIAL
COURTS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of atrocities against women and girls which are perpetrated
in many forms such as sexual harassment, torture, molestation, rape, teasing, stripping,
beating, branding as witch, etc. by establishing special courts to expedite the trial
process and for the rehabilitation and other measures for the women victims of such
atrocities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Atrocities Against Women (Prevention, Special
Courts and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No. XXIV of 2007
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 27TH APRIL, 2007

2
Definitions. 2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
 (a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
 (b) “atrocity” includes any offence committed against a woman such as rape,
assault, torture, molestation, teasing, striping, beating, branding as witch, forcing into
prostitution or such other offence against the women and girls which is punishable
under the Indian Penal Code;
 (c) “employer” means any person who employs women workers directly or
through any contractor and who has the control on the affairs of the establishment
which may be under the control of any Government, local body or private body or
individual by whatever name called;
 (d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
 (e) “sexual harassment at work place” includes,—
(i) harassing any woman employee by paying less wages, detaining her
before or after normal working hours without work or in the absence of other
employees, refusing to grant leave, passing lewd or obscene remarks, forcing to
attend office on holidays, compelling to attend a party or dance, refusing to
allow rest, compelling to perform such duties which she is not able to perform
with her physical condition or doing an act by using position as an employer
with an intention to exploit the women employee;
 (ii) fondling or touching the female employee in the guise of teaching her
or helping her in doing her work;
 (iii) showing gestures or actions either by words or by written material to
solicit sexual favour from the woman employee;
 (iv) showing pornographic material or obscene literature to the woman
employee;
 (v) offering unwanted suggestions or advise about physical appearances
of the woman employee with a view to hurt her;
 (vi) seeking sexual favour from the woman employee;
 (vii) misusing position to sexually exploit the woman employee.
(f) “work place” includes an office of the appropriate Government local body, a
mine, plantation, agricultural field, hospital, nursing home, shop or business
establishment brick kiln, construction site, banking establishments, educational
institutions including universities, colleges, schools, etc., any private office or house,
entertainment establishments and such other places where woman is employed for
any work for remuneration.
3. ( 1) Committing of atrocities against women and sexual harassment of women
employees at their work place is hereby prohibited.
 (2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be guilty of an
offence under this Act.
4.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, whoever,—
(a) commits atrocity against any woman or girl shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than seven years but in view of the gravity of the
offence it may extend to life imprisonment or with death, as the case may be;
Prohibition
of atrocities
against
women and
sexual
harassment
of women
employees at
their work
place.
Penalty. 45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section the grave offences include
rape, gang rape, rape with a pregnant woman, forcing into prostitution and brutal
killing of a woman.
(b) commits the offence of sexual harassment of woman employee in any
establishment or work place shall be,—
(i) dismissed from service if the culprit is employed in Government or
Semi-Government, local body or Government funded establishment as the case
may be; and
(ii) punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years but may extend to ten years and also with a fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of special courts
preferably headed by women judges to deal exclusively with the provisions of this Act, as it
may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 (2) The Special Courts under sub-section (1) shall be established in consultation
with the Chief Justice of the concerned High Courts of the States.
 (3) Every Special Court established under this Act shall exercise all the jurisdiction
powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all courts except the
concerned High Court and Supreme Court in relation to all matters of offences or atrocities
committed against women under the Indian Penal Code, or any other law for the time being
in force relation to women.
(4)  From the date of commencement of this Act, the Jurisdiction, powers and authority
in relation to offences committed under this Act shall be exercisable by a special court
established under this Act and no other court except the High Court concerned and the
Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to such offences.
(5) Every suit or other proceeding pending before any other Court, Tribunal or Au-
thority immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, being a suit or proceeding
the cause of action wherein it is  based is such that if it had arisen after such Constitution
of the Special Court within its jurisdiction, shall stand transferred on that date to such
Special Court:
 Provided that nothing contained in this Section shall apply to a suit or other
proceedings pending in a High Court or the Supreme Court, as the case may be.
6. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) Make arrangements for free legal aid to women so as to enable them to meet
the cost of litigation in special courts;
(b) initiate rehabilitation measures for the women victims covered under this
Act;
(c) implement such welfare measures for the women covered under this Act as
it may deem expedient and necessary.
7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force in relation to women and girls.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Establishment
of Special
Courts for
Women.
45 of 1860.
Welfare
measures.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nearly fifty per cent of the population of our country constitutes women and girls
though the latest census of 2001 has revealed a stunning fact of declining ratio of girls vis-
a-vis boys in the country. However, girls and women are vulnerable to various kinds of
exploitations and atrocities in the society. Such atrocities include day-to-day teasing and
molestation at public places; transport etc., passing vulgar remarks and whistling to them.
Another alarming trend is publicly stripping and parading naked in the streets particularly
the young girls and women of dalit and backward communities. In some parts of the country
there are incidents, where women are being branded as witches and killed. They are being
sexually exploited and raped. Even pregnant women are not spared. Many a time women and
girls are killed after committing rape on them to destroy the evidence or otherwise. Besides,
incident of gangrape and forcing women to prostitution are very common.
The number of working women is also increasing. At work place sometimes, women are
compelled to work in the most disadvantageous service conditions. They are sexually harassed
by their male colleagues, bosses, employers and others. Sexual favours are solicited on
various pretexts and many a time women employees are forced to accept the offer otherwise
they are fired or sacked. Unfortunately, cases of sexual harassment of women employees at
the work places do occur but more often these are not reported for fear of social ostracism,
family pressure or reprisal in the form of threats and discriminations.
Most of the cases of atrocities against women and girls, if at all registered, take a very
long time to decide. It has, therefore, become necessary that offences against women should
be tried by special courts preferably headed by women judges so that justice is delivered
very fast to the women victims.
Hence this Bill.
ALKA  BALRAM  KSHATRIYA
4
SERVER 5 \ BILL2007 \ RAJYA SABHA \ 1486RS

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Special Courts for women.
Clause 6 provides for the welfare measures. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of two thousands crore rupees may also involve.
5
SERVER 5 \ BILL2007 \ RAJYA SABHA \ 1486RS

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6
SERVER 5 \ BILL2007 \ RAJYA SABHA \ 1486RS

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of atrocities against women and girls which are perpetrated
in many forms such as sexual harassment, torture, molestation, rape, teasing, stripping,
beating, branding as witch, etc. by establishing special courts to expedite the trial
process and for the rehabilitation and other measures for the women
victims of such atrocities and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
—————
(Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya, M.P.)
MGIPMRND— 1772RS (S3)—27-04-2007.