10

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Butt No. XXIV or 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

A
BILL
farther to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall come into force at once:
2. In article 198 of the Constitution, —

(i in clause (2), for the words “and the Legislative Council shall within a period
of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative
Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative Assembly may thereupon
either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council.”
the words “the Legislative Council shall take up the Bill immediately after it is laid
on the Table of the Legislative Council and return the Bill to the Legisiative Assembly
with its recommendations” if any shall be substituted.

(ii) clauses (3), (4) and (5) shall be omitted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, the Legislative Council has no power whatsoever in respect of the Money
Bill, The Money Bill is introduced in the Legislative Assembly and is transmitted to the
Legislative Council for its recommendations as per the provision of article 168 of the
Constitution. Passing of Money Bill gets delayed in case it is rejected in the Legislative
Council. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the article 198 of the Constitution to facilitate
smooth passing of Money Bill. Hence this Bill.

K.C. KONDAIAH


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
198, (1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council.

(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State having
a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations
and the Legislative Council shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt
of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly with its recommendations, and the
Legislative Assembly may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations
of the Legislative Council.

(3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of the Legislative
Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the
amendments recommended by the Legislative Council and accepted by the Legislative
Assembly. पर

(4) If the Legislative Assembly does. not accept any of the recommendations of the
Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in
the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments
recommended by the Legislative Council.

(5) Ifa Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative
Council for its recommendations is not returned to the Legislative Assembly within the said
period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the
expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly.

Special proce-
dure in respect
of Money Bills.


RAJYA SABHA

BILL

further to amend thie Constitution of India

(Shri K, C. Kondaiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—81RS—10-04-2000.