THE ENDOSULFAN PESTICIDE (PROHIBITION)
BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to prohibit the use  of  endosulfan  pesticide  in  agricultural  activities  with  a  view to
preventing its  harmful  effects  on human  beings,  environment  and to provide
relief to persons affected by the harmful effects of endosulfan and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Endosulfan Pesticide (Prohibition) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States and
for different provisions of this Act.
2.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force.
3. In this Bill, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government.
(b) “BPL family” means the Below Poverty Line family as determined by the
Government of India.
(c) “Endosulfan” means the pesticide in use includes all its and alternative
pesticides having the same composition by a different name.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XXIV of  2011
Definitions.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
       5
     10
     15

2
(d) "Pesticide Inspector" means an Inspector appointed under section 7.
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(f) "Tribunal" means the tribunal constituted to adjudicate on matters referred to
it on endosulfan pesticide under section 6.
4. On and from such day as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf,—
(i) the use of endosulfan pesticide and its alternatives in agricultural and related
activities; and
(ii) the import of endosulfan and its alternatives from other countries.
shall be prohibited.
5. (1) Any person suffering from the adverse effects of endosulfan and his family, shall
be considered as a BPL family by the appropriate Government and shall be eligible to all the
compensation and benefits provided for the BPL families.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide financial assistance of rupees four
thousand per month to the family of any person affected by ill effects of endosulfan pesticide
and the family shall continue to receive financial assistance of rupees two thousand per
month for a period of another five years after the death of the affected person.
(3) All persons suffering due to the ill-effects of endosulfan shall be provided free
treatment and special health care in district level Government hospitals or Government hospital
or Government clinic nearest to their area of residence.
(4) The appropriate Government shall provide financial assistance of rupees two
thousand per month to the persons who assist and take care of the persons affected by
endosulfan pesticide.
(5) The Tribunal shall have the power to review the matters referred to it and shall
decide on the compensation and relief for the aggrieved persons and also the punishment for
violation of the provisions under this Act.
(6) The Tribunal shall also advise the Central Government and State Governments on
development of safer alternatives to existing endosulfan pesticide as per latest global research
and development.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Tribunal to deal with matters arising out of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of three members who shall decide on matters referred to
it by the appropriate Government relating to endosulfan pesticide.
(3) One member of the tribunal shall  be a retired judge of the High Court of the State
and each of the two members shall be experts in public health and agricultural activities and
practices respectively, and to be appointed by the Government of India,for a term of five
years for each member of the Tribunal on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(4) The Tribunal shall have such members of officers and staff on such terms and
conditions as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Tribunal shall appoint a person as it deems fit, possessing such technical
and other qualifications as may be prescribed, to be a pesticide Inspector for specified
districts as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that no person who has any financial interests in the manufacture, import
and sale of any pesticide shall be appointed as Pesticide Inspector.
(2) The Pesticide Inspector shall have the power—
(a) to enter, search and seize, inspect documents necessary to carry out the
objectives of this Act, at all reasonable times and with such assistance, if any, as he
Prohibition
on use of
Endosulfan.
Relief
measures for
persons
affected by
Endosulfan
pesticide.
Composition,
functions and
powers of the
Tribunal.
Appointment
of Pesticide
Inspector and
its powers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
considers necessary, any premises in which he has reason to believe that an offence
under this Act or the rules made thereunder has been or is being or is about to be
committed, and report to the required authorities and to the Tribunal; or for the purpose
of satisfying himself that the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder are
being compiled with; and
(3) to stop with the permission of the Executive Magistrate, the distribution, sale or
use of endosulfan or alternative pesticide which he has reason to believe is being distributed
or sold or used in activities in contravention of the provisions of this Act and report it to the
Tribunal.
8. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
9. (1) Whoever violates any provisions of this Act or any rules made therein under
shall be punishable with an imprisonment of not less than six months which may extend to
two years or with the fine of not less than twenty-five thousand rupees which may extend to
one lakh rupees or with both.
(2) Whoever obstructs a Pesticide Inspector from exercising the powers and functions
in discharging the duties provided under this Act shall be liable to pay a penalty of not less
than rupees twenty-five thousand.
(3) Whoever manufactures, sells or exhibits for sale, the prohibited endosulfan pesticide
under this Act, shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment of six months which may
extend to two years or to pay a fine of not less than rupees twenty five thousand which may
extend to two lakh rupees or with both.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty
Power to make
rules.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
       5
     10
     15
20
25

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Endosulfan is banned in more than sixty three countries worldwide for its hazardous
effects on human beings and environment. India still continues to be the world's largest user
of endosulfan and a mojor producer of it. The adverse impact of this pesticide on health and
safety of human life cannot be overlooked. In Kerala, due to the use of this pesticide thousands
of people have lost their lives. The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants
has recommended that Endosulfan be listed as a persistent organic pollutant. Keeping the
interests of the farmers and environment, it is imperative to prohibit the practice of using this
deadly pesticide and also to look for safer alternatives so that banning of this infectious
pesticide does not harm the agricultural interests in any way.
Hence, this Bill.
P. RAJEEVE

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to constitute a Tribunal by the appropriate Government to
deal with matters related to Endosulfan Pesticide and its alternatives. Clause 7 provides for
appointment of Pesticide Inspector to exercise the powers entrusted to him under this Bill.
Clause 8 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds
for carrying out the purposes of this Bill.
 The Bill, if enacted, will involve recurring as well as non-recurring expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India though it is difficult to estimate the expenditure at this
juncture.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—968RS(S3)—05-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the use  of  endosulfan  pesticide  in  agricultural  activities  with  a  view to
preventing its  harmful  effects  on human  beings,  environment  and to provide
relief to persons affected by the harmful effects of endosulfan and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri P . Rajeeve, M.P.)