AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XXIV of 2025 
THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:⸺ 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Prohibition of Child Marriage (Amendment)
Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
 2. 
 
 
In section 2 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, for clause (a), 
the following shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(a) “child” means a person who has not completed eighteen years 
of age;” 
 6 of 2007. 
  

3 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
  The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act (PCMA), 2006 was enacted with the 
objective of preventing child marriages and protecting the rights of children, 
particularly girls, from early and forced marriages. The current Act defines a child as a 
male under 21 years of age and a female under 18 years of age. Section 3 of the PCMA 
allows any party who got married as a child to seek annulment of the marriage as long 
as the petition is filed within two years of attaining majority. While there is a different 
age limit for marriage in PCMA, under the Majority Act, 1875, majority is attained on 
completing 18 years of age. A literal reading of the provisions of PCMA suggest that 
both male and female parties can seek annulment of marriage before they attain 20 
years of ag e.  The issues arises whether the male party can annul the marriage at 23 
years or 20 years due to the gender-based difference in the minimum age of marriage.  
Judicial pronouncements have revealed a divergence of views. The Punjab and 
Haryana High Court a nd the Karnataka High Court, in separate rulings, held that 
marriages between consenting individuals above the age of 18—even when one party is 
below 21—are valid.  In 2011, the Madras High Court in T. Sivakumar Vs. The 
Inspector of Police held that a literal interpretation will create an unfair disadvantage for 
males married at 20 years, who despite being married below the legal age, would not be 
able to annul the marriage and thus interpreted the age limit for annulment of marriage 
at 23 years.  The Allah abad High Court in Sanjay Chaudhary has countered this by 
reasoning that male parties entering the marriage after attaining 18 years cannot claim 
ignorance of law.  It opined that having same age limit, i.e.  within 20 years of age, to 
file a nullity petition is aligned with the principle of gender equality.  But the Allahabad 
High Court felt bound by the Supreme Court observations in Independent Thought Vs. 
UOI (2017) which mentioned that men could file annulment petition till the age of 23 
years. As a resu lt, the Allahabad High Court annulled the marriage and the aggrieved 
wife has filed an appeal in the Supreme Court. 
In the Independent Thought case, the issue before the Supreme Court was not the 
age limit for filing nullity petition under PCMA. Its observ ations that a male child can 
get the marriage annulled before attaining the age of 23 years results in substantive 
unfair disadvantage giving males more time than females to exit child marriage, leaving 
wives unprotected and disproportionately affected whi ch undermines the central 
objective of PCMA to protect and advance the status of women. 
This differential treatment in defining legal age of marriage is inconsistent with the 
constitutional mandate of equality and equal protection under Article 14. The age  of 
eighteen years is recognized in Indian law as the age of majority under the Majority 
Act, 1875, conferring full civil and legal capacity, including the right to vote 
(Representation of the People Act, 1951), to enter into contracts (Indian Contract Act , 
1872), to be tried as an adult (Juvenile Justice Act, 2015), and to be recruited into the 
armed forces. There is no rational justification for maintaining a higher minimum 
marriage age for boys when the law otherwise recognizes them as full adults at 
eighteen. 
This amendment seeks to bring uniformity in the legal minimum age of marriage 
for all genders at eighteen years, consistent with evolving societal norms, international 
human rights obligations and constitutional principles of equality. The amendment  also 
seeks to remove ambiguity and ensure uniform enforcement of child marriage laws 
across jurisdictions. 
Hence, this Bill.  
A.D. SINGH. 
 
 
   
 
  

4 
 
 
  ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE ACT, 2006 
(6 OF 2007) 
 
  *                               *                               *                            *                             *  
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “child” means a person who, if a male, has not completed twenty-one years 
of age, and if a female, has not completed eighteen years of age; 
 
  *                               *                               *                            *                             *  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 
_______ 
(Shri A. D. Singh, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—323—08.12.2025. 