THE ELECTRO HOMOEOPATHY SYSTEM OF MEDICINE
(RECOGNITION)  BILL,  2015
A
BILL
to provide for recognition and regulation of the Electro Homoeopathy system of
medicine in the country and to constitute a Central Council for the purpose
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Electro Homoeopathy System of Medicine
(Recognition) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. XXIV of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE  24TH  APRIL, 2015
5
10

2
(b) "Central Council" means the Council set up under section 7 of the Act;
(c) "Central Register" means the Register of Practitioners maintained under
sub-section (1) of section 10;
(d) "Electro Homoeopathy" means the systems of medicine founded by
Dr. Count Cesare Mattei of Italy in the nineteenth century based on treatment of
diseases by medicines made by the method of Spagyrical Cohobation (repeated
distillation) by which the life force of the plants are collected in the form of micro,
macro and trace elements of the herbs;
(e) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "State Register" means the Register of Practiotioners maintained by a State
Government under sub-section (3) of section 10.
3. The Central Government shall, by notification, within two months of the coming into
force of this Act, grant recognition to the Electro Homoeopathy System of medicine to be
practiced within the country.
4. (1) After the recognition being granted to electro homoeopathy system of medicines,
any university, Board or other medical institutions may apply to the Central Government for
permission to introduce a structured course in the electro homoeopathy system.
(2) No university, Board or other medical institution shall open the course of study in
the system, except with the previous permission of the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government, shall before according permission, refer the application to
the Central Council set up under section 7 for its recommendations.
(4) On receipt of the application from the Central Government, the Central Council may
obtain such particulars as may be considered, necessary by it, from the applicant and,
thereafter, make its recommendations to the Central Government.
(5) The Central Government may, after considering the application together with the
recommendations of the Central Council made under sub-section ( 4) and after obtaining,
such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the applicant, either approve,
with such conditions as may be considered necessary or disapprove the application and any
such approval shall constitute a permission under sub-section ( 2):
Provided that no application shall be disapproved by the Central Government except
after giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(6) Nothing in this section shall prevent any applicant whose application has been
disapproved by the Central Government from submitting a fresh application which shall be
considered by it afresh.
(7) Where, within a period of one year from the submission of the application under
sub-section, no order is communicated to the applicant, the permission of the Central
Government required under sub-clause (2) shall be deemed to have been granted.
5. The Central Government while granting permission or otherwise shall take into
account, whether,—
(a) the university, Board or other medical institutions seeking to open a course
in the electro homoeopathy system is in a position to offer the minimum standard of
medical education prescribed by the Central Council under section 10(i);
(b) any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training
to students likely to attend such course of study or training by persons having the
recognized medical qualifications;
Central
Government
to grant
recognition to
Electro
Homoeopathy
System of
medicine.
Permission of
Central
Government
for
introduction
of electro-
homoeopathy
as a course in
educational
institutions.
Factors
requisite to
grant of
permission by
the Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c)  necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment etc., are there to ensure the
proper conducting of the course or training;
(d) there is requirement of manpower in the field of practice of electro homoeopathy
medicine in the medical institutions; and
(e) there is any other factors prescribed by the Central Govt.
6. (1) On recognition being granted. Any university, Board or other medical institutions
permitted to conduct courses of the Electro homoeopathy system of medicine, may grant
such medical qualifications by awarding a degree in such  manners as may be prescribed.
(2) Any university, Board or other medical institutions which opens a course in Electro
homoeopathy without obtaining permission under sub-section (b) of section 4 shall not be
eligible to grant medical qualifications under sub-section (i).
(3) Medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India may be
recognized on a recommendation from the Central Council.
(4) Every university, Board or other medical institution in India which grants a
recognized medical qualification shall furnish such information as the Central Council may
from time to time require.
(5) The Central Council shall appoint such number of medical inspectors as it may
deem necessary to attend any examination held by any university, Board or other medical
institution for the purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of medical
qualifications granted by the university, board or medical institution.
(6) If the Central Council finds on the basis of a report by the medical inspector that the
examination and the courses of study conducted by the university, Board or other medical
institutions do not conform to the standard prescribed by the Central Council, the Council
shall make a recommendations to that effect to the Central Government.
(7) The Central Government may upon receipt of such recommendation send it to the
appropriate Government which shall forward the same to the university, board or medical
institution for submitting its explanation within a stipulated time.
(8) After considering such explanations together with the recommendation of the
appropriate Government, the Central Government may notify the withdrawal of recognition
granted to that university, board or the medical institution.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Offical Gazette constitute for
the purpose of this Act a Central Council consisting of the following members, namely:—
(a) Three members representing the Practitioners of Electro Homoeopathy whose
names are entered in the State Register of Electro Homoeopathy under section 10 (3) to
be elected from among themselves from states having such Register in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(b) Five members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons
having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Electro Homoeopathy:
Provided that, until members, are elected under sub-section 1(a), the Central
Government shall nominate such number of members as may be deteremined by
it, being persons actively practicing Electro Homoeopathy.
(2) The President of the Central Council shall be elected by members of the Central
Council from amongst themselves in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Election to the Central Council shall be conducted by the Central Government in
accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.
(4) All disputes relating to any election to the Central Council shall be referred to the
Central Government whose decision shall be final.
Recognition
of medical
qualification
in Electro
Homoeopathy.
Constitution
of Central
Council etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
8. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Council to prescribe the standards of Medical
Education in the Electro Homoeopathy system.
(2) The Central Council shall consider whether a university, Board or Medical Institution
is in a position to conduct courses in the Electro Homoeopathic System of Medicine and
recommend accordingly.
(3) Any reference made to the Central Council by the Central Government shall be dealt
with promptly by the Council.
(4) The Central Council shall meet at least once a year at such time and place as may be
appointed by the Central Council.
(5) One third of the total number of members of the Central Council shall form a quorum
in a meeting and all decisions therein shall be decided by a majority of the members present
and voting.
(6) The Central Council shall prescribe the conditions of eligibility for a practitioner to
be enrolled in the State Register of Electro Homoeopathy under sections 12 (3).
9. (1) The term of office of the President shall be five years from the date of his election:
Provided that he may continue in office till his successor assumes office.
(2) A member of the Central Council shall hold office for a period of five years from the
date of his election or nomination as the case may be.
(3) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat, if,
(a) he has remained absent without prior approval of the President from three consecutive
meetings of the central council; or.
(b) he ceases to be enrolled in the state Register of Electro Homoeopathy for any
reason whatsoever.
(4) A member of the Central Council shall be eligible for re-nomination.
(5) The Central Council shall appoint a Registrar who shall also act as secretary and
employ such other persons as it deemes necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(6) The Central Council shall, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix
remuneration and allowances to be paid to the President and members and determine the
conditions of service of the Registrar and the employees.
10. (1) The Central Council shall cause to be maintained in the prescribed manner, a register
of practitioners to be known as the Central Register of Electro Homoeopathy which shall contain
the names of all persons who are for the time being enrolled on a State Register to be maintained
by the State Government under sub-section 3 or any other law in force in that State.
(2)  It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Central Council to keep and maintain the
Central Register of Electro Homoeopathy for the purposes of this Act and from time to time
revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Each State Government shall maintain in the prescribed manner, a Register of
practitioner in that State to be known as State Register of Electro Homoeopathy which shall
contain the names of all eligible practitioners of that system.
(4) The Registrar of the Central Council may on receipt of the report of registration of
a person in a State Register or on an application made in the prescribed manner by any
person, enter his name in the Central Register:
Provided that the Registrar is satisfied that the person concerned is eligible
under this Act for such registration.
(5) Every person whose name is for the time being borne on the Central Register of
Electro Homoeopathy shall be entitled to practice Electro Homoeopathy in any part of India.
Duties and
functions of
the Central
Council.
Term of
office of the
President and
Members of
the Council.
The Central
and State
Registers of
Electro
Homoeopathy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(6) The Central Council may prescribe standards of professional conduct and a code
of ethics for the practitioners of Electro Homoeopathy.
(7) If the name of any practitioner is removed from the State Regiser for any reason
prescribed in a state law in force, the Central Council shall direct the removal of the name of
such person from the Central Register.
11. (1) The Central Council shall furnish such reports, copies of minutes abstracts
of its accounts and other information to the Central Government as may be
prescribed.
(2) (a) If the Central Government has reason to believe that the Central Council is not
complying with any of the provisions of this Act, it may refer the matter to a commission of
Inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom shall be Judges of a High Court to be
appointed by the Central Government and one person shall be appointed by the Central
Council and such Commission shall inquire into the complaint in a summary manner and
report its finds to the Central Government.
(b) If the charge of non-compliance  is established on such inquiry the commission
shall recommend the remedies which in its opinion are necessary.
(3) The Central Government may require the Central Council to adopt the remedies
recommended by the Commissions and if, the Central Council fails to comply with any such
requirement, the Central Government may take such steps as may be considered necessary
to give effect to the recommendations of the Commission.
(4) A commission of inquiry shall have power to administer oath to enforce the
attendance of witnesses and the production of documents and shall have all such other
necessary powers for the purpose of any enquiry conducted by it as are exercised by a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
12. No suit prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government or
the Central Council for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generally of provision of sub-section (1) such rules may
provide for,—
(a) the factors other than those mentioned in sub-section (1) to (4) of section 4
for granting permission to open a course in Electro Homoeopathy.
(b) the manner of election of the President of the Central Council.
(c) the management of the property of the Central Council and the maintenance
and audit of its accounts.
(d) the resignation of members of the council.
(e) the powers and duties of the President.
(f) the manner of election of members to the Central Council.
(g) the conduct of professional examination, qualification of examiners and the
conditions of admission to such examinations.
(3) The Central Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government
make by notification in the Official Gazette, regulations to carry out the purposes of this Act
and without prejudice to the generality of this  Power, such regulations may provide for,—
(a) the form of application and the particulars to be attached there to seeking
approval of the course in Electro Homoeopathy.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
5 of 1908.
Prosecution
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(b) minimum standards of medical education in respect of Electro Homoeopathy.
(c) the educational qualifications and other requirements of employees to be
recruited the Central Council.
(d) medical qualifications which will be granted by the university/Board or other
medical institutions.
(e) the manner of maintaining the Central Register.
(f) procedure for conducting meetings of the Central Council.
(g) the powers of the Registrar of the Central Council.
(h) Remuneration for the President and members of the Central Council.
(i) Any other matter in respect of which regulations are required to be made.
The Central Government shall cuase every rule and regulation made under this Act.
(4)  Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one sessions or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Electro Homoeopthay is a system of medicine based on the extraction of plants’ medical
values by means of separation and reunification principle with the help of repeated distillation
process. In Scientific term it is called "SPAGYRICAL COHOBATION".
The founder of this system, Dr. Count Cesare Mattei (1809—1896), who lived in Italy,
discovered that the permanent cure for various ailments which afflict human beings lies in
plants. Through long years of painstaking research, he perfected the methods of retracting
the ever present medical values of plants and tried those medicines on patients. The trials
were very successful which proved the soundness of his basic assumptions namely the
plants contain great medicinal values which, if extracted, through a new process of repreated
distillation could cure most of the ailments. Thus Electro Homoeopathy was born.
This system of treatment is presently being practiced in 19 states in India. The efficacy
of this system is borne out by the fact that more than 10 lakhs patients are receiving treatment
daily in different parts of India. Similarly, around 1 lakh doctors are using this system as
experts and around 5 lakh persons are qualified in this system.
However, due to the non-recognition of this system of medicine by the Government its
formal practice, research study, granting of qualifications and other related activities are not
possible at present. Even though some states have allowed the practice of this system of
medicine in the absence of a legal framework for its recognition it cannot make any progress.
It is a time-tested system based on plants' medicinal values whose benefits have reached
millions of people. It is, therefor the duty of the Government to recognize this system and
help the ailing public get its benefits.
This Bill seeks to confer recognition on this important system of medicine.
Hence, this Bill.
E.M. SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for Constitution of a Central Council. Clause 9 provides
for appointment of Registrar and person for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
This Bill, therefore if enacted, will entail expenditure from the consolidated fund of
India. The approximate expenditure both recurring and non-recurring may be of  Rs. ten crore
respectively.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government for making rules and
regulations by notification in the Official Gazette for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The rules and regulation will relate to matters of details only.
The Delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
9

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for recognition and regulation of the education, profession and practice in
Electro Homoeopathy and for that purpose to constitute a Central Council and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—569RS (S3)—27-04-2015.