1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH AUGUST, 2017
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code , 1860
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. XXIV of  2017

2
2. In section 153A of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code), after
sub-section (2), the following be inserted, namely:
‘Offence committed out of bias or prejudice—(3) Whoever commits an offence made
punishable under this Code or provokes the commission of such an offence, which is perceived
by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by a bias or prejudice based on the
victim’s actual or perceived religion, caste, profession, trade, place of residence, choice of
attire, appearance or eating habits, shall be punished either with imprisonment which may
extend to five years, or the punishment provided for that offence in the Code whichever is
higher, and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that where such offence results in the death of a person or a number of
persons, the punishment shall extend to life imprisonment and fine.’
3. After section 153B of the Code, the following section be inserted namely:
‘153C—whoever commits an offence made punishable by the Code, against the body
or property of a person, which is committed on the basis of actual or suspected commission
of an offence by that person, except when the offence is committed in exercise of right of
private defence as provided under this Code, shall be punished either with imprisonment
which may extend to three years, or with the punishment for that offence provided under this
Code, whichever is higher, or with fine or both:
Provided that where such offence results in the death of a person or a number of
persons, the punishment shall extend to life imprisonment and fine.’
Amendment of
section 153A.
45 of 1860.
Insertion of a
new Section
153C.
Vigilantism.
5
10
15
20

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
In recent times, India has seen an alarming rise in incidents of mob-violence, hate
crimes and vigilante justice. In all these cases, the modus operandi is similar—a group of
people identify a victim on the basis of their religion, caste, appearance, attire, eating habits
or profession and attack the victim, which sometimes proves to be fatal. Such attacks are
either driven by an ideology in which case it takes the shape of a hate crime or it is driven by
an urge to take the law in their own hands and punish the victim on mere suspicion of an
offence having been committed.
Hate crimes as well as vigilantism are treated as offences in many countries, attracting
even stricter penalties than ordinary crimes because they tend to offend public tranquility,
create a feeling of disharmony and undermine the faith of people in law and justice machinery
of the State. When such offences are directed towards people of a particular community,
then it also creates a sense of alienation and negatively impacts the social fabric of the
society. Such acts are to be condemned and appropriately punished in order to uphold the
civic and fundamental rights of the citizens. There can be no culture of State indifference of
impunity in such cases as they speak of a larger malaise rather than one-off disconcerted
incidents.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to describe the contours of hate crimes and vigilantism
in order to deal with them effectively.
Hence this Bill.
HUSAIN DALWAI

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
153A. Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place
of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenace of harmony—
(1) Whoever—
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations
or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of
birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever,
disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious, racial,
language or regional groups or castes or communities, or
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between
different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, and
which disturbs or is likely to disturb the public tranquility, or
(c) organizes any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity intending that
the participants in such activity shall use or be trained to use criminal force or violence
or knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to
use criminal force or violence, or  participants in such activity will use or be trained to
use criminal force or violence, or knowing it to be likely that the  participants in such
activity will use or be trained to use criminal force or violence, against any religious,
racial language or regional group or caste or community and such activity for any
reason whatsoever causes or is likely to cause fear or alarm or a feeling of insecurity
amongst members of such religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or
community, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.
Offence committed in place of worship, etc.— (2) Whoever commits an offence specified
in sub-section (1) in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the performance of
religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment which may
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1773RS(S3)—04-08-2017.