      AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA         
ON 26TH JULY, 2024
Bill No. XXIV of  2024 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:– 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 
10 
2. In article 164 of the Constitution, for clause (1), the following shall be substituted,
namely,-
“(1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other 
Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief 
Minister, and the Ministers shall hold office till such time they enjoy the 
confidence of the Legislative Assembly of the State.” 
Amendment of 
Article 164. 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The concept that the Queen reigns, but the Ministers rule, is the bedrock of the 
Westminster system. However, the adoption of colonial expressions that impregnates 
principles of constitutional monarchy into a republican Constitution can result in the 
said expressions being interpreted against the spirit of the Constitution. The concept 
of “serving during the pleasure” is archaic and a modern Constitution demands that 
such vestiges of colonial rule be dropped to strengthen its republican nature. 
Accordingly, the Bill seeks to amend clause (1) of article 164 of the 
Constitution pertaining to the appointment and term of the Council of Ministers in a 
State by providing that they shall hold office till such time they enjoy the confidence 
of the Legislative Assembly of the State instead of ‘during the pleasure of the 
Governor’, as provided at present. This amendment will do awaywith the present 
archaic phraseology and bring it in consonance with the constitutional form of 
Government.   
Hence this Bill. 
A. A. RAHIM 

3 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
* * * * 
164.(1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other 
Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and 
the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor: 
Provided that in the States of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and 
Odisha there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in 
charge of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and backward classes or any other 
work. 
Other 
provisions as to 
Ministers. 
* * * * 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri A.A. Rahim, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—153–30.07.2024. 