Bill No.  XXIV  of  2016
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following new article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“21B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part IX and Part IXA, every
citizen of India, shall have the right to be chosen as and for being a member of Parliament,
State Legislatures, Panchayats, and Municipalities, in accordance with the provisions
of this Constitution.
(2) The State may provide for any disqualifications for being chosen as and for
being a member of Parliament, State Legislatures, Panchayats, and Municipalities, on
grounds of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in the Constitution, or any judgement or order of
any court, any law inconsistent with clauses ( 1) and ( 2) shall, to the extent of such
inconsistency, be void.”
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 29TH APRIL, 2016
Short title and
Commencement.
Insertion of
new article
21A.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Preamble to the Constitution of India declares India as a Sovereign Socialist
Secular Democratic Republic and guarantees its citizens Political, Social and Economic Justice
and Equality of status and of opportunity.
The Supreme Court of India, while interpreting the Constitution of India, has repeatedly
held that Democracy is part of the basic structure of the Constitution. The right to vote and
the right to contest for an election are integral to representative democracy and hence part of
the basic structure of the Constitution.
India is a signatory to and has ratified the International Covenant of Civil and Political
Rights, 1966 that mandates State Parties to guarantee to their citizens the right to vote and to
be elected at genuine periodic elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and
shall be held by secret ballot, guaranteeing the free expression of the will of the electors.
However, in express opposition to the democratic scheme of the Constitution and
international obligations of India, executive decisions of some Governments have imposed
qualifications on the citizen's right to contest, which debar more than fifty per cent of the
electorate from exercising their right to contest for electoral office. This has been made
possible due to a lacuna in the Constitution which does not explicitly guarantee the citizen's
right to contest for electoral office.
While this power has so far only been exercised for elections to local self-governments,
the current Constitutional scheme as interpreted by some political parties and the Courts
does not bar similar exclusions to elections to the State Legislature or Parliament thereby
undermining the very foundation of our democracy.
It is thus important to clarify and secure the fundamental status of the citizen's right to
contest for all public offices and it is thought fit to elevate the right to be chosen as a member
to the House of the People, State Legislature, Panchayats and Municipalities as a fundamental
right.
Hence  this Bill.
GHULAM NABI AZAD
2

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—682RS(S3/F)—03.05.2016.