1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In Article 19 of the Constitution,
(i) in clause (2) the words "the sovereignty and integrity of India" shall be omitted.
(ii) in clauses (3) and (4) the words " the sovereignty and integrity of India or" shall
be omitted.
Bill No. XXIV of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD AUGUST, 2018
Amendment
of Article 19.
Short Title,
and
Commencement.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 19 being an important fundamental right provides for our right to freedom. It
constitutes a part of our basic human rights. Article 19 is also of great significance as it
provides for those rights which are necessary in a democratic system such as ours. Any
limitations placed on this right should be provided for by law and should meet a high
standard of necessity. Being provided for by law, the expression used to restrict human
rights should be precise, clear and the implication of which should be sufficiently foreseeable.
The terms used to restrict the right must be narrowly defined.
The restrictions to such basic rights if governed by vague terms will allow for the
arbitrary and unnecessary interference of these rights and will amount to a violation of the
individual's basic human right. It will allow for an unnecessarily overbroad scope for
enforcement, infringing the person's rights. Such laws need to be removed in order to protect
the rights of the people and the same was iterated by the Supreme Court in the case of
Shreya Singhal v. Union of India (2015).
The term "the sovereignty and integrity of India" was never part of the original text of
the constitution and was added much later in 1963 by the Constitution (Sexteenth
Amendment), Act. The original drafters had provided for ample and adequate restrictions
upon each of the rights. The use of such superfluous language cannot be permitted for
legislative purposes especially with regard to determining the limitations upon the
fundamental right. Thereby in light of ensuring the protection of the right to freedom of the
citizens, in furtherance of democratic values and upholding the principles of law, the vague
term employed in the article requires to be removed.
Hence, this Bill.
V .  VIJAYASAI  REDDY
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*******
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of any existing law,
or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions
on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of the sovereignty
and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public
order, deceny or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an
offence.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (b) of the said clause shall affet the operation of any existing
law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interets
of the sovereignty and integrity of India or public order, reasonable restrictions on the
exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause.
(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any
existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the
interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or public order or morality, reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause.
*******
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1453RS—06.08.2018.