5

10

As INTRODUCED IN THR Ratva SABHA,

Bill No. XXIV of 2001

THE PROHIBITION OF PUBLICATION OF PRE-ELECTION SURVEY
BILL, 2001
A
BILL

to prohibit the publication of pre-election survey of the elections to the Lok Sabha and
Legislative Assemblies of the States and for matters connected therewith.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—
1, (7) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Publication of Pre-Election Survey Act,
2001.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: —
(@ “election” means an election to fill a seat or seats in the House of the People
in the Legislative Assembly in a State.
(b) “express” means and includes expression through printing or publication in
a newspaper or a book or telecast/broadcast through television/radio network or
internet or by other means to which the public has access;

Short title and
‘commencement.

Definitions.


Prohibition of
publication of
pre-election
surevey

Penalty

Over-riding
effect of the
Act

2
(c) “person” includes agency, organization or a body corporate; and

(व) “process of election” means the final phase of casting of votes by the eligible
voters in their respective constituencies.

3. No person shall express or cause-to be expressed any opinion based on a result of
any survey by whatever name called, about the likely result of any election, before the
completion of process of election.

4. If any person contravenes the provisions of section 3:—

(i he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years;
and

(ii) the registration or licence given to such an organization or agency under any
law for the time being in force, shall be revoked.

5. This Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any
other law for the time being in force or any decree or judgement or order by any court or
authority having judicial powers.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Ours is a very large country and therefore, elections to Lok Sabha and State
Legislatures are held in many phases. It has been observed that various agencies start
publishing pre-poll survey about the victory or defeat of political parties on the completion
of the first phase of the election itself. As a result, there is every possibility that the voters in
other constituencies where elections are to be held, can be influenced especially because a
majority of them are illiterate. Keeping this fact in view, the Election Commission had puta
ban on such surveys. However, the court struck it down and as a result thereof various
agencies started publishing their pre-poll survey again.

Hence it is necessary to enact a legislation so that the voters are not influenced by
these surveys and the forecast of election results in one area do not adversely affect the
voting pattern in the other areas.

The Bill seeks to achieve this object.

P. PRABHAKAR REDDY.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to prohibit the publication of pre-election survey of the elections to the Lok Sabha
and Legislative Assemblies of the States and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6753RS—26-02-2001.