Bill No. XXIV of 2019
Short title, and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Constitution, for article 282, the following shall be substituted namely;
"282. The Union or a State may make any grants for any public purpose, notwithstanding
that the purpose is not one with respect to which Parliament or the Legislature of the State,
as the case may be, may make laws:
"Provided that the Union Government or a State Government, shall not announce or
introduce any new scheme or programme to incur any expenditure under the provisions of
this article, if the general election to the House of the People or election to the Legislative
Assembly of a State, as the case may be, is due within a period of six months."
Substitution
of new article
for article
282.
Expenditure
defrayable by
the Union or
a State out of
its revenues.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 26TH JULY, 2019

2
"Provided further that in case of a scheme or programme already commenced by the
Union Government or a State Government under the provisions of this article but the initial
transfer of benefits to the eligible beneficiaries under that scheme or programme has not
commenced prior to six months of the general election to the House of the People or an
election to the Legislative Assembly of a State, the transfer of such benefits shall not be
commenced till the completion of the process of such elections."
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nowadays, the political parties and persons contesting various elections promise and
boast of distribution of freebies to electors as a short route to please them and seek electoral
mandate in their favour. There is a tendency of choosing this freebie distribution just before
general elections from government treasuries under various popular schemes and programmes
for public purpose under article 282 of Constitution. The reality cannot be ruled out that
distribution of freebies of any kind, undoubtedly, influences all people. It shakes the root of
free and fair elections to a large degree and vitiates the electoral process. These freebies are
gifts that have no other purpose than to induce voters to vote for a particular party or
person. The attempt of each party to outdo the other has taken a vicious form of competitive
populism. If not curtailed, this will ruin the State financially.
Article 282 was incorporated in the Constitution with a noble aim to give power to
Union and States to spend public money for public purpose in the emergent contingencies
and special situations. This article is source of spending funds for the public purpose and is
normally meant for special, temporary or adhoc schemes apart from normal government
spending enshrined under article 275. But spending under the provision of this article shall
be subject to other constitutional requirements. Freebie distribution by parties should be
considered as a corrupt practice as defined under section 123 of Representation of People's
Act, 1951.
It is necessary to prevent misuse of this article just before the general elections.
Announcement of a new scheme or program before general election within six months and
commencing distribution of freebies under already announced schemes before six months
when general elections are due, needs to be curtailed to ensure a level playing field to all
contestants of election and to promote free and fair election.
This Bill seeks to further amend the Constitution to put a check on distribution of
freebies under the garb of provisions of article 282 just before general elections by the Union
and the State from the Government treasures.
K.V.P. RAMACHANDRA RAO
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
282. The Union of a state may make any grants for any public purpose, notwithstanding
that the purpose is not one with respect to which Parliament or the Legislature of the State,
as the case may be, may make laws.
* * * * *
Expenditure
defrayable by
the Union or
a State out of
its revenues.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandrarao, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2364RS(S3)—02-08-2019.