TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
WS-3/WINUSER1/GAZETTE/RS/258RS.PM5/1
Bill No. XXIV of 2002
THE SLUMS AND JHUGGI-JHOPRI AREAS (BASIC AMENITIES AND
CLEARANCE) BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to provide for the basic minimum amenities of water, electricity, sanitation and health
facilities in slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters and for the clearance of such areas in
larger public interest and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri Areas (Basic Amenities and
Clearance) Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the Union Territories and Metropolitan cities only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different Union
Territories and Metropolitan cities.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “ appropriate Government” means in the case of a Metropolitan city falling
within the jurisdiction of a State, the Government of that State and in other cases the
Central Government;
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
Commence-
ment.
5
10

(b) “building” includes any structure or erection or any part of a building but
does not include a plant or machinery comprised in a building;
(c) “competent authority” means such officer or authority as the appropriate
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the competent
authority for the purposes of this Act;
(d) “Jhuggi-Jhopri” means small roughly built house or shelter usually made of
mud, wood or metal having thatch or tin sheet roof covering;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “slum” means an area consisting of badly built, overcrowded houses, buildings
or Jhuggi-Jhopri cluster;
(g) “slum clearance” means the clearance of any slum area by demolition and
removal of buildings therefrom;
(h) “works of improvement” includes in relation to a slum area the execution of
following works, namely:—
(i) necessary repairs of lanes, roads, etc.;
(ii) provision of light point, water taps and bathing places;
(iii) construction of drains, open or covered;
(iv) provisions of latrines, inlcuding conversion of dry latrines into water
borne latrines; and
(v) removal of rubbish.
3. The competent authority may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare any area to be a slum area within the meaning of this Act.
4. The appropriate Government through the competent authority shall carry out
works of improvement in slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters from time to time in such
manner as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide minimum basic health facilities  through
primary health centres in slum areas and Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters in such manner as may
be prescribed.
6. The competent authority shall not allow a Jhuggi-Jhopri cluster to come upon a
Government land and if any slum exists in such a land before the commencement of this Act,
the competent authority shall remove it in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. Where the competent authority is  satisfied that the most satisfactory method of
dealing with the conditions in a slum area is the demolition of all the buildings in the area, the
authority shall by an order notified in the Official Gazette declare the area to be a clearance
area, that is to say an area to be cleared of all buildings in accordance with the provision of
this Act and the rules made thereunder.
8. As soon as may be after the competent authority has declared any slum area to be
a clearance area it shall make a slum clearance order in such manner as may be prescribed and
submit the order for the clearance by the appropriate Government   and if the appropriate
Government confirms the order, the order shall become operative from the date of such
confirmation.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
the purposes of this Act.
2
Health
facilities in
slums and JJ
clusters.
Competent
authority to
declare slum
areas.
Competent
authority to
carry out
works of
improvement
in slums and
JJ clusters.
Removal of JJ
clusters from
Government
land.
Power to
declare any
area to be a
clearance
area.
Slum clearance
order.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

C:/WIN USER/GAZ ETTE/RS/258RS.PM5    3
3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Crores of people in our country are living in slums and Jhuggi Jhopri clusters under
inhuman conditions. There are no basic facilities of potable water, electricity, sanitation and
health services in these areas. However people have no other option but to live in such
slums and JJ clusters. The problem is more appaling in Metropolitan cities like Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai and Kolkata and such other big cities where people migrate in large numbers in
search of employment. Poverty forces them to find shelter in slums and JJ clusters. It is the
duty of the concerned State Governments to provide basic facilities in such areas. However,
sometimes JJ clusters come upon Government land which is meant for other important
purposes. Their clearance is also necessary in larger public interest.
Hence this Bill.
SURESH  PACHOURI

C:/WIN USER/GAZ ETTE/RS/258RS.PM5    4
4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that competent authority shall carry out works of
improvement in slums and JJ clusters. Clause 5 provides for health care facilities in slums.
The Bill, if enacted, will involved expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of five hundred crore rupees will involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.
A sum of rupees one hundred crores will also involve as non-recurring expenditure.

C:/WIN USER/GAZ ETTE/RS/258RS.PM5    5
5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATE  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purposes
of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the basic minimum amenities of water, electricity, sanitation and health facilities
in slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters and for the clearance of such areas in larger public
interest and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—258RS—16-4-2002