THE  COMPANIES  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2006
A
BILL
further  to amend the Companies Act,1956.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2)    It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
2. In section 253 of the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that no company shall appoint or re-appoint any individual as director
of the company unless he has been allotted a Director Identification Number under
section 266B.”.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section
253.
1 of 1956.
Bill No. XXIV of 2006
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

2
SERVER 5 \ BILL 2004 \ 5911RS
3. After section 266 of the principal Act, the following sections  shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘Director Identification Number
266A. Every—
(a) individual, intending to be appointed as director of a company; or
(b) director of a company appointed before the commencement of the
Companies (Amendment) Act, 2006,
shall make an application for allotment of Director Identification Number to the Central
Government in such form, and manner (including electronic form) alongwith such fee,
as may be prescribed:
Provided that every director appointed before the commencement of the
Companies (Amendment) Act, 2006 shall make, within sixty days of the commencement
of the said Act, such application to the Central Government:
Provided further that every applicant, who has made an application under  this
section  for allotment of Director Identification Number, may be  appointed as a director
in a company,  or, hold office as director in a company till such time such applicant has
been allotted Director Identification Number.
 266B. The Central Government shall, within one  month  from  the receipt of the
application under section 266A, allot  a Director Identification Number to an applicant,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
266C. No individual, who had already been allotted a Director Identification
Number under section 266B, shall apply, obtain or possess another Director
Identification Number.
266D. Every existing director shall, within one month of the receipt of Director
Identification Number from the Central Government, intimate his Director Identification
Number to the company or all companies wherein   he is a director.
266E. (1) Every company shall, within one week of the receipt of intimation under
section 266D, furnish  the Director Identification Number of all its directors  to the
Registrar  or any other officer  or authority as may be specified by the Central
Government.
 (2) Every intimation under sub-section (1) shall be furnished in such  form  and
manner as may be prescribed.
266F. Every person or company, while furnishing any return, information or
particulars as are required to be furnished under this Act, shall quote the Director
Identification Number in such return, information or particulars in case such return,
information or particulars relate to the director or contain any  reference of any
director.
Insertion of
new sections
266A, 266B,
266C, 266D,
266E, 266F
and 266G.
Application
for allotment
of Director
Identification
Number.
Allotment of
Director
Identification
Number.
Prohibition to
obtain more
than one
Director
Identification
Number.
Obligation of
director to
intimate
Director
Identification
Number to
concerned
company or
companies.
Obligation of
company to
inform
Director
Identification
Number to
Registrar.
Obligation to
indicate
Director
Identification
Number.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
SERVER 5 \ BILL 2004 \ 5911RS
266G . If any individual or director, referred to in  section  266A  or section 266C or
section 266D or a company referred to in section 266E, contravenes any of the provisions
of those sections, every such individual or director or the company, as the case may
be, who or which,  is in default, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees and where the contravention is a continuing one, with a further fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day after the first during which the
contravention continues.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sections 266A, 266B, 266C, 266D, 266E  and
266F, the Director Identification Number means a identification number which the
Central Government may allot to any individual, intending to be appointed as director
or to any existing directors of a company, for the purpose of his identification as
such.”.
4. After section 610A of the principal  Act, the following sections  shall be  inserted,
namely :—
“610 B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and without prejudice
to the provisions contained in section 6 of the Information Technology Act, 2000,  the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules so as to
require from such date as may be specified in the rules, that—
(a) such applications, balance-sheet, prospectus, return, declaration,
memorandum of association, articles of association, particulars of charges,  or
any other particulars or document as may be required to be filed or delivered
under this Act or rules made thereunder,  shall  be filed, through the electronic
form and authenticated in such manner as may be specified in the rules;
(b) such document , notice , any communication or intimation, required to
be served or delivered under this Act, shall   be served or delivered under this
Act through the electronic form and authenticated in such manner as may be
specified in the rules;
 ( c) such applications, balance-sheet, prospectus, return, register,
memorandum of association, articles of association, particulars of charges, or
any other document and return filed under this Act or rules made thereunder
shall be maintained by the Registrar in the electronic form and registered or
authenticated, as the case may be, in such manner as may be specified in the
rules;
(d) such  inspections of the memorandum of association, articles of
association, register, index, balance-sheet, return or any other document
maintained in the electronic form, which is otherwise available for such inspection
under this Act or rules made thereunder, may be made by any person through
the electronic form as may be specified in the rules;
(e)   such  fees, charges or other sums payable under this Act or rules made
thereunder shall be paid through the electronic form and in such manner as may
be specified in the rules;
(f) the Registrar shall,  register change of registered office, alteration of
memorandum of association or articles of association, prospectus, issue certificate
of incorporation or certificate of commencement of business, register such
document, issue such certificate, record notice, receive such communication as
may be required to be registered or issued or recorded or received, as the case
may be, under this Act or rules made thereunder or perform duties or discharge
functions or exercise powers under this Act or rules made thereunder or do any
act which is by this Act directed to be performed or discharged or exercised or
done by the  Registrar, by the electronic form, in such manner as may be specified
in the rules.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of section
266A   or
section 266C
or section
266D or
section 266E.
Insertion of
new sections
610 B,  610C,
610D and
610E.
21 of 2000.
Provisions
relating to
filing of
applications,
documents
inspection
etc. through
electronic
form.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
SERVER 5 \ BILL 2004 \ 5911RS
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a
scheme to carry out the provisions specified under sub-section ( 1) through the
electronic form:
Provided that the Central Government may appoint different dates in respect of
different Registrar of Companies or Regional Directors from which such scheme shall
come into force.
610C. (1)  The  Central  Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette,
direct  that any of the provisions of this  Act,  so far as it is required for the purpose of
electronic record specified under section 610B in the electronic form,—
 (a)  shall not apply, in relation to the matters specified under clauses
 ( a) to ( f) of sub- section ( 1) of section 610B, as may be specified in the
notification; or
(b)   shall  apply, in relation to the matters specified under clauses (a) to (f)
of sub section ( 1) of section 610B only with such  consequential exceptions,
modifications or adoptions as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that no such notification which relates to imposition of fines or
other pecuniary penalties or demand or payment of fees or contravention of any
of the provisions of this Act or offence shall be issued under this sub-section.
 (2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued  under sub-section  (1),
shall be laid in draft before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days  which  may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and  if,  before the expiry of the session immediately  following
the session  or  the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses  agree  in disapproving
the  issue of the notification or both Houses  agree  in making  any modification in the
notification, the  notification  shall not  be  issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued
only  in  such modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.
610D. The Central Government may provide such value added services through the
electronic form and levy such fees as may be prescribed.
610E. All the provisions of  the Information Technology Act, 2000  relating  to the
electronic records (including the manner and format in which the electronic records shall be
filed), in so far as they  are not  inconsistent with  this Act, shall apply , or in relation, to the
records in electronic form under section 610B.”.
Power to
modify Act in
relation to
electronic
records
(including the
manner and
form in which
electronic
records shall
be filed).
Providing of
services
through
electronic
form.
Application
of provision
of Act 21 of
2000.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In context of the rapid developments witnessed in technology, the Ministry of Com-
pany Affairs decided to enable the operations carried out by the Ministry and its field offices
to be performed more efficiently and effectively through the use of contemporary informa-
tion technology and computers.  It was felt that the earlier efforts at computerisation had not
yielded the desired efficiency in operation of the system and an operating system that took
into account contemporary technology was necessary. Therefore, it was decided to imple-
ment a comprehensive e-Governance system and programme to achieve the above objective.
2. The Ministry of Company Affairs on the recommendations of Department of Infor-
mation Technology is implementing an e-Governance initiative through a project named as
“MCA-21”.  This project will provide the public, corporate entities and others an easy and
secure online access to the corporate information, including filing of documents and public
access to the information required to be in the public domain under the statute, at any time
and from anywhere. This would also result in efficiency in statutory supervision of corporate
processes and efficient professional services under the Companies Act, 1956 (the Act).
 3. The filing and registration of documents is a statutory requirement under the Act.
At present, the Act lays down the procedures for filing of various documents in physical
form and the processes associated therewith. While, the broad enabling framework for such
an initiative is available under the Information Technology Act, 2000 read with Companies
Act, 1956, enabling provisions would still be required to support certain online electronic
processes which have since become available due to technological advancement for various
detailed procedural requirements under the Companies Act, 1956.
4. It is, therefore, proposed to insert new sections 610B, 610C, 610D and 610E in the
Companies Act, 1956 so as to make provision for electronic filing system and for payment of
fees through electronic form under the said Act which are essential for the successful imple-
mentation of the MCA-21 Project.  After the proposed amendments to the Companies Act,
1956 have been enacted, the documents in electronic form duly authenticated with digital
signatures shall be accepted under the provisions of that Act. The proposed electronic
system also provides for multiple modes of payment of statutory fees.
5. The provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 allow an individual to be a director of up
to fifteen companies and such companies can be located in the jurisdiction in any of the
Registrars of Companies. There is a need for individual identity of person(s) intending to be
directors of companies to be established. This would also facilitate effective legal action
against the directors of such companies under the law, keeping in view the possibility of
fraud by companies and the phenomenon of companies that raise funds from the public and
vanish thereafter. It is, therefore, proposed to insert new sections 266A, 266B, 266C, 266D,
266E, 266F and 266G in the Companies Act, 1956 so as to, inter alia, provide for allotment of
a unique Director Identification Number to any individual, intending to be appointed as a
director in a company or to any existing director of a company, for the purpose of his
identification as such, through electronic or other form and to provide for penalty for any
violation in this regard.
6. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PREM  CHAND  GUPTA.
The 25 February, 2006.
5
SERVER5 \ BILL2004 \ LAW \ 5130LAW

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill proposes inter alia  to insert a new section 266B in the Companies
Act, 1956 which empowers the Central Government to issue Director Identification Number
(DIN) to all applicants within one month from the date of application.  DIN card would
involve certain expenses which would be met from the sanctioned budget of the Ministry.
The Bill will not involve any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature.
6
SERVER5 \ BILL2004 \ LAW \ 5130LAW

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 3 of the Bill, inter alia, proposes to insert a new section 266A in the Companies
Act, 1956 so as to confer power upon the Central Government to specify, by the rules made
by it, the form in which application shall be made for allotment of Director Identification
Number and the manner (including electronic form) in which such application shall be made
and the fee which shall be paid along with such application.
2. Clause 3 of the Bill, inter alia, proposes to insert a new section 266B, in the Compa-
nies Act, 1956 so as to confer power upon the Central Government to specify, by the rules
made by it, the manner in which it shall allot a Director Identification Number to an applicant.
3. Clause 3 of the Bill, inter alia, proposes to insert a new section 266E, in the Compa-
nies Act, 1956 so as to confer power upon the Central Government to specify by rules made
by it, the form and the manner in which the intimation shall be furnished by every company,
the Director Identification Number of all its directors  to the Registrar  or any other officer  or
authority as may be specified by the Central Government.
 4. Clause 4 of the Bill, inter alia, proposes to insert a new section 610B, in the Compa-
nies Act, 1956 so as to confer power upon the Central Government to specify by rules made
by it the form and the manner relating to filing of applications, documents, inspection, etc.,
through electronic form and the fee to be paid under that section. It also confers power upon
the Central Government to specify by rules made by it, the date from which various provi-
sions of the new section 610B shall come into force.
5. Clause 4 of the Bill, inter alia, proposes to insert a new section 610C in the Compa-
nies Act, 1956 to confer power upon the Central Government to direct, by notification in the
Official Gazette,  that any of the provisions of the said  Act,  so far as it is required for the
purpose of electronic record specified under section 610B in the electronic form, (other than
relating to imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties or demand or payment of fees or
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or offence) shall not apply, in relation to
the matters specified under clauses   (a) to (f) of sub-section (1) of section 610B, as may be
specified in the notification; or shall  apply, in relation to the matters specified under clauses
(a) to ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 610B only with such  consequential exceptions,
modifications or adoptions as may be specified in the notification.
6. Clause 4 of the Bill, inter alia, proposes to insert a new section 610D in the Compa-
nies Act, 1956 to confer power upon the Central Government to provide such value added
services through the electronic form and levy such fees as may be specified by rules made
by it.
7. A copy of every notification proposed to be issued  under sub-section  (1) of section
610C, shall be laid in draft form for a total period of thirty days before each House of
Parliament and such notification shall be issued after expiry in  such modified form as may be
agreed upon by both the Houses or shall not  be  issued if disapproved by both the Houses
of Parliament.
8. The rules made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after they
are made, before each House of Parliament.
9. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters of proce-
dure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power involved is of a normal character.
7
SERVER5 \ BILL2004 \ LAW \ 5130LAW

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956.
————
(Shri Prem Chand Gupta, Minister of Company Affairs)
MGIPMRND—5911RS(S5)—02-03-2006.