1
Bill No.  XXIV  of  2008
THE DISTANCE SELLING (REGULATION)
BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of selling of products and services by dialing a telephone
number advertised for the purpose in television, internet network, newspapers,
magazines, hoarding, banners, posters, etc. or placing orders on internet and for
protection of rights of consumers against marketing of products and services through
these methods and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Distance Selling (Regulation) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “cooling period” means a fixed time given to a consumer to examine the
products or services purchased by him through distance selling without inviting any
liabilities;
(b) “distance selling” means entering into contract for purchase or purchasing
of any  products or services by dialing a telephone number advertised for the purpose
in television, internet network, newspapers, magazines, hoarding, posters and in similar
other manners and also includes purchasing of products and services on internet;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to
them in that Act.
3. (1) Every consumer who purchases any product or opts for any service through
distance selling shall have a cooling period of fifteen days from the day of receiving such
product or service.
(2) The consumer shall have the right to return the product or the service to the
company offering the same, within a cooling period of fifteen days, if he is not satisfied with
the quality and performance of the product or service without giving any reasons for returning
the product or refusing the service.
(3)  The company which has offered the products or services shall refund the full
amount, if any charged for the same once the product is returned or the service is refused by
the consumer within the cooling period.
Explanation.—  For the purpose of this sub-section "full amount" includes the
packaging cost also but does not include the cost of returning the product.
(4)  Every consumer shall have the right to get a full refund of money including the
delivery charges, the cost of return or the installation charges, if the products or services on
purchase are found to be faulty.
4. (1) Every company shall give full and clear information about the products and the
services being offered through distance selling in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) Any condition, agreement or contract whatsoever, shall  not be enforceable by the
company unless it gives the required information to the consumer, prior to purchase of the
product or services.
5.  Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to one years or with fine,
which may extend to ten lakh rupees or with both.
6.  Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule, made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of
business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to
punishment, if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Explanation.— for the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association of
individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
2
Right of
consumer to
return the
product or
service,
purchased
through
distance
selling.
Definitions.
Companies to
give full
information
of product
offered for
distance
selling.
Punishment.
Contravention
by a company.
68 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7.  All offences under this Act shall be tried summarily in the manner prescribed for
summary trial under the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1973.
8.  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to distance selling.
10.  The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Summary trial
of offences.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.
5
10
3

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With the passage of time and upgradation in technology, the concept of buying goods
and services has undergone a tremendous change. People are buying various goods without
even having virtually seen or felt them. The technology has also shrink the world as the
goods manufactured, anywhere in the globe, are available to a person just by making a
telephone call. The manufacturer of various goods are just flashing out their telephone
numbers in television, newspapers, magazines, hoarding, posters, etc. for the purpose of
inviting customers to purchase their goods and services. Besides this, there are many portals
which are selling goods and services through internet, wherein a person just have to place
an order with a view to purchase any goods or services. In view of the fact that the person
who is buying goods or services through this distance selling does not get any chance of a
face to face contact with the person selling the goods and the opportunity to feel or examine
it, hence there are chances that he may fall into a false trap. Many cases have been reported
of this nature where the goods and services purchased by an individual do not match in
quality and appearance with those displayed on  television, magazines, hoarding, etc. In
such cases, if the customer wants to return those goods or services, the supplier would not
oblige him and he has no legal backing to do so. Many countries have enacted laws on
distance selling in order to protect the rights of the customers. As of now, there is no law on
distance selling in our country. With a view to protect the rights of the customers opting for
distance selling in our country, there is an urgent need to have such a law. The Bill, accordingly,
provides for the rights of the customer to return the goods or services purchased through
distance selling within the cooling period of fifteen days without inviting any liabilities and
imposing duties on the companies to provide full, fair and complete information to the
customer while selling goods and services through distance selling.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only as such the delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.

6
RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of selling of products and services by dialing a telephone number
advertised for the purpose in television, internet network, newspapers, magazines,
hoarding, banners, posters, etc. or placing orders on internet and for protection of
rights of consumers against marketing of products and services through these
methods and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4750RS(S-1)—29-12-2008.