1
THE DISTRESSED VETERAN SPORTS PERSONS (WELFARE)
BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the distressed veteran sportspersons such as old
age pension for subsistence, disability assistance, healthcare facilities, housing
facilities etc., to be undertaken by the State and for the establishment of
Distressed Veteran Sportspersons Welfare Fund and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Distressed Veteran Sportspersons (Welfare) Act,
2013.
(2) It extends to whole of India and applies to sportspersons who are citizens of India
and are for the time being, in distress.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
Short title,
extent,
application
and com-
mencement .
Definitions.
Bill No. XXIX of 2013
5
[AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH JULY, 2014]

2
(b) "Fund" means the Distressed Veteran Sportspersons Welfare Fund
established under section 3;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "veteran sportsperson" includes all sportspersons who have represented a
State in National games or represented India in Olympic games or Commonwealth
Games or Asian Games or in any International sports event.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish the Distressed
Sportspersons Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act with initial corpus of rupees ten
thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government by due appropriation made by law
by Parliament in this behalf and thereafter the Central Government and Governments of
the States and Union Territories shall contribute to the Fund to such extent and in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The fund may also receive moneys from body corporates, financial institutions
and sportsbodies, both domestic and international ones, individuals and bodies in the form
of contributions and donations.
(3) The fund shall be administered by a Board consisting of,—
(i) the Union Minister of Sports, as the (ex-officio) chairperson;
(ii) five members to represent each of the Sports bodies called Associations,
Federations or by whatever name called, recognized by the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) or as may be recognized by the Central Government, by notification
in the Official Gazette, who shall be rotated in alphabetical order after every three
years in such manner as may be prescribed;
(iii) three members to represent the States to be nominated by the Central
Government on the recommendation of the States who shall be rotated in alphabetical
order after every three years, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(iv) two members to represent the veteran sportspersons to be nominated by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Any veteran sportsperson who is in distress and who intends to avail old age
pension for his subsistence or for disability assistance under this Act shall apply to the
Board constituted under sub-section (3) of section 3 in such form and in such manner as
may be prescribed and the Board shall, after holding such inquiry, as it may deem fit and
necessary either accept or reject the application and in case the application is accepted,
shall sanction the quantum of old age pension per month and the disability assistance in one
lump sum, as the case may be, to the applicant:
Provided that the monthly old age pension shall not be less than rupees ten thousand
and the disability assistance shall not be less than rupees five lakh.
4. The fund shall be utilized, in addition to the purposes referred to in sub-section (4)
of section 3 of this Act, for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) payment of premium of life insurance of veteran sportsperson;
(b)  free healthcare facilities including medicines pathological tests, X-rays and
various scans, treatment as outdoor  and indoor patients for the distressed veteran
sportspersons and their family members; and
(c) for such other purposes and welfare measures, as may be prescribed.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to set up a special cell for the
purposes of monitoring the implementation of the provisions of this Act within its territorial
jurisdiction.
Establishment
of the
Distressed
Sportspersons
Welfare Fund.
Utilization of
the fund.
Appropriate
Government
to set up
special cell.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. The Central Government shall, after  due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
8. The   Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our Nation has produced world renowned sportspersons and of late, our Nation has
improved its medal tally at the Olympics, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games and other
International events which proves that games and sports are gaining popularity in our
Country, There are sports like Cricket, lawns tennis or to some extent badminton in which
sportspersons are earning good money which may be enough to lead a normal life but there
are games where there is no money for the sportspersons. Very often incidents are reported
by the media that veteran sportsperson is pulling bicycle rickshaw, or working as a labourer
or as a waiter and so on so forth. With the passage of time, many veteran, sportspersons
become distresed either due to old age, disability, infirmity, due to chronic diseases, etc.,
They do not have money even for their subsistence, let alone spending money on their
medical treatment and other necessities of life. Circumstances compel them to lead isolated
life. It is felt that Welfare Fund shared be established for such sportspersons so that they
may be provided old age pension, disability allowance, medical treatment or financial
assistance for self employment. The Bill proposes to achieve this objective.
Hence, this Bill.
DR.  AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Distressed Sportspersons
Welfare Fund with initial corpus of rupees ten thousand crore to be provided by the Central
Government and thereafter contribute to the fund. Clause 6 of the Bill makes it obligatory for
the Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not
possible to quantify the actual amount which may be involved at this stage but it is estimated
that a sum of rupee one thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers  the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will related to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the distressed veteran sportspersons such
as old age pension for subsistence, disability assistance, healthcare facilities,
housing facilities etc., to be undertaken by the State and for the establishment
of Distressed Veteran Sportspersons Welfare Fund and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1075RS(S4)—11-07-2014.