AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SaBita

Bill No. XXIX of 2001

THE CIGARETTES AND OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS
(PROHIBITION OF ADVERTISEMENT AND REGULATION
OF TRADE AND COMMERCE, PRODUCTION, SUPPLY
AND DISTRIBUTION) BILL, 2001

A
BILL

to prohibit the advertisement of, and to provide for the regulation of trade
and commerce in, and production, supply and distribution of, cigarettes
and other tobacco products and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

Wuereas it is expedient to prohibit the consumption of cigarettes and other tobacco
products which are injurious to health and with a view to achieving improvement of public
health in general as enjoined by article 47 of the Constitution;

AND WHEREAS it is expedient to prohibit the advertisement of, and to provide for
regulation of trade and commerce, production, supply and distribution of, cigarettes and
other tobacco products and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto;

AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution resolutions
have been passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of the States of Goa, Punjab, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal to the effect that the tobacco products other than cigarettes
should be regulated in those States by Parliament by law.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition
of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and
Distribution) Act, 2001.

(2) Itextends—

(a) in so far as it relates to cigarettes, to the whole of India;

(8) in so far as it relates to tobacco products other than cigarettes, in the first
instance, to the whole of the States of Goa, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal
and to all the Union territories; and

Short ttle, extent
and commence-
ment


Definitions.

2
(c) it shall also extend to such other State as may adopt this Act by resolution
passed in that behalf in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution.
(3) It shall come into force—

(a) in so far as it relates to cigarettes, on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and

(8) in so far as it relates to tobacco products other than cigarettes in a State or
Union territory to which it extends, or may be extended in future, on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different
dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act or for different States or
Union territories.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “advertisement” includes any visible representation by way of notice, circular,
label, wrapper or other document and also includes any announcement made orally or
by any means of producing or transmitting light, sound, smoke or gas;

(0) “cigarette” includes,—

() any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any other substance not
containing “tobacco,

(ii) any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco,
which, by reason of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its
packaging and labelling is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as
cigarette, but does not include beedi, cheroot and cigar;

(c) “distribution” includes distribution by way of samples, whether free or
otherwise;

(व) “export”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means
taking out of India to a place outside India;

(e) “foreign language” means a language which is neither an Indian language
nor the English language;

() “import”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means
bringing into India from a place outside India;

(g) “Indian language” means a language specified in the Eighth Schedule to the
Constitution, and includes any dialect of such language;

(A) “label” means any written, marked, stamped, printed or graphic matter, affixed
to, or appearing upon, any package;

(® “package” includes a wrapper, box, carton, tin or other container;

9) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(0 “production”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
includes the making of cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, beedis, cigarette tobacco, pipe
tobacco, hookah tobacco, chewing tobacco, pan masala or any chewing material
having tobacco as one of its ingredients (by whatever name called) or snuff and shall
include—

(i) packing, labelling or re-labelling, of containers;
(ii) re-packing from bulk packages to retail packages; and

(ii) the adoption of any other method to render the tobacco product
marketable;

20

25

30

35

40


20

25

30

35

40

45

3

(0 “public place” means any place to which the public have access, whether as
of right or not, and includes auditorium, hospital buildings, health institutions,
amusement centres, restaurants, public offices, court buildings, educational institutions,
libraries, public conveyances and the tike which are visited by general public but does
not include any open space.

(m) "sale", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means any
transfer of property in goods by one person to another, whether for cash or on credit,
or by way of exchange, and whether wholesale or retail, and includes an agreement for
sale, and offer for sale and exposure for sale;

(n) "smoking", means smoking of tobacco in any form whether in the form of
cigarette, cigar, beedis or otherwise with the aid of a pipe, wrapper or any other
instruments;

(0) “specified warning" means such warnings against the use of cigarettes or
other tobacco products to be printed, painted or inscribed on packages of cigarettes or
other tobacco products in such form and manner as may be prescribed by rules made
under this Act;

(p) “tobacco products” means the products specified in the Schedule.

3. No person shall engage in smoking in a public place where smoking is prohibited
and such prohibition is displayed or conveyed through any audio or visual medium.

4, (1) No person engaged in, or purported to be engaged in the production, supply or
distribution of cigarettes or any other tobacco products shall advertise and no person
having control over a medium shall cause to be advertised cigarettes or any other tobacco
products through that medium and no person shall take part in any advertisement which
directly or indirectly suggests or promotes the use or consumption of cigarettes or any other
tobacco products.

(2) No person, for any direct or indirect pecuniary benefit, shall—

(a) display, cause to display, or permit or authorise to display any advertisement
of cigarettes or any other tobacco product; or

(6) sell or cause to sell, or permit or authorise to sell a film or video tape containing
advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product; or

(c) distribute, cause to distribute, or permit or authorise to distribute to the
public any leaflet, hand-bill or document which is or which contains an advertisement
of cigarettes or any other tobacco product; or

(व) erect, exhibit, fix or retain upon or over any land, building, wall, hoarding,
frame, post or structure or upon or in any vehicle or shall display in any manner
whatsoever in any place any advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply in relation to—

(a) an advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product in or on a
package containing cigarettes or any other tobacco product;

(6) advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product which is displayed
at the entrance or inside a warehouse or a shop where cigarettes and any other tobacco
products are offered for distribution or sale.

(3) No person, shall, under a contract or otherwise promote or agree to promote the use
or consumption of— .

(a) cigarettes or any other tobacco product; or

(0) any trade mark or brand name of cigarettes or any other tobacco product in
exchange for a sponsorship, gift, prize or scholarship given or agreed to be given by
another person.

Prohibition of
smoking in a
public place

Prohibition of
advertisement of
tobacco products


Prohibition on
sale of cigarette or
other tobacco
products to a per-
son below the age
of eighteen years.

Restrictions on
trade and
commerce in,
and production,
supply and
distribution of
cigarettes and
other tobacco
products.

Manner in which
specified warning

shall be made.
Language in
which the
specified warning
shall be
expressed.

4

5. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or permit sale of, cigarette or any other tobacco
products to any person who is under eighteen years of age.

6. (1) No person shall, directly or indirectly, produce, supply or distribute cigarettes
or any other tobacco products unless every package of cigarettes or any other tobacco
products produced, supplied or distributed by him bears thereon, or on its label, the
specified warning.

(2) No person shall carry on trade or commerce in cigarettes or any other tobacco
products unless every package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products sold, supplied
or distributed by him bears thereon, or on its label, the specified warning.

(3) No person shall import cigarettes or any other tobacco products for distribution or
supply for a valuable consideration or for sale in India unless every package of cigarettes or
any other tobacco products so imported by him bears thereon, or on its label, the specified
warning.

(4) The specified warning shall appear on not less than one of the largest panels of
the package in which cigarettes or any other tobacco products have been packed for
distribution, sale or Supply for a valuable consideration.

(5) No person shall, directly or indirectly, produce, supply or distribute cigarettes
unless every package of cigarettes produced, supplied or distributed by him indicates
thereon, or on its label, the nicotine and tar contents per cigarette:

Provided that the nicotine and tar contents shall not exceed the maximum permissible
quantity thereof as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

7. (1) The specified warning on a package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products
shall be—

(a) legible and prominent;
(9) conspicuous as to size and colour;

(c) in such style or type of lettering as 19 be boldly and clearly presented in
distinct contrast to any other type, lettering or graphic material used on the package
or its label and shall be printed, painted or inscribed on the package in a colour which
contrasts conspicuously with the background of the package or its labels.

(2) The manner in which a specified warning shall be printed, painted or inscribed on
a package or tobacco products shall be such as may be specified in the rules made under
this Act.

(3) Every package containing tobacco products shall be so packed as to ensure that
the specified warning appearing thereon, or on its label, is, before the package is opened,
visible to the consumer.

8. (1) Where the language used on a package containing cigarettes and any other
tobacco products or on its label is—

(a) English, the specified warning shall be expressed in the English language;

(0) any Indian language or languages, the specified warning shall be expressed
in such Indian language or languages;

10

15

20

25

30

35

40


10

20

25

30

2 of 1974,

35

40

45

5

(c) both English and one or more Indian languages, the specified warning shall
be expressed in the English language as well as in such Indian language or languages;

(d) partly English and partly any Indian language or languages, the specified
warning shall be expressed in the English language as well as in such Indian language
or languages;

(0) any foreign language, the specified warning shall be expressed in the English
language;

() partly any foreign language and partly English or any Indian language or
languages, the specified warning shall be expressed in the English language as well
as in such Indian language or languages.

(2) No package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products or its label shalt contain
any matter or statement which is inconsistent with, or detracts from, the specified warning,

9. No specified warning or indication of nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes shall
be deemed to be in accordance with the provisions of this Act if the height of each letter or
figure, or both used on such warning and indication is less than the height as may be
prescribed by rules made under this Act.

10. For purposes of testing the nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes the Central
Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette grant recognition to such testing
laboratory as that Government may deem necessary.

11. (7) Any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector or any officer of State
Food or Drug Administration or any other officer, holding the equivalent rank being not
below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police, authorised by the Central Government or by the
State Government may, if he has any reason to suspect that any provision of this Act has
been, or is being, contravened, enter and search in the manner prescribed, at any reasonable
time, any factory, building, business premises or any other place,—-

(a) where any trade or commerce in cigarettes or any other tobacco products is
carried on or cigarettes or any other tobacco products are produced, supplied or
distributed; or

(6) where any advertisement of the cigarettes or any other tobacco products
has been or is being made.

(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply to every
search and seizure made under this Act.

12. (1) If any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector or any officer of
State Food or Drug Administration or any other officer, holding the equivalent rank being
not below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police, authorised by the Central Government or by
the State Government, has any reason to believe that,—

(a) in respect of any package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products, or
(9) in respect of any advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco products,

the provisions of this Act have been, or are being, contravened, he may seize such package
or advertisement material in the manner prescribed.

(2) No package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products or advertisement material
seized under clause (a) of sub-section (7) shall be retained by the officer who seized the
package or advertisement material for a period exceeding ninety days from the date of the
seizure unless the approval of the District Judge, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
such seizure was made, has been obtained for such retention.

Size of letters and
figures.

Testing labora-
tory for nicotine
and tar contents.

Power of entry
and search.

Power to seize.


Confiscation of
package.

Power to give
option to pay
costs in lieu of
confiscation.

Liability to pay
penalty,

Confiscation or
penalty not to
interfere छाए
other — punish-
ments.

Adjudication

Giving opportu-
nity to the owner
of seized pack-
ages.

6

13. Any package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products or any advertisement
material of cigarettes or any other tobacco products, in respect of which any provision of
this Act has been or is being contravened, shall be liable to be confiscated:

Provided that, where it is established to the satisfaction of the court adjudging the
confiscation that the person in whose possession, power or control any such package of
cigarettes or any other tobacco products is found is not responsible for the contravention
of the provisions of this Act, the Court may, instead of making an order for the confiscation
of such package, make such other order authorised by this Act against the person guilty of
the breach of the provisions of this Act as it may think fit.

14, (7) Whenever any confiscation of any package of cigarettes or any other tobacco
products is authorised by this Act, the court adjudging it may, subject to such conditions
as may be specified in the order adjudging the confiscation, give to the owner thereof an
option to pay, in tieu of confiscation, costs which shall be equal to the value of the goods
confiscated.

(2) On payment of the costs ordered by the court, the seized packages shall be
returned to the person from whom they were seized on condition that such person shall,
before making any distribution, sale or supply of such packages of —

(a) cigarettes, get the specified warning and indication of nicotine and tar
contents incorporated on each such package;

(b) other tobacco products, get the specified warning, incorporated on each
such package.

15, Any person who carries on any trade or commerce in, or who produces, supplies
or distributes, cigarettes or any other tobacco products, shall—

(a) if any package of cigarettes does not contain the specified warning and
indication of the nicotine and tar contents; and

(0) if any package of any other tobacco products does not contain the specified
warning,
be liable to pay a penalty not exceeding five times the value of the package of cigarettes or of
any other tobacco products or one thousand rupees, whichever is more, whether or not such
package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products, has been confiscated or is available for
confiscation.

16. No confiscatiqn made, costs ordered to be paid or penalty imposed under this Act
shall prevent the infliction of any punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable
under the provisions of this Act or under any other law.

17. Any confiscation of cigarettes or any other tobacco products may be adjudged or
costs may be ordered to be paid or penalty be imposed,—

(a) without any limit, by the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction such confiscation has been made, costs have been
ordered to be paid, or penalty has been imposed, as the case may be;

(6) subject so such limits as may be specified by the Central Government in this
behalf, by such other court, not below a civil court having pecuniary jurisdiction
exceeding rupees five thousand, as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf.

.18. (1) No order adjudging confiscation or directing payment of costs or imposing
penalty shall be made unless the owner or person in possession of the package of cigarettes
or any other tobacco products has been given a notice in writing informing him of the
grounds on which it is proposed to confiscate such package, and giving him a reasonable
opportunity of making a representation in writing, within such reasonable time as may be

10

20

25

30

35

40

45


5 of 1908.

2 of 1974.

7

specified in the notice, against the confiscation or imposition of penalty mentioned therein,
and, if he so desires, of being heard personally or through a representative in the matter :

Provided that, where no such notice is given within a period of ninety days from the

date of the seizure of the package of cigarettes or of any other tobacco products, such

5 package shall be returned, after the expiry of that period, to the owner or the person from
whose possession it was seized.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (I), the provisions of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, shall, as far as may be, apply to every proceeding referred to in
sub-section (1).

10 19, (1) Any person, aggrieved by any decision of the court adjudging a confiscation,
ordering the payment of costs or imposing a penalty, may prefer an appeal to the court to
which an appeal lies from the decision of such court.

(2) The appellate court may, after giving to the appellant an opportunity of being heard,

pass such order as it thinks fit confirming, modifying or reversing the decision or order appealed
15 against or may send back the case with such directions as it may think fit for a fresh decision or
adjudication, as the case may be, after taking additional evidence, if necessary:

Provided that an order enhancing any penalty or fine in lieu of confiscation or
confiscating of goods of greater value shall not be made under this section unless the
appellant has had an opportunity of making a representation and, if he so desires, of being

20 heard in person or through a representative in his defence.

(3) No further appeal shall lie against the order of the court of appeal.
20. (7) Any person who,—

(a) sells, or distributes or supplies in the course of any trade or commerce, any

package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products, which does not contain, either

25 on the package or on its label, the specified warning and the nicotine and tar contents
or, the specified warning, as the case may be;

(0) produces, or supplies or distributes in the course of any trade or commerce,
any package of cigarettes or anyother tobacco products which does not contain,
either on the package or on its label, the specified warning and the nicotine and tar

30 contents or, the specified warning, as the case may be,

shall in the case of first conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may
extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both, and, for
the second or subsequent offences, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with both.

35 21. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to two hundred rupees.

(2) An offence under this section shall be compoundable and shall be tried summarily
in accordance with the procedure provided for summary trials in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.

40 22. Whoever contravenes the provision of section 4 shall, on conviction, be
punishable—

(a) in the case of first conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;

(b) in the case of second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment which
45 may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with
both,

23. Where any person has been convicted under this Act for the contravention of the
provision of section 4, the advertisement and the advertisement material for tobacco products
may be forfeited to the Government and such advertisement and advertisement material shall

50 be disposed of in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Appeal.

Punishment for
failure to give
specified warming
and nicotine and
tar contents.

Punishment for
smoking in certain
places.

Punishment for
advertisement of

“tobacco products.

Forfeiture of
advertisement and
advertisement
material.


Punishment for
sale of cigarettes
or any other
tobacco products
an certain places
or to persons
below the age of
eighteen years.

Prevention,
detention and
place of trial of
offences under
sections 3 and 5.

Offences by com-
panies.

Offences to be
cognizable and
bailable.

8

24. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 5 shall be guilty of an
offence under this Act and shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred
rupees,

(2) All offences under this section shall be compoundable and shall be tried summarily
in accordance with the procedure provided for summary trials in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.

25. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Central Government or the State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, authorise one or more persons who shall be competent to act under this Act:

Provided that the person so authorised may, if he has reasonable ground for believing
that any person has committed an offence under section 3 or section 5, may detain such
person unless the accused person furnishes his name and address, and otherwise satisfies
the officer detaining him that he will duly answer any summons or other proceedings which
may be taken against him.

(2) Where a police officer or any officer of the State Government, not below the rank of
Sub-Inspector of Police, as authorised by that Government, has reasonable grounds for
believing that any person has committed an offence under section 3 or section 5, he may
arrest without warrant such person.

(3) Any person detained under sub-section (/) or arrested under sub-section (2) shall
forthwith be taken before Magistrate to be dealt with according to law.

(4) Any person committing an offence under section 3 or section 5 shall be triable for
such offence in any place in which he may be or which the State Government may notify in
this behalf, as well as in any other place in which he is liable to be tried under any law for the
time being in force.

(5) Every notification issued under sub-sections (1) and (4) shall be published in the
Official Gazette, and a copy thereof shall be exhibited for information to the public in some
conspicuous place or places as the State Government may direct.

(6) Every person authorised under sub-section (7) shall be deemed to be a public
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

26. (7) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person, who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such ‘person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section —

(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(0) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

27. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,

an offence punishable under this Act shall be bailable.

5

0

20

30

45

2 of 1974,

45 of 1860.

2 of 1974.


20

25

30

35

40

45

9

(2) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that any offence punishable
under this Act, other than an offence under section 3 or section 5, shall be cognizable.

28. (1) Any offence committed under section 3 or section 5 may either before or after
the institution of the prosecution be compounded by such officer authorised by Central
Government or State Government and for an amount which may not exceed two hundred
Tupees.

(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (7), the offender, if in
custody, shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect
of such offence.

29. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or any State Government or any officer of the Central Government or any State
Government for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

30. The Central Government, after giving by notification in the Official Gazette, not
Jess than three months' notice of its intention so to do, may, by like notification, add any
other tobacco product in respect of which it is of opinion that advertisements are to be
prohibited and its production, supply and distribution is required to be regulated under this
Act, and thereupon the Schedule shall in its application to such products be deemed to be
amended accordingly.

31. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) specify the form and manner in which warning shall be given in respect of
cigarettes under clause (0) of section 2;

(6) specify the maximum permissible nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes under
the proviso to sub-section (5) of section 6;

(c) specify the manner in which the specified warning shall be inscribed on each
package of cigarettes or its label under sub-section (2) of section 7;

(@) specify the height of the letter or figure or both to be used in specified
warning or to indicate the nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes under section 9;

(e) provide for the manner in which entry into and search of any premises is to be
conducted and the manner in which the seizure of any package of cigarettes shall be
made and the manner in which seizure list shall be prepared and delivered to the person
from whose custody any package of cigarettes has been seized;

(/) provide for any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made under this Act and every notification made under section 30 shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be
made, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.

32. (1) The State Government may, by notification make rules, not being a matter for
which the rules are or required to be made by the Central Government, for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.

Composition of
offences

Protection of
action taken in
good faith

Power to add
any tobacco
products in the
Schedule

Power of

the Central
Government
to make rules

Power of the State
Government to
make rules.


Act not to apply
to cigarettes
which are
exported.

Repeal and
savings.

10

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) specify the form and manner in which warning shall be given in respect of
any tobacco products other than Cigarettes referred to in clause (०) of section 2;

(6) specify the period for which the specified warning shall be inscribed on each
package of tobacco products or its label under sub-section (2) of section 7;

(c) provide for the manner in which entry into and search of any premises is to be
conducted and the manner in which the seizure of any other products of tobacco other
than cigarettes shall be made and the manner in which seizure list shall be prepared and
delivered to the person from whose custody any other product of tobacco other than
cigarettes has been seized;

(d) provide for any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.

33. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any cigarette or package of cigarettes
which is exported:

Provided that ngthing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the export of any
package of cigarettes, not containing the specified warning and indication of nicotine and tar
contents to any country if the law in force in that country requires that the same or similar
warning and nicotine and tar contents shall be specified on each package of cigarettes.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, any cigarette or package of cigarettes
shall be deemed to be exported before the commencement of this Act, if the necessary steps
for export have already been taken notwithstanding that the actual export has not taken
place.

34. (1) The Cigarettes (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1975,
is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions
of the aforesaid Act, shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this
Act as if the said provisions were in force when such thing was done or such action was
taken and shall continue in force accordingly until superseded by anything done or any
action taken under this Act.

0

5

20

25

49 of 1975.


THE SCHEDULE
{See section 2(p)]
1. Cigarettes
2. Cigars
3. Cheroots
4, Beedis
5. Cigarette tobacco, pipe tobacco and hookah tobacco
6. Chewing tobacco
7. Snutf

8. Pan masala or any chewing material having tobacco as one of its ingredients (with
whatever name called).

9. Gutka

10. Tooth powder containing tobacco.

nl



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Tobacco is universally regarded as one of the major public health hazards and is
responsible directly or indirectly for an estimated eight lakh deaths annually in the country.
It has also been found that treatment of tobacco related diseases and the loss of productivity
caused therein cost the country almost Rs. 13,500 crores annually, which more than offsets
all the benefits accruing in the form of revenue and employment generated by tobacco
industry. The need for a comprehensive legislation to prohibit advertising and regulation
of production, supply and distribution of cigarettes and tobacco products was recommended
by the Parliamentary Committee on Subordinate Legislation (Tenth Lok Sabha) and a
number of points suggested by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation have been
incorporated in the Bill.

2. The proposed Bill seeks to put total ban on advertising of cigaréttes and other
tobacco products and to prohibit sponsorship of sports and cultural events either directly or
indirectly as well as sale of tobacco products to minors. It also proposes to make rules for
the purpose of prescribing the contents of the specified warnings, the languages in which
they are to be displayed, as well as displaying the quantities of nicotine and tar contents of
these products. For the effective implementation of the proposed legislation, provisions
have been proposed for compounding minor offences and making punishments for offences
by companies more stringent. The objective of the proposed enactment is to reduce the
exposure of people to tobacco smoke (passive smoking) and to prevent the sale of tobacco
products to minors and to protect them from becoming victims of misleading advertisements.
This will result in a healthier life style and the protection of the right to life enshrined in the
Constitution. The proposed legislation further seeks to implement article 47 of the
Constitution which, inter alia, requires the State to endeavour to improve public health of
the people.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New Dew C.P. THAKUR.
The 22nd February, 2001.


Notes on clauses

Clause 2.—This clause defines various expressions used in the Bill. Most of the
definitions of the expressions used in the Bill are based on the definitions in the Cigarettes
(Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1975. The scope of some of the
definitions has been broadened and some new definitions have been added such as "public
place". Sub-clause (/) provides definition of the expression "public place" to mean any place
to which the public have access, whether as of right or not, and includes auditorium, hospital
buildings, health institutions, amusement centres, restaurants, public offices, court buildings,
educational institutions, libraries, public conveyances and the like which are visited by
public but does not include any open space. Sub-clause (p) provides definition of the
expression "tobacco products" as specified in the Schedule attached to the Bill.

Clause 3.—This clause provides for the prohibition of smoking in public places.

Clause 4.—This clause provides that no person who is engaged in production, supply
or distribution of cigarettes or any other tobacco products shall advertise and no person
having control over a medium shall advertise cigarettes or any other tobacco products
through that medium and further, that no person shall take part in any advertisement directly
or indirectly suggesting or promoting the use or consumption of cigarettes or any other
tobacco products. .

Clause 5.—This clause provides for prohibition of sale of cigarettes or any other
tobacco products to persons below eighteen years of age.

Clause 6.—This clause provides that no person shall produce, supply and distribute
cigarettes which do not carry the specified warning and that the specified warning should
cover not less than one of the largest panels of the cigarettes. It also provides that nicotine
and tar contents should not exceed the maximum permissible limit as prescribed and that
these contents must be displayed on the package.

Clauses 7 to 9.—These clauses provide for the manner in which the specified warning
shall be made, and the languages in which it should be expressed and also the size of letters
and figures.

Clause 10.—This clause provides for issuing of notification by the Central Government
regarding testing laboratory for nicotine and tar contents.

Clauses 11 and 12.—These clauses provide for the power of entry, search and seizure
under the Bill.

Clauses 13 and 14.—These clauses provide for provisions relating to confiscation
of packages and empowers the Court to give option to pay costs in lieu of confiscation.

Clause 15.—This clause provides for liability of a person to pay penalty where
specified warning is not contained on package of cigarattes and other tobacco products and
contents of nicotine and tar are not indicated on package of cigarattes,

Clause 16.—This clause provides that confiscation and penalty would not interfere
with any other punishment under this Bill or under any other law.

Clauses 17 to 19.—These clauses provide for the confiscation of cigarettes or any
tobacco products which have been seized as well as the procedure of giving opportunity to
the owner of the seized packages and of allowing him to make a representation as well as the
right of appeal available to any person aggrieved by any decision of the Court under this Bill.

Clauses 20 to 22.—These clauses provide for the punishment firstly, for failure to
give specified warning and nicotine and tar contents on the packets of cigarettes or other
tobacco products, secondly, for smoking at public places and thirdly, for making advertisement
of tobacco products.

13


14

Clause 23.—This clause provides for forfeiture of advertisement and advertisement
material related to tobacco products.

Clause 24.—This clause provides for punishment for sale of cigarettes or any other
tobacco products to persons below eighteen years of age.

Clause 25.—This clause provides for the prevention, detention and place of trial of
offences under sections 3 and 5. It also empowers the Central Government and State
Government, to issue notification to authorise one or more persons who shall be competent
under the Bill to detain a person who has committed an offence under section 3 or section 5.
Sub-clause (2) empowers the police officer or any officer of the State Government not below
the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police as authorised by that Government, who has reasonable
grounds for believing that any person has committed an offence under section 3 or section
5 he may arrest without warrant such person.

Clause 26.—This clause provides for punishment for the offences committed by a
company or any person in charge of the conduct of the business of the company.

Clause 27.—This clause provides that the offences committed under this Bill shall be
bailable. It further provides that for the avoidance of doubt every offence punishable under
this Bill other than an offence under section 3 or section 5 shall be congnizable.

Clause 28.—This clause provides that the offence committed under section 3 or
section 5 shall be compoundable and the person who committed such offences shall be fined
not more than two hundred rupees. It also provides that where an offence has been
compounded, the offender if in custody, shall be discharged and no further proceedings
shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.

Clause 29.—This clause provides for protection of action taken in good faith by any
officer of the Central Government or State Government.

Clause 30.—This clause provides to empower the Central Government to add any
tobacco products in the Schedule appended with this Bill.

Clause 31.—This clause empowers tne Central Government to make rules to carry
out the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 32.—This clause empowers the State Government to make rules to carry out
the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 33.—This clause provides that the provisions contained in the Bill shall not
apply to any cigarettes or packet of cigarettes which are exported.

Clause 34,—This is a usual clause regarding repeal and savings and repeals the
Cigarettes (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1975 which is being
replaced by this Bill.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for the
purposes of carrying out the provisions of the Bill, inter alia, to specify the form and manner
in which warning shall be given in respect of cigarettes, to specify the maximum permissible
nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes and to provide for the manner in which the powers of

entry, search and seizure by an officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police shall be
carried out.

2. Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules to provide for
similar matters in respect of tobacco products other than cigarettes,

3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure or
detail. The delegation of legislative power is, thus, of a normal character.


RAJYASABHA

A
BILL

to prohibit the advertisement of, and to provide for the regulation of trade and
commerce in, and production, supply and distribution of, cigarettes and other
tobacco products and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Dr. C.P. Thakur, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6902RS—01-03-2001.