1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“16A. Every citizen, who has attained the age of eighteen years, shall have the
right to employment:
Provided that any such citizen, who is not provided with employment, shall be
entitled to unemployment allowance at such rate as Parliament may, by law, determine.”
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Insertion of
new article
16A.
Right to
employment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 19TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XXIX  of  2011
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after sixty-four years of Independence, twenty-seven per cent of India’s population
is living below poverty line and large section of people die of starvation every year. Although
poverty has been checked to a large extent, yet a large section of our society is unemployed
and as such they do not have any source of income. In the absence of adequate employment
opportunities youth take re-course to sustain themselves by joining extremist, terrorist and
criminal activities and also indulge in other anti-social activities such as kidnapping, robbery,
hijacking, etc., which is not good for the growth and unity and integrity of the nation.
Therefore, time has come to amend the Constitution to make right to employment a fundamental
right, so that the young generation do not indulge in anti-national activities. Besides, making
right to employment a fundamental right of the citizens, the Bill also provides for payment of
unemployment allowance to all unemployed citizens till they are provided with employment.
This will help young generation financially, discourage them from indulging in anti-national
activities and on the other hand will engage them in nation building activities.
Hence, this Bill.
NARENDRA  KUMAR  KASHYAP
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that every citizen shall have the right to the employment.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure for the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.
3

GMGIPMRND—1362RS(S3)—19-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap, M. P.)