1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govt. may, by notification in
the official Gazette, oppoint.
2. In article 130 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that there shall be established a permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court at Ahmedabad consisting of seven Judges who shall be nominated
from amongst the Judges of the Supreme Court by the Chief Justice of India which
shall also have appellate jurisdiction over cases decided by any High Court in order to
administer justice and exercise control over cases arising in the states of Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Union Territory of Daman & Diu.”
Bill No. XXIX  of  2014
Short title
and
Commence-
ment.
Amendment
of article
130.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH NOVEMBER, 2014

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are at present 29 States and 7 Union Territories.  During the last four year
workload of the Supreme Court has increased manifold which is creating tremendous burden
on the Supreme Court, resulting in delay in justice. This puts question mark in efficiency of
our judcial system. Even the Law Commission has also recommended the Central Government
to bifurcate Supreme Court in four zones to enhance timely disposal of long pending cases
pending before the Supreme Court. Our Society is taking more and more interest in judicial
proceedings due to rising literacy and influence of media which brings more awareness of
our society in our judicial system.
There is a need to establish a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at Ahmedabad to
deal with the cases arising in the states of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
and Daman and Diu urgently as the people from these states have to travel all the way to
New Delhi in connection with their cases.
Hence this Bill.
MANSUKH  L.  MANDA VIYA ,

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill, enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in
respect of administration of the Supreme Court Bench at Ahmedabad. It is likely that it will
involve a recurring expenditure of about repees five crore per year and repees one hundred
crore as a non-recurring expenditure.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
130.  The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief
Justice of India may, with the approval of the President from time to time, appoint.
* * * * *
Seat of
Supreme
Court.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya, M.P . )
GMGIPMRND—3074RS(S3)—28-11-2014.