1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WELFARE OF HOME-BASED
WORKERS BILL, 2022
A
BILL
 to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for Welfare of Home-based
Workers and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Welfare of Home-based
Workers Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 22ND JULY, 2022
Definitions.
5
10
Bill No. XXIX of  2022

2
(b) "employer" means any person who employs, either directly or through another
person, on behalf of himself or any other person for remuneration, any home-based
worker;
(c) "home-based work" means work carried out by a person, in his or her home or
in other premises of his or her choice, other than the workplace of the employer; for
remuneration; which results in a product or service as specified by the employer,
irrespective of who provides the equipment, materials or other inputs used;
(d) "home-based worker" means workers who produce goods or provide services
for the market in their own home or in any other premises of his or her choice, other
than the workplace of the employer;
(e) "National Commission" means the National Commission for the Welfare of
Home-based Workers established under section 3; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Welfare of Home-based Workers
to improve the conditions of home-based workers in the country.
(2) The Commission shall consist of —
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson; and
(c) three members
to be appointed by the President by warrant under his signature and seal from amongst the
persons having special knowledge and vast experience in the field of home-based work.
(3) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and staff including
experts to the Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, members, officers, staff and experts of the
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The National Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the National Commission to take such steps, as it may
deem appropriate, for the welfare and protection of the rights of home-based workers and
their dependant family members.
(2)Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the National
Commission shall ensure the following provisions for the benefit and welfare of home-based
workers, namely:—
(a) recognise and accepting home-based workers as workers in their own right
through legislative and administrative actions;
(b) conducting a national survey for the collection of statistics of home-based
workers on a regular basis and not as a one off National Sample Survey module by
adopting the official international statistical definition of 'home-based workers', and
ensuring that such national surveys include a question on 'place of work' and 'source
of work (contractor or firm or self)' so that the distinction between self-employed own
account home-based workers and sub-contracted home-based workers becomes clear;
(c) undertaking the registration of home-based workers at the national and state
level by assisting the appropriate Government and issuing a Home-based Worker
Identification number (HBWIN card) for each of them;
Establishment
of a National
Commission
for the
Welfare of the
Home-based
Workers.
Functions of
the National
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(d) ensuring legal equality to home-based workers in status and rights in relation
to other wage earners performing same work;
(e) ensuring decent wage, social security and occupational health and safety
provisions for home-based workers through appropriate legislative and administrative
measures;
(f) identifying, preventing and mitigating potential human rights violations that
affect home-based workers;
(g) drafting a national policy for the welfare of the home-based workers;
(h) ensuring legal recognition of the home-based workers in global supply chains
and include the protection of the rights and welfare of home-based workers in all due
diligence processes applicable to such companies involved therein;
(i) promoting community-based skill-building trainings for the home-based
workers by coordinating with the state and local governments;
(j) ensuring financial and digital inclusion of home-based workers;
(k) collaborating with all relevant stakeholders including the representatives of
home-based workers, NGOs and trade unions in pursuance of the objective of the
National Commission;
(l) submitting reports to the President regarding the working of safeguards on
an annual basis or at such intervals as it thinks fit including measures for protection,
welfare and social development of home-based workers.
5. (1) The President shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament all the
reports submitted to him under clause (1) of sub-section ( 2) of section 4 along with a
memorandum explaining the reasons for not accepting any of the recommendations made
thereto.
(2) Where the report, or any of its part is related to any of the issue connected with the
State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of that State,
who shall in turn, along with an explanatory memorandum concerned with the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for not
accepting any of the recommendations, cause such report to be laid before the State
legislature.
6. The National Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in
sub-section (2) of section 4, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in particular
in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall consult the National Commission on all policies
affecting the interests of the home-based workers.
President to
lay report.
National
Commission
to have
powers of
Civil Court.
Appropriate
Government
to consult the
National
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the National Commission for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
to the
National
Commission.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Home-based workers are workers who produce goods or provide services for the
market in their own home or in a structure attached to their own home. Most of the home-
based workers produce goods for global supply chains across the world. The work they do
can vary greatly and may include stitching garments and weaving textiles, stitching shoe
uppers and footballs, producing craft products, processing and preparing food items, rolling
incense sticks, cigarettes and cigars, assembling or packaging electronics, automobile parts,
and pharmaceutical products etc. Although they remain largely invisible, home-based workers
are engaged in many branches of industries—old and new—and represent a significant
share of employment in global supplychains.
According to the 2017-18 India Periodic Labour Force Survey, there were about
35 million home-based workers representing 9.8 per cent. of all workers. A recent survey of
340 garment factories in Delhi and Bengaluru showed that 58 per cent. of surveyed factories
outsource to home workers. These workers may be contracted directly by factories or through
third party contractors.
Home-based workers are the most vulnerable among all informal economy workers.
Relegated to the bottom of supply chains, they have the least bargaining power, the most
insecure work, and low incomes. Majority of the workers lack social security, income security
and health security. They also lack access to basic services such as water, health care,
sanitation, and electricity which severely affect their lives and livelihoods.
Although home-based workers belong to the most vulnerable categories of workers,
there is no official policies, programmes and schemes that protect their rights and welfare.
The term home-based worker is not legally recognised. Hence, they remain as an exploited
and invisible class of workers living under the mercy of global brands for whom they do the
hard-work. It is critical for the Government to recognise and identify the problems of these
large majority of workers and safeguard their legitimate rights and welfare through legislative
and administrative actions. Considering the intensity and gravity of the problem, it is
understood that an institutional framework with necessary powers, functions and capacity
is an urgent policy priority.
Hence, the Bill seeks to attain the objectives mentioned above through the establishment
of the National Commission for the Welfare of Home-based Workers.
SANDOSH  KUMAR  P.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clauses 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the National Commission for the
Welfare of Home-based Workers to carry out the responsibilities assigned to it. It also
provides for appointment of a Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, members, officers, staff
and experts to the Commission. Clause 8 provides for the Central Government to provide
adequate funds for the functioning of the Commission.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India which cannot be estimated at present. Recurring expenditure is also likely to be
incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for Welfare of Home-based
Workers and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.)
MGIPMRND—656RS(S3)—25-07-2022.