AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON 
THE 13TH MARCH, 2026
Bill No.  XXIX of 2026 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR DE-NOTIFIED, NOMADIC AND 
SEMI-NOMADIC TRIBES BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for De-notified, 
Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes to safeguard their rights, inquire 
 into violations, address historical injustice, ensure socio-economic 
development and dignity, and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for De -notified,
Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes Act, 2026.
(2) I t shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Commission” means the National Commission for De-
notified, Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic Tribes constituted under 
section 3; 
(b) “De-notified Tribes” means communities which were
notified as criminal tribes under any law in force before the 
commencement of the Constitution and were subsequently de -
notified by the Central Government from time to time; 
(c) “ Nomadic Tribes” means comm unities traditionally
pursuing a mobile or itinerant way of life for livelihood and notified 
as such by the Central Government in the Official Gazette from time 
to time; 
(d) “ prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act; 
(e) “ Semi -Nomadic Tribes” means communities pursuing a
partially mobile or seasonal way of life for livelihood and notified as 
such by the Central Government in the Official Gazette from time to 
time;  
(f) “S tate Government” means the Government of a State and
includes the administration of a Union territory. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR DE-NOTIFIED, NOMADIC AND 
SEMI-NOMADIC TRIBES 
Constitution of 
National 
Commission for 
De-notified, 
Nomadic and 
Semi-Nomadic 
Tribes. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Commission to be known as the National
Commission for De -notified, Nomadic and Semi- Nomadic Tribes  to
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions
assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue
or be sued.
(3) T he head office of the Commission shall be at such place in the
country as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette specify and the Commission may, with the prio r
approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places
in the country as it may deem necessary, for the efficient discharge of
the duties assigned to it under the Act.
25 
30 
35 
Composition of 
the Commission. 
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, having specialised
knowledge of, or practical experience in, matters relating to the socio-
economic development, law, or administration concerning De-
notified, Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic Tribes, a Vice- Chairperson, 
three Members and a Member-Secretary:  
Provided that at least two Members shall belong to the De -
notified, Nomadic or Semi-Nomadic Tribes: 
Provided further that at least one Member shall be a woman. 
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the following, namely: —
(a) qualification for appointment of Chairperson, Vice -
Chairperson and Members; 
40 
45 
50 

3 
5 
10 
(b) salary, allowances payable to the m and their term of
office; 
(c) disqualification for appointment and continuation as
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members; 
(d) resignation by Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and
Members and filling of vacancy; 
(e) proceedings of the Commission;
(f) officers and employees of the Commission;
(g) powers to be exercised by the Chairperson; and
(
h) any other matter to further the objective of this Act.
15 
5. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be
invalid on the ground merely by reason of:
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the
Commission; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson
or Member of the Commission; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not
affecting the merits of the case. 
Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
proceedings of 
the 
Commission. 
20 
CHAPTER III 
 FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
6. (1) The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely: —
(a) ev aluate the progress of the development of the De-
notified, Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic Tribes under the Union and 
any State; 
(b) m
onitor the working of the safeguards available for the De-
notified, Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic in the Constitution or under 
any laws enacted by the Parliament and the State Legislatures; 
(c) evaluate the progress of development programmes and
schemes; 
(d) m ake recommendations for th e effective implementation of
safeguards provided for the De -notified, Nomadic and Semi -
Nomadic Tribes and welfare schemes by the Central Government or 
the State Governments;  
(e) inquire into specific complaints regarding deprivation of
rights, discrimination, unlawful surveillance, police harassment or 
denial of welfare benefits and take up such matters with the 
appropriate authorities; 
( f) participate and advise on the planning process for socio -
economic development of the De -notified, Nomadic  and Semi -
Nomadic Tribes; 
(g) promote research, documentation and data collection
relating to the De-notified, Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes; 
(h) u ndertake awareness programmes to combat stigma
and social exclusion; and 
(i) di
scharge such other functions as may be necessary or as
may be prescribed to carry out the provisions of this Act or may be 
referred to it by the Central Government or any State Government. 
Functions and 
powers of the 
Commission. 

4 
(2) The Central Government shall cause the recommendations referred t o
in clause (d) of sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be
taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for
the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(3) Where any recommendation referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1)
or any part thereof with which any State Government is concerned, the
Commission shall forward a copy of such recommendation or part to suc
h
S
tate Government who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of
the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendation or
part.
5 
10 
Safeguards 
against 
discrimination 
and harassment. 
7. The Commission shall recommend measures to the Central Government
and State Governments, as the case may be, to protect De -notified,
Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes from discrimination, stigma, arbitrary
detention, unlawful surveillance and abuse.
15 
Welfare and 
development 
measures. 
8. The Commission shall advise Central Government and State
Governments on the formulation, implementation and monitoring of
policies and programmes relating to education, livelihood, housing,
healthcare, social security, economic development and measures
appropriate for mobile populations.
20 
Review of 
classification 
and affirmative 
action. 
9. (1) The Commission shall examine matters relating to inclusion,
exclusion or misclassification of the De -notified, Nomadic or Semi -
Nomadic Tribes under Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Other
Backward Classes lists.
(2) U pon such examination, the Commission may make recommendations
to the Central Government and State Governments, as the case may be,
for appropriate action.
25 
Inquiry into 
complaints. 
10. (1) The Commission may, either suo motu or on a complaint referred to it
by the Central Government or any State Government, or received from 
any person or group of persons aggrieved, inquire into any matter 
concerning the De-notified, Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes. 
(2) Every complaint under sub-section (1) shall be made in such form and
manner, and shall be accompanied by such particulars, as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Commission may entertain a complaint 
notwithstanding any defect in form if it is  satisfied that sufficient grounds 
exist for inquiry. 
30 
35 
Commission to 
have powers of 
a civil court. 
11. (1) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter or inquiring into
any complaint under this Act, have all the powers of a civil court trying a 
suit and, in particular in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) s ummoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath; 
(b) r
equiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) r
eceiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) r
equisitioning any public record  or copy thereof from an y
c
ourt or office; 
(e) i
ssuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents; and 
(f) a
ny other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The Commission may make recommendations to the Central
Government and State Governments, as the case may be, for remedial
measures.
40 
45 
50 

5 
 
(3) The Commission may  exercise such other powers as may be 
prescribed. 
   CHAPTER IV 
COORDINATION WITH GOVERNMENTS AND STATUTORY BODIES 
  
 5 12. The Commission shall coordinate with Ministries and Departments of the 
Central Government and State Governments for effective implementation 
of its recommendations. 
 Coordination 
with Central 
and State 
Governments. 
  
 
 
10 
13. The Commission shall, to discharge its functions under this Act, act in 
coordination with the National Commission for Scheduled Castes, the 
National Commission for Scheduled Tribes and the National Commission 
for Backward Classes. 
 Relationship 
with other 
Commissions. 
   CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
  
  
 
15 
14. 
 
The Central Government, shall after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission, by way of 
grants such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit 
for being utlilised for the purposes of this Act. 
 Grants by 
Central 
Government. 
  
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
15. (1) The Commission shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records including the administration of the Fund and prepare an annual 
statement of accounts in such form and manner, at such time of each 
financial year, and such intervals, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him 
and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by 
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the National 
Commission under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and 
the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the 
Commission. 
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government by the Commission and the Central Government 
shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament. 
 Accounts and 
audit. 
  
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
16. (1) The Commission shall submit an annual report to the Central 
Government and to the State Government concerned and may at any time 
submit special reports on any matter which, in its opinion, is of such 
urgency or importance that it should not be deferred ti ll submission of the 
annual report.  
(2) The Central Government and the State Government concerned, as the 
case may be, shall cause the annual and special reports of the Commission 
to be laid before each House of Parliament or the State Legislature 
respectively, as the case may be, along with a memorandum of action 
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Commission 
and the reasons for non- acceptance of the recommendations, if any, 
within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such report.  
 Annual and 
Special reports. 

6 
 
(3) The annual report shall be prepared in such form, manner and contain 
such details as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
   CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
  
Members, 
officers and staff 
of the 
Commission to 
be public 
servants. 
 17. The Chairperson, Members, officers and staff including experts of the 
Commission shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants 
within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
5  
 
 
 
 
45 of 2023. 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 18. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government, the Commission or any member, officer or employee thereof 
for anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder. 
10  
Act to have an 
overriding 
effect. 
 
 
19. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other 
law for the time being in force. 
 
 
15 
 
Power to make 
rules. 
 20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not  inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide 
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the 
purposes of implementing the provisions of this Act. 
(3) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both the Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not 
be made, the rule or regulation shall there after have effect only in a such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
 21. 
 
(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
may appear it to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
35 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
  

7 
 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS   
  The De -notified Tribes (DNTs), along with Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic 
Tribes, represent one of the most historically stigmatised and structurally 
marginalised sections of Indian society. The expression “De- notified Tribes” 
refers to communities that were notified as criminal tribes under colonial 
legislation, most notably the Criminal Tribes Act, 1871, and its subsequent 
amendments enacted by the British coloni al administration. These laws were 
premised on the discriminatory assumption that criminality was an inherited trait 
of certain communities. As a result, entire groups were subjected to compulsory 
registration, restrictions on movement, forced settlement, police surveillance, 
collective punishment, and social ostracisation. Children were separated from 
families, livelihoods were destroyed, and generations were pushed into extreme 
poverty and exclusion. Although the Criminal Tribes Act was repealed in 1952 
after Independence, these communities were merely “de -notified” without any 
meaningful programme for their social, economic, or legal rehabilitation.  
Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes are closely interlinked with De-notified 
Tribes, as many de -notified commu nities traditionally pursued seasonal 
livelihoods. Nomadic Tribes are communities whose occupations require 
continuous mobility, while Semi -Nomadic Tribes move periodically and remain 
settled only for parts of the year. There is no uniform statutory or constitutional 
definition of these groups in India, and their classification varies widely across 
States. This definitional ambiguity has contributed to their continued invisibility 
in official records and policy frameworks.  
According to estimates compiled f rom reports of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment, India is home to approximately 425 De -notified 
Tribes, 810 Nomadic Tribes, and 27 Semi- Nomadic Tribes. The National 
Commission for De -notified, Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic Tribes, chaired by 
Shri Balkrishna Sidram Renke, estimated their combined population at around 
10.74 crore on the basis of Census 2001 data. Despite this scale, the absence of 
reliable, disaggregated, and updated data has resulted in their systematic 
exclusion from evidence -based policymaking. The Renke Commission Report 
(2008) reported that DNTs and NTs were extremely vulnerable, with 89 per cent 
of the former and 98 per cent of the latter reporting that none of the families in 
their communities owned any land. The Renke Commissi on also prepared a 
comprehensive list of DNTs, NTs, and SNTs, identifying around 334 De -notified 
communities and approximately 809 Nomadic communities. The highest number 
of De -notified communities were found in States such as Tamil Nadu (68), 
Karnataka (6 7), and Telangana (36), while a larger number of Nomadic 
communities were identified in States such as Bihar (64), Tamil Nadu (60), and 
Maharashtra (38). 
While the Constitution of India provides explicit recognition, safeguards, 
and institutional mechanism s for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and 
statutory recognition exists for Other Backward Classes, there is no comparable 
recognition of DNTs, NTs, or SNTs as a distinct category. Their inclusion within 
existing categories has been fragmented, incon sistent, and dependent on State -
specific practices. Many communities are included under the Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, or Other Backward Classes in some States but not in others, 
while a significant number remain entirely outside these categories.  The National 
Commission chaired by Shri Bhiku Ramji Idate, which submitted its report in 
2018 after extensive fieldwork and consultations across States, identified more 
than 1,235 De -notified, Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic communities. Of these, at 
least 269 c ommunities were found to be completely unclassified under the 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, or Other Backward Classes lists, thereby 
excluding them from reservations, scholarships and other affirmative action 
measures.  
Since Independence, several co mmittees and commissions have examined 
the condition of these communities and highlighted the need for systemic 
intervention. The Ananthasayanam Ayyangar Committee in 1949 recommended 
  

8 
 
the repeal of the Criminal Tribes Act, leading to its formal withdrawal in 1952. 
The First Backward Classes Commission under Shri Kaka Kalelkar in 1953 
acknowledged the extreme social and educational backwardness of de -notified 
and nomadic communities and cautioned against perpetuating the stigma 
associated with criminalisatio n. The Mandal Commission also took note of 
nomadic and semi- nomadic groups while assessing backwardness for the 
purposes of reservation. The Renke Commission, constituted in 2005 by the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, was the first national -level body 
exclusively mandated to study De -notified, Nomadic, and Semi-Nomadic Tribes. 
Its report, submitted in 2008, documented severe landlessness, lack of access to 
education and healthcare, absence of identity documents, near -total exclusion 
from institu tional credit, and continued social discrimination. The reconstituted 
National Commission under Shri Bhiku Ramji Idate further reinforced these 
findings and made comprehensive recommendations, including the creation of a 
permanent statutory commission, foc used welfare measures, improved data 
collection, and institutional safeguards.  
Notwithstanding these repeated recommendations, the socio -economic 
conditions of De-notified, Nomadic, and Semi -Nomadic Tribes remain alarming. 
Many members of these communitie s allege that they continue to face arbitrary 
detention and social profiling, often under residual State-level Habitual Offenders 
laws or informal policing practices. According to a report by the People’s 
Archive of Rural India (PARI), literacy rates among  these communities are 
significantly lower (45 per cent) than the national average (77 per cent), and 
school dropout rates remain high due to seasonal migration, lack of residential 
schooling facilities, and economic distress. Access to healthcare is limit ed, 
resulting in poor health indicators, while malnutrition and occupational hazards 
are widespread. Landlessness is pervasive, with a vast majority lacking formal 
land titles or secure housing. A substantial proportion of families lack caste 
certificates, domicile records, or other identity documents, preventing access to 
welfare schemes and constitutional entitlements. Social stigma continues to 
obstruct their integration into mainstream society, employment markets, and local 
self-government institutions.  
The Government of India has, in recent years, initiated certain measures 
aimed at addressing the needs of these communities. However, in the absence of a 
statutory body with investigative powers, monitoring authority, and a mandate to 
report to Parliamen t, the implementation of welfare schemes has remained 
fragmented and accountability mechanisms have been weak. Unlike the National 
Commissions for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Backward Classes, 
there is no permanent national institution dedicated to safeguarding the rights and 
interests of De-notified, Nomadic, and Semi-Nomadic Tribes.  
The consistent demand articulated by these communities, as well as by 
expert bodies and parliamentary committees, has been for the establishment of a 
permanent st atutory National Commission empowered to protect their rights, 
address grievances, monitor safeguards, and advise Governments on 
comprehensive socio-economic development. Such a commission is essential not 
only to remedy the historical injustice arising fr om colonial criminalisation but 
also to fulfil the constitutional mandate enshrined in Articles 14, 15, 16, 21, 38, 
and 46, which obligate the State to promote equality, social justice, and the 
interests of weaker sections of society. The proposed legislat ion seeks to 
institutionalise these obligations through the creation of a National Commission 
for De -notified, Nomadic, and Semi -Nomadic Tribes, thereby providing a 
dedicated mechanism to ensure dignity, inclusion, and equal opportunity for some 
of the most marginalised citizens of India.  
Hence, this Bill. 
 
 K. LAXMAN. 
 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of National Commission 
for De -notified, Nomadic and Semi -Nomadic Tribes. Clause 4 provides for 
composition of the Commission, term of office, salaries, allowances of the 
Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and Members, and for appointment of officers 
and staff of the Commission. Clause 6 provides for functions of the Commission, 
which inter alia,  provides for undertaking awareness programmes to combat 
stigma and social exclusion. Clause 14 provides for Central G overnment to 
provide grants to the Commission for carrying out the purpose of this Bill. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non -recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 

10 
 
 
  MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION   
  Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and 
the Commission to frame regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
Clause 21 empowers the Central Government to issue orders for removing 
difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act. 
As the rules, regulations and orders will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for De-notified, 
Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes to safeguard their rights, inquire  
into violations, address historical injustice, ensure socio-economic  
development and dignity, and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Dr. K. Laxman, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—167—16.03.2026.