1
Short title.
Bill  No.  XXIX  of  2007
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
2. After article 30 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"30A (1) Every citizen shall have the right to adequate potable water.
(2) The State shall provide in every village, tehsil and at district level, as the case may
be adequate number of wells or tube-wells or hand-pumps or water-pipes or water-tanks to
provide adequate quantity of drinking water to every citizen within a period of five years
from the date of commencement of this Act."
Insertion of
new article
30A.
Right to Basic
Amenities.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 27TH APRIL, 2007

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water is an extremely essential element for the survival of all the creatures living on the
earth. Adequate water is available in ponds, lakes, rivers and seas in our country. But, in the
absence of efficient water management, most of the water of the rivers and seas goes waste.
Besides water, ponds and lakes have been ruined for quite some years for the lack of awareness
among common people in regard to the importance of water and means to conservence.
There is an acute shortage of potable water  everywhere in the country including
metropolitan cities. In most of the villages, especially in the States of Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, villagers harvest rain water in small
ponds which they use mainly for drinking purpose. In the absence of any other alternative,
they are forced to use the unhygienic water harvested this way. This water is generally full
of insects, worms and other poisonous germs.
In a welfare State like ours, it is the duty of the State to fulfil the basic needs of its
citizens. Hence, the State should endeavour to  make potable water available to every citizen.
This objective can be achieved  if  the right to potable water is made a fundamental right. It
is therefore, proposed that the Constitution should be amended suitably in pursuit of the
objective.
Hence  this Bill.
JAI  PARKASH  AGGARWAL
2

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that citizens shall be given the right to potable water and
the State shall provide, at every village, tehsil and district level, adequate number of wells,
tube wells, taps, hand-pumps and water-tanks. The Bill, if enacted and implemented, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of rupees fifteen thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees seventy crore is also likely to be incurred.
3

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1778RS(S3)—27-04-2007.