THE PREVENTION OF VEXATIOUS AND FRIVOLOUS
LITIGATIONS BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to prevent vexatious and frivolous proceedings, civil or criminal, in the High Courts and
Courts subordinate thereto by individual and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Vexatious and Frivolous Litigations
Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify.
2.  No person shall file without any reasonable grand any vexatious proceedings
habitually and/or institute frivolous proceedings, criminal or civil, against any individual.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Vexatious and
Frivolous
Litigation not
to be filed.
Bill  No.  XXV of  2008
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
3. (1) Any person against whom another person has instituted or conducted
proceedings, civil or criminal, may file an application in the appropriate High Court for
declaring the other person as a vexatious litigant in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) If, on an application filed under sub-section (1), the High Court is satisfied that any
person has habitually and without any reasonable ground instituted vexatious proceedings
or has filed frivolous proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court whether against the same
person or against different persons, the High Court may, after giving the person who has
instituted such proceedings, an opportunity of being heard, declare that person as a vexatious
litigant by an order to that effect.
(3) The High Court while disposing of the application under sub-section ( 1) shall
adopt such procedure as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The vexatious litigant as so declared by High Court under sub-section ( 2) of
section 3 shall not institute any proceeding or continue with any proceeding, civil or criminal,
in the High Court or any other subordinate court without obtaining necessary permission of
the High Court or the subordinate court as the case may be.
(2) The appropriate Court or the appropriate Judge, as the case may be, shall grant
permission after being satisfied that the proceedings are not an abuse of the process of the
Court and that there is prima facie ground in the proceedings proposed to be instituted or
continued by the person declared as a vexatious litigant.
5. (1) An order made under sub-section ( 2) of section 3, declaring any person as a
vexatious litigant, shall be published in the Official Gazette and may also be published in
such other manner as the High Court may direct.
(2) Every order referred in sub-section (1) shall also be communicated to all the courts
subordinate to the High Court which passed such order.
6. (1) Any proceedings, civil or criminal, instituted or continued in any court by a
person who has been declared as vexatious litigant under section 3 without obtaining the
leave required to be obtained from the appropriate Court or appropriate Judge, shall be
dismissed by the said court.
(2) The court while dismissing the proceedings under sub-section (1) shall, in addition,
further direct such vexatious litigant to pay costs of the litigation.
(3) Every person referred to in sub-section ( 1) who has instituted or continued any
proceeding without leave as aforesaid, may also be liable for punishment for contempt of the
High Court which had passed the order under sub-section (2) of section 3.
7.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force providing for prevention of vexatious
and frivolous proceedings or prevention of abuse of the process of law.
8. The High Court may by notification make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
Declaration of
a person as a
vexatious
litigant.
Leave of
Court
necessary for
vexatious
litigant to
institute or
continue any
civil or
criminal
proceedings.
Publication
and
Communication
of Order.
Proceedings,
civil or
criminal,
instituted or
continued
without leave
of the
appropriate
Court to be
dismissed.
Savings.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Frivolous and vexatious litigations are the cause of concern for the courts for quite
sometime. Often the subject was highlighted by various courts and the Law Commission,
which favoured for a check on the filing of frivolous and vexatious proceedings. At times, it
has been seen that many persons abuse the process of law and indulge in the habitual and
intentional filing of frivolous and vexatious civil or criminal proceedings to harass other
persons without any reasonable ground. It has also been observed by the courts that some
persons habitually and persistently file cases on the issues, which has already been decided
once or more than once against some parties or their successors or against different parties.
Besides the harassment, filing of such proceedings also leads to wastage of the precious
time of the courts. There is no denying of the fact that every person has right to file civil or
criminal proceeding against any other person, but a check is necessary to allow the court to
examine the bona fide of a person filing the proceeding. Many countries in the world, like
USA, UK have enacted a law on the filing of frivolous and vexatious litigation. In our country
also, there is a law on the subject in two States i.e. Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra. In view of
the concern expressed by the courts, it is necessary that a Central law must be enacted to
prevent the filing of frivolous and vexatious complaints by declaring such a person as
vexatious litigant, who may thereafter be barred from filing or continuing any such complaint
without the permission of the High Court or the appropriate court. It is also felt that if a
person is declared as vexatious litigant, provision should also be made to punish him for the
contempt of the court besides directing him to pay the cost.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
MAHENDRA MOHAN
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the concerned High Court to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only as such the delegation
of legislative powers is of normal character.
4

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent vexatious and frivolous proceedings, civil or criminal, in the High Courts and
Courts subordinate thereto by individual and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4749RS(S5)—29-12-2008.