1
Bill No. XXV of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 28TH NOVEMBER, 2014
Short title,
and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution  Amendment  Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In Article 371 of the constitution,—
(i) in clause  (a) and its sub-clause (a) the words ''Maharashtra, Vidharbha,
Marathwada and the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case may be'' shall be omitted.
(ii) after clause (2) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by order made
with respect to the State of  Maharashtra, provide for any special responsibility of the
Governor for—
(a) the establishment of separate development Boards for Vidharbha,
Marathwada, Konkan and North Maharashtra with the provision that a report on the
working of each of  the Boards will be placed each year before the State legislature;
Amendment
of article
371.
Special
provisions
with respect
to state of
Maharashtra.
5
10

2
(b) the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the said
areas or regions, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole;
(c) requiring the development boards to,
(i) encourage investment in these regions;
(ii) develop irrigation facilities;
(iii) promote agriculture, horticulture and agro-based industries;
(iv) augment potable water facilities;
(v) develop power projects based on conventional and new and renewable
energy sources;
(vi) encourage dairy development, cottage and village industries, healthcare
facilities, education, vocational training, tourism and other activities.
(d) equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belongning to these
areas or regions, in matters of public employment, education and vocational training,
subject to the requirements of the State as a whole;
(e) An order made under sub-clause (d) of clause, (3) may provide for:—
(i) reservation of a proportion of seats in educational and vocational training
institutions in these regions for students who belong to the respective region
by birth or by domicile; and
(ii) identification of posts or classes of posts under the State Government
and in any body or organization under the control of the State Government in
these regions of the State and reservation of a proportion of such posts for
persons who belong to these regions by birth or by domicile and for appointment
thereto by direct recruitment or by promotion or in any other manner as may be
specified in the order.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, funds for the developmental works
to be undertaken by the development Boards established under sub-clause (a) of clause (3)
shall be borne by the Union.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Maharashtra is one of the big States of the Indian Union and it has made
steady progress since independence. It is one of the industrially developed States and its
capital Mumbai is known as the financial capital of the Nation, however, there are many
regions in the State which are still backward. The Vidharbha region synonymous consistent
suicides by farmers. The Marathwada, Konkan regions and the North Maharashtra are also
very backward. Mother nature has also not been kind to the Vidharbha and Marathwada
regions which always receive deficit rainfall and consistently face draught conditions.
Successive crop failures and indebtedness force the farmers to end their lives. These regions
are industrially, educationally and economically very backward. The land in these regions of
the State is very fertile but irrigation facilities are minimal. Here quality grapes, pomegranates,
oranges and other fruits are grown which are exported but due to non completion of irrigation
projects and non availability of water, orchards have vanished from these regions. Water is
not available even for drinking and traditional water bodies and rain water harvesting and
not resorted to for use. In order to remove backwardness of these regions development
boards needs to be established. The State Government has in the recent past requested the
Central Government to amend the Constitution to pave the way for setting up development
Boards but the proposals were rejected stating that the Planning Commission has not
supported the proposal. Hence, in this Bill, development Boards for the Vidharbha,
Marathwada, North Maharashtra and Konkan regions have been proposed with funding
from the Central Government. This is necessary to accelerate development in these regions.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR DHOOT

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-Clause (4) of clause 2 of the Bill provides that funds for the developmental works
to be undertaken by the development boards established under this Bill shall be borne by
the Central Government. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one lakh crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty thousand crores may also
involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
371. Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat.
* * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, The President may by order made
with respect to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat, provide for any special responsibility of
the Governor for—
(a) the establishment of separate development boards for Vidarbha, Marathwada, and
the rest of  Maharashtra or, as the case may be, Saurashtra, Kutch and the rest of Gujarat with
the provision that a report on the working of each of these boards will be placed each year
before the State Legislative Assembly;
* * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3064RS(S4)—28.11.2014.