THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. The section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 is hereby repealed.
Bill No. XXV of 2021
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 4TH FEBRUARY, 2022
Repealing of
section 124A
of Act 45 of
1860.
Short title and
commencement.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The law of sedition was introduced by Sec. 124A of the IPC as a draconian measure to
counter anti-colonial sentiments, and most major leaders of the independence movement -
including Gandhi and Tilak - were tried under this  provision. Gandhi famously described
Sec.124A as the 'prince among the political sections of the Indian Penal Code designed to
suppress the liberty of the citizen'. When the Constituent Assembly deliberated on the
scope and extent of restrictions that could be placed on free speech, the prominent exclusion
from what eventually became Article 19(2) was the word sedition. In the original draft that
was up for discussion, the word sedition had been included as one of the grounds for
restriction on speech.
The point of the sedition law is essentially that of suppressing free speech and free
thought, both of which are unpopular with the government. Where a critic can be silenced by
the mere fact that there is a possible life sentence that itself acts as a deterrent. Despite the
relatively high standards laid down by the Supreme Court of what actually constitutes
sedition, the law enforcement system in our country have continued to ignore precedent.
Freedom of speech and expression within the Indian legal tradition includes within its
ambit any form of criticism, dissent and protest. Sedition was a provision in the law enacted
by the British for those who "rebelled against the crown". There is no concept of a crown in
our country today. The sedition provision is completely untenable with our democratic
structure. It is often used to tackle political opponents.
Hence this Bill.
ELAMARAM  KAREEM
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(Act No. 45 of 1860)
* * * * * * *
124A. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible
representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites
or attempts to excite disaffection towards the Government established by law in India, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment
which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
* * * * * * *
3
Sedition.

MGIPMRND—2014RS(S3)—07.02.2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Elamaram Kareem, M.P.)