THE COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISION AND
COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISION OF HIGH COURTS
BILL, 2015
——————
 ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  Short title, extent and commencement.
2.  Definitions.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION OF COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL APPELLATE
DIVISIONS
3.  Constitution of Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions and Commercial
Appellate Divisions.
4. Nomination of judges to the Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
Divisions in High Courts.
5. Appointment, qualification, terms and conditions of judges to Commercial Courts.
6. Jurisdiction of Commercial Court.
7. Jurisdiction of  Commercial Divisions of High Courts.
8. Bar against revision application or petition against an interlocutory order.
9. Transfer of suit if counter-claim in a commercial dispute is of Specified Value.
10. Jurisdiction in respect of arbitration matters.
11. Bar of jurisdiction of Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions.
CHAPTER III
S
PECIFIED VALUE
12. Determination of Specified Value.
CHAPTER IV
APPEALS'
13. Appeals from decrees of Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions.
14. Appeals or writ petitions in case of certain Tribunals.
15. Expeditious disposal of appeals.
Bill No. XXV of  2015
CLAUSES
(i)
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

(ii)
CHAPTER V
TRANSFER OF PENDING SUITS
16. Transfer of pending cases.
CHAPTER VI
AMENDMNETS TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
17. Amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in its application to commercial
disputes.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
18. Collection and disclosure of data by Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions and
Commercial Appellate Divisions.
19. Power of High Court to issue directions.
20. Infrastructure facilities.
21. Training and continuous educations.
22. Act to have overriding effect.
23. Power of Central Government to make rules.
24. Laying of rules before Parliament.
25. Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE.
C
LAUSES

1
THE COMMERCIAL COURTS, COMMERCIAL DIVISION AND
COMMERCIAL APPELLATE DIVISION OF
HIGH COURTS BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division in the High Courts for adjudicating commercial disputes and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  XXV  of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different High Courts and for
different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the High Court
or to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to that High Court
or the commencement of that provision:
Provided further that no notification under this sub-section shall be issued in relation
to a High Court unless the Central Government has consulted the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court and the concerned State Government or State Governments.
2.    (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Commercial Appellate Division" means the Commercial Appellate Division
in a High Court constituted under sub-section (3) of section 3;
(b) "Commercial Court" means the Commercial Court constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 3;
(c) "commercial dispute" means a dispute arising out of—
(i) ordinary transactions of merchants, bankers, financiers and traders
such as those relating to mercantile documents, including enforcement and
interpretation of such documents;
(ii) export or import of merchandise or services;
(iii) issues relating to admiralty and maritime law;
(iv) transactions relating to aircraft, aircraft engines, aircraft equipment
and helicopters, including sales, leasing and financing of the same;
(v) carriage of goods;
(vi) construction and infrastructure contracts, including tenders;
(vii) agreements relating to immovable property used exclusively in trade
or commerce;
(viii) franchising agreements;
(ix) distribution and licensing agreements;
(x) management and consultancy agreements;
(xi) joint venture agreements;
(xii) shareholders agreements;
(xiii) subscription and investment agreements pertaining to the services
industry including outsourcing services and financial services;
(xiv) mercantile agency and mercantile usage;
(xv) partnership agreements;
(xvi) technology development agreements;
(xvii) intellectual property rights relating to registered and unregistered
trademarks, copyright, patent, design, domain names, geographical indications
and semiconductor integrated circuits;
(xviii) agreements for sale of goods or provision of services;
(xix) exploitation of oil and gas reserves or other natural resources
including electromagnetic spectrum;
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(xx) insurance and re-insurance;
(xxi) contracts of agency relating to any of the above, or relating to such
other commercial disputes as may be prescribed; and
(xxii) such other commercial disputes as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—A commercial dispute shall not cease to be a commercial dispute
merely because—
(a) it also involves action for recovery of immovable property or for
realisation of monies out of immovable property given as security or involves
any other relief pertaining to immovable property;
(b) one of the contracting parties is the State or any of its agencies or
instrumentalities, or a private body carrying out public functions;
(d) "Commercial Division" means the Commercial Division in a High Court
constituted under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(e) "District Judge" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (a) of article 236 of the Constitution of India;
(f) "document" means any matter expressed or described upon any
substance by means of letters, figures or marks, or electronic means, or by
more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, for
the purpose of recording that matter;
(g) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette
and the expression "notify" with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations
shall be construed accordingly;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made by the Central
Government;
(i)  "Schedule" means the Schedule appended to the Act; and
(j) "Specified Value", in relation to a commercial dispute, shall mean  the
value of the subject matter in respect of a suit as determined in accordance
with section 12 which shall not be less than one crore rupees or such higher
value, as may be prescribed.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, shall have the same meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Code and the Act.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION OF COMMERCIAL C OURTS, C OMMERCIAL D IVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL
APPELLATE DIVISIONS
3.  ( 1)(a) In all States or Union territories where the High Court does not have
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, after consultation with the
concerned High Court, by notification, constitute such number of Commercial Courts, as
it may deem necessary, for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction conferred on those
Courts by the Act.
(b) In all States or Union territories where the High Court has ordinary original civil
jurisdiction, the State Government may, after consultation with the concerned High Court,
by notification, constitute such number of Commercial Courts, as it may deem necessary,
for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction conferred on those Courts by the Act.
(c) The Commercial Courts as referred to in clause (a) shall consist of such number of
judges as may be appointed in accordance with the provisions of section 5.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.
Constitution of
Commercial
Courts,
Commercial
Divisions and
Commercial
Appellate
Divisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(d) The Commercial Courts as referred to in clause (b) shall consist of such number of
judges as may be appointed in accordance with the provisions of section 5.
(2)(a) In all High Courts having ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the State Government
may, after consultation with the concerned High Court, by notification, constitute a
"Commercial Division" of that High Court.
(b) The Commercial Division of High Court shall consist of such number of judges as
may be determined from time to time by the Chief Justice of such High Court.
(3)(a) The State Government shall, immediately after issuing notification under sub-
sections (1) and (2), constitute a "Commercial Appellate Division" of that High Court.
(b) The Commercial Appellate Division shall have one or more Division Benches as
may be determined from time to time by the Chief Justice of such High Court.
4. (1) The Chief Justice of the concerned High Court shall nominate such number of
Judges of the High Court as required to be Judges of the Commercial Division or Commercial
Appellate Division of such High Court.
    ( 2) The Judges to be nominated for the Commercial Division or the Commercial
Appellate Division shall have experience in dealing with commercial disputes and such
nomination shall be for a period of two years or such other period as may be determined by
the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court.
5. (1) The Judge of a Commercial Court shall be appointed by the concerned High
Court in such manner as may be prescribed.
    (2) Where more than one judge is appointed to a Commercial Court, the senior most
judge shall be designated as "Principal Judge" and shall have such powers and functions in
relation to the Commercial Court, as the Principal District Judge has for the purposes of the
administration of the District Court.
   ( 3) No person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Judge of a Commercial Court
unless such person—
(a) is qualified to be appointed as a District Judge and has experience in dealing
the matters relating to commercial disputes; or
(b) has for at least  seven years held a judicial office in the territory of India or the
office of a member of a tribunal or any post under the Union or a State requiring special
knowledge of law.
   (4) The terms and other conditions of service of the judges of the Commercial Court
shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that such terms and conditions of service for judges of the Commercial Court
shall not be less than that of the post of the Principal District Judge or any other post in the
judicial service equivalent to the Principal District Judge in that State or Union territory, as
the case may be.
6. The Commercial Court shall have jurisdiction to try all suits and applications relating
to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value arising out of the entire territory of the State over
which it has been vested territorial jurisdiction.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, a commercial dispute shall be
considered to arise out of the entire territory of the State over which a Commercial Court has
been vested jurisdiction, if the suit or application relating to such commercial dispute has
been instituted as per the provisions of sections 16 to 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.
7. All suits and applications relating to commercial disputes of a Specified Value filed
in a High Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction shall be heard and disposed of by
the Commercial Division of that High Court:
Nomination of
judges to
Commercial
Division and
Commercial
Appellate
Divisions in
High Courts.
Appointment,
qualification,
terms and
conditions of
judges to
Commercial
Courts.
5 of 1908.
Jurisdiction of
Commercial
Divisions of
High Court.
Jurisdiction of
Commercial
Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Provided that all suits and applications relating to commercial disputes, stipulated
by an Act to lie in a court not inferior to a District Court, and filed on the original side
of the High Court, shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division of the
High Court:
Provided further that all suits and applications transferred to the High Court by
virtue of sub-section ( 4) of section 22 of the Designs Act, 2000 or section 104 of the
Patents Act, 1970 shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division of the
High Court in all the areas over which the High Court exercises ordinary original civil
jurisdiction.
8.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, no civil revision application or petition shall be entertained against any
interlocutory order of a Commercial Court, including an order on the issue of jurisdiction,
and any such challenge, subject to the provisions of section 13, shall be raised only in
an appeal against the decree of the Commercial Court.
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
in the event that a counter-claim filed in a suit before a civil court relating to a commercial
dispute is of Specified Value, such suit shall be transferred by the civil court to the
Commercial Court or Commercial Division, as the case may be, having territorial
jurisdiction over such suit.
    (2) In the event that such suit is not transferred in the manner contemplated in
sub-section ( 1), the Commercial Appellate Division of  the High Court exercising
supervisory jurisdiction over the civil court in question may, on the application of any
of the parties to the suit, withdraw such suit pending before the civil court and transfer
the same for trial or disposal to the Commercial Court or Commercial Division or, as the
case may be, having territorial jurisdiction over such suit, and such order of transfer
shall be final and binding.
10. Where the subject matter of an arbitration is a commercial dispute of a Specified
Value and—
(1) if such arbitration is an international commercial arbitration, all
applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that have been filed in a High Court, shall
be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Appellate Division where such
Commercial Appellate Division has been constituted in such High Court;
(2) if such arbitration is other than an international commercial arbitration,
all applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under the provisions of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that have been filed on the original side
of the High Court, shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Appellate
Division where such Commercial Appellate Division has been constituted in such
High Court;
(3) if such arbitration is other than an international commercial arbitration,
all applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under the provisions of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that would ordinarily lie before any
principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a district (not being a High Court)
shall be filed, heard and disposed of by the Commercial Court exercising territorial
jurisdiction over such arbitration where such Commercial Court has been
constituted.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a Commercial Court or a
Commercial Division shall not entertain or decide any suit, application or proceedings
relating to any commercial dispute in respect of which the jurisdiction of the civil court
is either expressly or impliedly barred under any other law for the time being in force.
16 of 2000.
39 of 1970.
Bar against
revision
application or
petition
against an
interlocutory
order.
5 of 1908. Transfer of suit
if counter-claim
in a commercial
dispute is of
Specified
V alue.
Jurisdiction in
respect of
arbitration
matters.
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
Bar of
jurisdiction of
Commercial
Courts and
Commercial
Divisions.
26 of 1996.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

6
CHAPTER III
SPECIFIED VALUE
12. (1) The specified value of the subject matter of the commercial dispute in a suit,
appeal or application shall be determined in the following manner:—
(a) where the relief sought in a suit or application is for recovery of money, the
money sought to be recovered in the suit or application inclusive of interest, if any,
computed up to the date of filing of the suit or application, as the case may be, shall be
taken into account for determining such specified value;
(b) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to movable
property or to a right therein, the market value of the movable property as on the date
of filing of the suit, appeal or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into
account for determining such specified value;
(c) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to immovable
property or to a right therein, the market value of the immovable property, as on the
date of filing of the suit, appeal or application, as the case may be, shall be taken into
account for determining specified value;
(d) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or application relates to any other
intangible right, the market value of the said right as estimated by the plaintiff shall be
taken into account for determining specified value; and
(e) where the counter-claim is raised in any suit, appeal or application, the value
of the subject matter of the commercial dispute in such counter-claim as on the date of
the counter-claim shall be taken into account.
(2) The aggregate value of the claim and counter-claim, if any, as set out in the statement
of claim and the counter-claim, if any, in an arbitration of a commercial dispute shall be the
basis for determining whether such arbitration is subject to the jurisdiction of Commercial
Court, Commercial Division or Commercial Appellate Division, as the case may be.
(3) No appeal or civil revision application under section 115 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, as the case may be, shall lie from an order of a Commercial Court or
Commercial Division finding that it has jurisdiction to hear a commercial dispute under this
Act.
CHAPTER IV
A
PPEAL
13. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Commercial Court or
Commercial Division of a High Court may appeal to the Commercial Appellate Division
of that High Court within a period of sixty days from the date of judgment or order, as
the case may be:
Provided that an appeal shall lie from such orders passed by a Commercial Court
or Commercial Division that are specifically enumerated under Order XLIII of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 as amended by this Act and section 37 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.
    (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
or Letters Patent of a High Court, no appeal shall lie from any order or decree of a Commercial
Court or Commercial Division otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
14. An appeal or a writ petition filed in a High Court against the orders of the,—
(a) Competition Appellate Tribunal;
 (b) Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal;
5 of 1908.
Determination
of Specified
V alue.
Appeals from
decrees of
Commercial
Courts and
Commercial
Divisions.
Appeals or writ
petitions in
case of certain
Tribunals.
5 of 1908.
26 of 1996.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(c) Intellectual Property Appellate Board;
(d) Company Law Board or the National Company Law Tribunal;
(e) Securities Appellate Tribunal;
(f) Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal,
shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Appellate Division of such High Court, if
the subject matter of such appeal or writ petition relates to a commercial dispute.
15. The Commercial Appellate Division shall endeavour to dispose of appeals filed
before it within a period of six months from the date of filing of such appeal.
CHAPTER V
TRANSFER OF PENDING SUITS
16. (1) All suits and applications, including applications under the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value pending in a High
Court where a Commercial Division has been constituted, shall be transferred to the Commercial
Division.
   ( 2) All suits and applications, including applications under the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value pending in any
civil court in any district or area in respect of which a Commercial Court has been constituted,
shall be transferred to such Commercial Court:
 Provided that no suit or application where the final judgment has been reserved by the
Court prior to the constitution of the Commercial Division or the Commercial Court shall be
transferred either under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2).
  (3) Where any suit or application, including an application under the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, relating to a commercial dispute of Specified V alue shall stand
transferred to the Commercial Division or Commercial Court under sub-section ( 1) or
section (2), the provisions of this Act shall apply to those procedures that were not complete
at the time of transfer.
  (4) The Commercial Division or Commercial Court, as the case may be, may hold case
management hearings in respect of such transferred suit or application in order to prescribe
new timelines or issue such further directions as may be necessary for a speedy and
efficacious disposal of such suit or application in accordance with Order XIV A of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908:
Provided that the proviso to sub-rule ( 1) of rule 1 of Order V of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 shall not apply to such transferred suit or application and the court may, in its
discretion, prescribe a new time period within which the written statement shall be filed.
  (5) In the event that such suit or application is not transferred in the manner specified
in sub-section (1), (2) or (3), the Commercial Appellate Division of the High Court may, on the
application of any of the parties to the suit, withdraw such suit or application from the court
before which it is pending and transfer the same for trial or disposal to the Commercial
Division or Commercial Court, as the case may be, having territorial jurisdiction over such
suit, and such order of transfer shall be final and binding.
CHAPTER VI
A
MENDMENTS TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
17. (1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall, in their application to
any suit in respect of a commercial dispute of a Specified Value, stand amended in the manner
as specified in the Schedule.
Expeditious
disposal of
appeals.
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
Transfer of
pending cases.
5 of 1908. Amendments
to Code of
Civil Procedure,
1908 in its
application to
commercial
disputes.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5 of 1908.

8
      (2) The Commercial Division and Commercial Court shall follow the provisions of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as amended by this Act, in the trial of a suit in respect of
a commercial dispute of a Specified Value.
    (3) Where any provision of any rule of the jurisdictional High Court or any amendment
to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, by the State Government is in conflict with the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as amended by this Act, the provisions of the Code of
Civil Procedure as amended by this Act shall prevail.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
18. The Statistical data regarding the number of suits, applications, appeals or writ
petitions filed before the Commercial Court, Commercial Division, or Commercial
Appellate Division, as the case may be, the pendency of such cases, the status of each case,
and the number of cases disposed of, shall be maintained and updated every month by each
Commercial Court, Commercial Division, Commercial Appellate Division and shall be
published on the website of the relevant High Court.
19. The High Court may, by notification, issue practice directions to supplement the
provisions of Chapter II of this Act or the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in so far as such
provisions apply to the hearing of commercial disputes of a Specified Value.
20. The State Government shall provide necessary infrastructure to facilitate the working
of a Commercial Court or a Commercial Division of a High Court.
21. The State Government may, in consultation with the High Court, establish necessary
facilities providing for training of Judges who may be appointed to the Commercial Court,
Commercial Division or the Commercial Appellate Division in a High Court.
22. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law for the time being in
force other than this Act
23. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
     ( 2) In particular and without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section
(1), such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of appointment of Judge of a Commercial Court under sub-section
(1) of section 5;
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Judges of the Commercial Court
under sub-section (4) of section 5; and
(c) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be made by rules.
24. Every rule made and every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rules or notifications, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rules or
notifications, as the case may be, should not be made or issued, the rule or notification, as
the case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
Collection and
disclosure of
data by
Commercial
Courts,
Commercial
Divisions and
Commercial
Appellate
Divisions.
5 of 1908.
Power of High
Court to issue
directions.
Infrastructure
facilities
Training and
continuous
educations
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.
Laying of
rules and
notificiations
before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification,  as the
case may be.
25. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
    (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
THE SCHEDULE
(See  section 17)
1. In section 26 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereafter referred to as the Code),
in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that such an affidavit shall be in the form and manner as prescribed
under Order VI, rule 15A".
2. For section 35 of the Code, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"35. (1) In relation to any commercial dispute, the Court, notwithstanding anything
costs contained in any other law for the time being in force or rule, has the discretion
to determine:
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another;
(b) the quantum of those costs; and
(c) when they are to be paid.
Explanation. —For the purpose of clause ( a), the expression "costs" shall mean
reasonable costs relating to—
(i) the fees and expenses of the witnesses incurred;
(ii) legal fees and expenses incurred;
(iii) any other expenses incurred in connection with the proceedings.
   (2) If the Court decides to make an order for payment of costs, the general rule is that
the unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay the costs of the successful party:
 Provided that the Court may make an order deviating from the general rule for reasons
to be recorded in writing.
Illustration
The Plaintiff, in his suit, seeks a money decree for breach of contract, and damages.
The Court holds that the Plaintiff is entitled to the money decree. However, it returns a
finding that the claim for damages is frivolous and vexatious.
In such circumstances the Court may impose costs on the Plaintiff, despite the Plaintiff
being the successful party, for having raised frivolous claims for damages.
   (3) In making an order for the payment of costs, the Court shall have regard to the
following circumstances, including—
(a) the conduct of the parties;
(b) whether a party has succeeded on part of its case, even if that party has not
been wholly successful;
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5 of 1908. Amendment of
section 26.
Substitution of
new section
for section 35.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Costs.

10
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counter claim leading to delay in the
disposal of the case;
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle is made by a party and unreasonably
refused by the other party; and
(e) whether the party had made a frivolous claim and instituted a vexatious
proceeding wasting the time of the Court.
  (4) The orders which the Court may make under this provision include an order that
a party must pay—
(a) a proportion of another party's costs;
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party's costs;
(c) costs from or until a certain date;
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun;
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;
(f) costs relating to a distinct part of the proceedings; and
 (g) interest on costs from or until a certain date.
3. In section 35A of the Code, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
4. In the First Schedule to the Code,—
(A) in the Order V, in rule 1, in sub-rule (1), for the second proviso, the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement
within the said period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the written
statement on such other day, as may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be
recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, but
which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from the date of service
of summons. On expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date of service of
summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written statement and
the Court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.";
(B) in Order VI,—
(i) after rule 3, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:—
"3A. In a commercial dispute, where forms of pleadings have been
prescribed under the High Court rules or Practice Directions made for the
purposes of such commercial disputes, pleadings shall be in such forms.";
(ii) after rule 15, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:—
“15A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 15, every
pleading in a Commercial Dispute shall be verified by an affidavit in the
manner and form prescribed in the Appendix to this Schedule.
(2) An affidavit under sub-rule ( 1) above shall be signed by the
party or by one of the parties to the proceedings, or by any other person
on behalf of such party or parties who is proved to the satisfaction of the
Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case and who is duly authorised
by such party or parties.
(3) Where a pleading is amended, the amendments must be verified
in the form and manner referred to in sub-rule (1) unless the Court orders
otherwise.
Amendment of
section 35A.
Amendment of
First Schedule.
Forms of
pleading in
Commercial
Courts.
V erification
of pleadings
in a
commercial
dispute.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
(4) Where a pleading is not verified in the manner provided under
sub-rule (1), the party shall not be permitted to rely on such pleading as
evidence or any of the matters set out therein.
(5) The Court may strike out a pleading which is not verified by a
Statement of Truth, namely, the affidavit set out in the Appendix to this
Schedule.";
(C) in Order VII, after rule 2, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:—
"2A. ( 1) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall contain a
statement to that effect along with the details set out under sub-rules (2) and (3).
(2) Where the plaintiff seeks interest, the plaint shall state whether
the plaintiff is seeking interest in relation to a commercial transaction
within the meaning of section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and,
furthermore, if the plaintiff is doing so under the terms of a contract or
under an Act, in which case the Act is to be specified in the plaint; or on
some other basis and shall state the basis of that.
(3) The pleadings shall also state—
(a) the rate at which interest is claimed;
(b) the date from which it is claimed;
(c) the date to which it is calculated;
(d) the total amount of interest claimed to the date of
calculation; and
(e) the daily rate at which interest accrues after that date.";
(D) in Order VIII,—
(i) in rule 1, for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
 "Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement
within the said period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the written
statement on such other day, as may be specified by the Court, for reasons
to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the Court
deems fit, but which shall not be later than one hundred twenty days from
the date of service of summons. On expiry of one hundred twenty days
from the date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right
to file the written statement and the Court shall not allow the written
statement to be taken on record.";
(ii) after rule 3, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:—
"3A. (1) Denial shall be in the manner provided in sub-rules (2), (3),
(4) and (5) of this rule.
(2) The defendant in his written statement shall state which of the
allegations in the particulars of plaint he denies, which allegations he is
unable to admit or deny, but which he requires the plaintiff to prove, and
which allegations he admits.
(3) Where the defendant denies an allegation of fact in a plaint, he
must state his reasons for doing so and if he intends to put forward a
different version of events from that given by the plaintiff, he must state
his own version.
Where
interest is
sought in the
suit.
5 of 1908.
Denial by the
defendant in
suits before
the
Commercial
Division of
the High
Court or the
Commercial
Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
.(4) If the defendant disputes the jurisdiction of the Court he must
state the reasons for doing so, and if he is able, give his own statement as
to which Court ought to have jurisdiction.
(5) If the defendant disputes the plaintiff's valuation of the suit, he
must state his reasons for doing so, and if he is able, give his own statement
of the value of the suit." ;
(iii) in rule 5, in sub-rule (1), after the first proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely: —
"Provided further, that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not
denied in the manner provided under rule 3A of this Order, shall be taken
to be admitted except as against a person under disability." ;
(iv) in rule 10, after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely: —
"Provided further that no Court shall make an order to extend the
time provided under rule 1 of this Order for filing of the written statement.";
(E). for Order XI of the Code, the following  Order shall be substituted, namely:—
"ORDER XI
D
ISCLOSURE, DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS IN SUITS BEFORE THE COMMERCIAL
DIVISION OF A HIGH COURT OR A COMMERCIAL COURT
1. (1) Plaintiff shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all documents, in its
power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along with the plaint,
including:—
(a)  The documents referred to and relied on by the plaintiff in the plaint;
(b) The documents relating to any matter in question in the proceedings, in the
power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, as on the date of filing the plaint,
irrespective of whether the same is in support of or adverse to the plaintiff's case;
(c) Nothing in this rule shall apply to documents produced by plaintiffs and
relevant only—
(i) for the cross-examination of the defendant's witnesses, or
(ii) in answer to any case setup by the defendant subsequent to the filing
of the plaint, or
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.
(2) The list of documents filed with the plaint shall specify whether the documents in
the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff are originals, office copies or
photocopies. The list shall also set out in brief, details of parties to each document, mode of
execution, issuance or receipt and line of custody of each document.
(3) The plaint shall contain a declaration on oath from the plaintiff that all documents
in the power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, pertaining to the facts and
circumstances of the proceedings initiated by him have been disclosed and copies thereof
annexed with the plaint, and that the plaintiff does not have any other documents in its
power, possession, control or custody.
Disclosure and
Discovery of
documents.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

13
Explanation. —A declaration on oath under this sub-rule shall be contained in
the Statement of Truth as set out in the Appendix.
(4) In case of urgent filings, the plaintiff may seek leave to rely on additional
documents, as part of the above declaration on oath and subject to grant of such leave
by Court, the plaintiff shall file such additional documents in Court, within thirty days
of filing the suit, along with a declaration on oath that the plaintiff has produced all
documents in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the facts and
circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the plaintiff and that the plaintiff does
not have any other documents, in its power, possession, control or custody.
(5) The plaintiff shall not be allowed to rely on documents, which were in the
plaintiff's power, possession, control or custody and not disclosed along with plaint or
within the extended period set out above, save and except by leave of Court. Such leave
shall be granted only upon the plaintiff establishing reasonable cause for non-disclosure
along with the plaint.
(6) The plaint shall set out details of documents, which the plaintiff believes to be
in the power, possession, control or custody of the defendant and which the plaintiff
wishes to rely upon and seek leave for production thereof by the said defendant.
(7) The defendant shall file a list of all documents and photocopies of all
documents, in its power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to the suit, along
with the written statement or with its counter claim if any, including—
(a) the documents referred to and relied on by the defendant in the written
statement;
(b) the documents relating to any matter in question in the proceeding in the
power, possession, control or custody of the defendant, irrespective of whether
the same is in support of or adverse to the defendant's defense;
(c) nothing in this rule shall apply to documents produced by defendants
and relevant only—
(i) for the cross-examination of the plaintiff's witnesses,
(ii) in answer to any case setup by the plaintiff subsequent to the
filing of the plaint, or
(iii) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.
(8) The list of documents filed with the written statement or counter claim shall
specify whether the documents, in the power, possession, control or custody of the
defendant, are originals, office copies or photocopies. The list shall also set out in
brief, details of parties to each document being produced by the defendant, mode of
execution, issuance or receipt and line of custody of each document;
(9) The written statement or counter claim shall contain a declaration on oath
made by the deponent that all documents in the power, possession, control or custody
of the defendant, save and except for those set out in sub-rule ( 7) (c)(iii),  pertaining to
the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by the plaintiff or in the counter
claim, have been disclosed and copies thereof annexed with the written statement or
counter claim and that the defendant does not have in its power, possession, control or
custody, any other documents;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

14
(10) Save and except for sub-rule (7) (c)(iii), defendant shall not be allowed to rely on
documents, which were in the defendant's power, possession, control or custody and not
disclosed along with the written statement or counter claim, save and except by leave of
Court. Such leave shall be granted only upon the defendant establishing reasonable cause
for non - disclosure along with the written statement or counter claim;
(11) The written statement or counter claim shall set out details of documents in the
power, possession, control or custody of the plaintiff, which the defendant wishes to rely
upon and which have not been disclosed with the plaint, and call upon the plaintiff to produce
the same;
(12) Duty to disclose documents, which have come to the notice of a party, shall
continue till disposal of the suit.
2. (1) In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the court may deliver
interrogatories in writing for the examination of the opposite parties or any one or more
of such parties, and such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof
stating which of such interrogatories each of such persons is required to answer:
Provided that no party shall deliver more than one set of interrogatories to the
same party without an order for that purpose: Provided also that interrogatories which
do not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be deemed irrelevant,
notwithstanding that they might be admissible on the oral cross examination of a
witness.
(2) On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatories
proposed to be delivered shall be submitted to the court, and that court shall decide within
seven days from the day of filing of the said application, in deciding upon such application,
the court shall take into account any offer, which may be made by the party sought to be
interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make admissions, or to produce documents relating
to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall be given as to such only of the
interrogatories submitted as the court shall consider necessary either for disposing fairly
of the suit or for saving costs.
(3) In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any party be made
into the propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing
officer or of the court, either with or without an application for inquiry, that such
interrogatories have been exhibited unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the
costs occasioned by the said interrogatories and the answers thereto shall be paid in any
event by the party in fault.
(4) Interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No. 2 in Appendix C to the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with such variations as circumstances may require.
(5) Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether
incorporated or not, empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name or in the
name of any officer of other person, any opposite party may apply for an order allowing
him to deliver interrogatories to any member or officer of such corporation or body, and
an order may be made accordingly.
(6) Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it is scandalous
or irrelevant or not exhibited bona fide for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters inquired
into are not sufficiently material at that stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other
ground may be taken in the affidavit in answer.
(7) Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have been exhibited
unreasonably or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive,
unnecessary or scandalous and any application for this purpose may be made within seven
days after service of the interrogatories.
Discovery by
Interrogatories.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(8) Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten days, or within
such other time as the court may allow.
(9) An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in the form provided in Form No,
3 in Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with such variations as circumstances
may require.
(10) No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the sufficiency or
otherwise of any such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the court.
(11) Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers insufficiently, the
party interrogating may apply to the court for an order requiring him to answer, or to answer
further, as the case may be. And an order may be made requiring him to answer, or to answer
further, either affidavit or by viva voce examination, as the court may direct.
3. (1) All parties shall complete inspection of all documents disclosed within thirty
days of the date of filing of the written statement or written statement to the counter claim,
whichever is later. The Court may extend this time limit upon application at its discretion, but
not beyond thirty days in any event.
(2) Any party to the proceedings may seek directions from the Court, at any stage of
the proceedings, for inspection or production of documents by the other party, of which
inspection has been refused by such party or documents have not been produced despite
issuance of a notice to produce;
(3) Order in such application shall be disposed off within thirty days of filing such
application, including filing replies and rejoinders (if permitted by Court) and hearing;
(4) If the above application is allowed, inspection and copies thereof shall be furnished
to the party seeking it, within five days of such order.
(5) No party shall be permitted to rely on a document, which it had failed to disclose or
of which inspection has not been given, save and except with leave of Court.
(6) The court may impose exemplary costs against a defaulting party, who wilfully or
negligently failed to disclose all documents pertaining to a suit or essential for a decision
therein and which are in their power, possession, control or custody or where a Court holds
that inspection or copies of any documents had been wrongfully or unreasonably withheld
or refused.
4. (1) Each party shall submit a statement of admissions or denials of all documents
disclosed and of which inspection has been completed, within fifteen days of the completion
of inspection or any later date as fixed by the Court.
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out explicitly, whether such party
was admitting or denying:
(a) Correctness of contents of a document;
(b) Existence of a document;
(c) Execution of a document;
(d) Issuance or receipt of a document;
(e) Custody of a document;
Explanation.—A statement of admission or denial of the existence of a document
made in accordance with rule 4(2)(b) of the modified Order XI will include the admission
or denial of the contents of a document.
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a document under any of the above
grounds. Bare and unsupported denials shall not be deemed to be denials of a document and
proof of such documents may then be dispensed with at the discretion of the Court.
Admission and
Denial of
Documents.
Inspection.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(4) Any party may however submit bare denials for third party documents of which the
party denying does not have any personal knowledge of, and to which the party denying is
not a party to in any manner whatsoever;
(5) An Affidavit in support of the statement of admissions and denials shall be filed
confirming the correctness of the contents of the statement.
(6) In the event that the Court holds that any party has unduly refused to admit a
document under any of the above criteria, - costs (including exemplary costs) for deciding on
admissibility of a document may be imposed by the Court on such party.
(7) The court may pass orders with respect to admitted documents including for
waiver of further proof thereon or rejection of any documents.
5. (1) Any party to a proceeding may seek or the Court may order, at any time during
the pendency of any suit, production by any party or person, of such documents in the
possession or power of such party or person, relating to any matter in question in such
suit.
(2) Notice to produce such document shall be issued in the form provided in Form
No. 7 in Appendix C to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(3) Any party or person to whom such notice to produce is issued shall be given not
less than seven days and not more than fifteen days to produce such document or to answer
to their inability to produce such document.
(4) The Court may draw an adverse inference against a party refusing to produce such
document after issuance of a notice to produce and where sufficient reasons for such
non-production are not given and order costs.
6.  (1) In case of disclosures and inspection of electronic records (as defined in the
Information Technology Act, 2000), furnishing of printouts shall be sufficient compliance
of the above provisions.
(2) At the discretion of the parties or where required (when parties wish to rely on
audio or video content), copies of electronic records may be furnished in electronic form
either in addition to or in lieu of printouts.
(3) Where Electronic Records form part of documents disclosed, the declaration
on oath to be filed by a party shall specify—
(a) the parties to such electronic record;
(b) the manner in which such electronic record was produced and by whom;
(c) the dates and time of preparation or storage or issuance or receipt of each
such electronic record;
(d) the source of such electronic record and date and time when the electronic
record was printed;
(e) in case of email ids, details of ownership, custody and access to such email
ids;
(f) in case of documents stored on a computer or computer resource (including
on external servers or cloud), details of ownership, custody and access to such data
on the computer or computer resource;
(g) deponent's knowledge of contents and correctness of contents;
(h) whether the computer or computer resource used for preparing or receiving
or storing such document or data was functioning properly or in case of malfunction
that such malfunction did not affect the contents of the document stored;
(i) that the printout or copy furnished was taken from the original computer or
computer resource;
Production of
documents.
Electronic
records. 21 of  2000.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(4) The parties relying on printouts or copy in electronic form, of any electronic records,
will not be required to give inspection of electronic records, provided a declaration is made
by such party that each such copy, which has been produced, has been made from the
original electronic record.
(5) The Court may give directions for admissibility of electronic records at any stage of
the proceedings.
(6) Any party may seek directions from the Court and the Court may of its motion issue
directions for submission of further proof of any electronic record including metadata or logs
before admission of such electronic record.
7. For removal of doubt, it is hereby clarified that rule 1of Order XIII, rule 14 of Order VII
and rule 1A of order VIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall not apply to suits or
applications before the Commercial Divisions of High Court or Commercial Courts.".
5. After Order XIII of the Code, the following Order shall be inserted, namely:—
"ORDER XIII-A
S
UMMARY JUDGEMENT
1. (1) This Order sets out the procedure by which Courts may decide a claim pertaining
to any Commercial Dispute without recording oral evidence.
(2) For the purposes of this Order, the word "claim" shall include—
(a) part of a claim;
(b) any particular question on which the claim (whether in whole or in part)
depends; or
(c) a counter-claim, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an application for summary judgment
under this Order shall not be made in a suit in respect of any Commercial Dispute that is
originally filed as a summary suit under Order XXXVII.
2. An applicant may apply for summary judgment at any time after summons has been
served on the defendant:
Provided that, no application for summary judgment may be made by such applicant
after the Court has framed the issues in respect of the suit.
3. The Court may give a summary judgment against a plaintiff or defendant on a claim
if it considers that—
(a) the plaintiff has no real prospect of succeeding on the claim or the defendant
has no real prospect of successfully defending the claim, as the case may be; and
(b) there is no other compelling reason why the claim should not be disposed of
before recording of oral evidence.
4. (1) An application for summary judgment to a Court shall, in addition to any other
matters the applicant may deem relevant, include the matters set forth in clauses (a) to (e)
mentioned hereunder:—
(a) the application must contain a statement that it is an application for summary
judgment made under this Order;
Certain
provisions of
the Code of
Civil Procedure,
1908 not to
apply.
5 of 1908.
Scope of and
classes of
suits to which
this Order
applies.
Insertion of
Order XIII-A.
Stage for
application for
summary
judgment.
Grounds for
summary
judgment.
Procedure.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

18
(b) the application must precisely:
(i) disclose all material facts; and
(ii) identify the point of law, if any;
(c) in the event the applicant seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence, the
applicant must:—
(i) include such documentary evidence in its application; and
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which
the applicant relies;
(d) the application must state the reason why there are no real prospects of
succeeding on the claim or defending the claim, as the case may be;
(e) the application must state what relief the applicant is seeking and briefly
state the grounds for seeking such relief.
(2) Where a hearing for summary judgment is fixed, the respondent must be given at
least thirty days' notice of:—
(a) the date fixed for the hearing; and
(b) the claim that is proposed to be decided by the Court at such hearing.
(3) The respondent may, within thirty days of the receipt of notice of application of
summary judgment or notice of hearing (whichever is earlier), file a reply addressing the
matters set forth in clauses  (a) to (f) mentioned hereunder in addition to any other matters
that the respondent may deem relevant:—
(a) the reply must precisely—
 (i) disclose all material facts;
(ii) identify the point of law, if any; and
(iii) state the reasons why the relief sought by the applicant should not be
granted;
(b) in the event the respondent seeks to rely upon any documentary evidence in
its reply, the respondent must—
(i) include such documentary evidence in its reply; and
(ii) identify the relevant content of such documentary evidence on which
the respondent relies;
(c) the reply must state the reason why there are real prospects of succeeding
on the claim or defending the claim, as the case may be;
(d) the reply must concisely state the issues that should be framed for trial;
(e) the reply must identify what further evidence shall be brought on record at
trial that could not be brought on record at the stage of summary judgment; and
(f) the reply must state why, in light of the evidence or material on record if any,
the Court should not proceed to summary judgment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

19
 5. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the respondent in an application for
summary judgment wishes to rely on additional documentary evidence during the hearing,
the respondent must:—
(a) file such documentary evidence; and
(b) serve copies of such documentary evidence on every other party to the
application at least fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Order, if the applicant for summary judgment
wishes to rely on documentary evidence in reply to the defendant's documentary evidence,
the applicant must:—
(a) file such documentary evidence in reply; and
(b) serve a copy of such documentary evidence on the respondent at least five
days prior to the date of the hearing.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, sub-rules (1) and (2) shall not require
documentary evidence to be:—
(a) filed if such documentary evidence has already been filed; or
(b) served on a party on whom it has already been served.
6.  (1) On an application made under this Order, the Court may make such orders that
it may deem fit in its discretion including the following:—
(a) judgment on the claim;
(b) conditional order in accordance with rule 7 mentioned hereunder;
(c) dismissing the application;
(d) dismissing part of the claim and a judgment on part of the claim that is not
dismissed;
(e) striking out the pleadings (whether in whole or in part); or
(f) further directions to proceed for case management under Order XV A.
(2) Where the Court makes any of the orders as set forth in sub-rule (1) (a) to (f), the
Court shall record its reasons for making such order.
 7.  (1) Where it appears to the Court that it is possible that a claim or defence may
succeed but it is improbable that it shall do so, the Court may make a conditional order as set
forth in rule 6 (1) (b).
(2) Where the Court makes a conditional order, it may:—
(a) make it subject to all or any of the following conditions:—
(i) require a party to deposit a sum of money in the Court;
(ii) require a party to take a specified step in relation to the claim or defence,
as the case may be;
(iii) require a party as the case may be to give such security or provide
such surety for restitution of costs as the Court deems fit and proper;
(iv) impose such other conditions, including providing security for
restitution of losses that any party is likely to suffer during the pendency of the
suit, as the Court may deem fit in its discretion; and
(b) specify the consequences of the failure to comply with the conditional order,
including passing a judgment against the party that have not complied with the
conditional order.
Evidence for
hearing of
summary
judgment.
Conditional
Order.
Orders that
may be made
by the Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

20
8.  The Court may make an order for payment of costs in an application for summary
judgment in accordance with the provisions of section 35 and section 35A of the Code.".
6. Order XV of the Code shall be omitted.
7. After Order XV of the Code,  the following Order shall be inserted, namely:—
"ORDER XV-A CASE MANAGEMENT HEARING
1.  The Court shall hold the first 'Case Management Hearing', no later than four weeks
from the date of filing of affidavit of admission or denial of documents by all parties to the
suit.
2. In a Case Management Hearing, after hearing the parties, and once it finds that there
are issues of fact and law which require to be tried, the Court may pass an order:—
(a) framing the issues between the parties in accordance with Order XIV of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 after examining pleadings, documents and documents
produced before it, and on examination conducted by the Court under rule 2 of Order
X, if required;
(b) listing witnesses to be examined by the parties;
(c) fixing the date by which affidavit of evidence to be filed by parties;
(d) fixing the dates on which evidence of the witnesses of the parties to be
recorded;
(e) fixing the date by which written arguments are to be filed before the Court by
the parties;
(f) fixing the date on which oral arguments are to be heard by the Court; and
(g) setting time limits for parties or their advocates to address oral arguments.
3.  In fixing dates or setting time limits for the purposes of rule 2 of this Order, the Court
shall ensure that the arguments are closed no later than six months from the date of the first
case management hearing.
4.  The Court shall as far as possible ensure that the recording of evidence shall be
carried on, on a day-to-day basis until the cross examination of all the witnesses is
complete.
5.  The Court may, if necessary, also hold case management hearings anytime during
the trial to issue appropriate orders so as to ensure adherence by the parties to the dates
fixed under rule 2 and facilitate speedy disposal of the suit.
6. (1) In any case management hearing held under this Order, the Court shall have the
power to—
(a) prior to the framing of issues, hear and decide any pending application filed
by the parties under Order XIIIA;
(b) direct parties to file compilations of documents or pleadings relevant and
necessary for framing issues;
(c) extend or shorten the time for compliance with any practice direction or Court
order if it finds sufficient reason to do so;
(d) adjourn or bring forward a hearing if it finds sufficient reason to do so;
(e) direct a party to attend the Court for the purposes of examination under rule
2 of Order X;
(f) consolidate proceedings;
Omission of
Order XV .
Power to
impose costs.
Insertion of
Order XV-A
First Case
Management
Hearing.
Orders to be
passed in a
Case
Management
Hearing.
Time limit
for the
completion
of a trial.
Recording of
oral evidence
on a day-to-
day basis.
Case
Management
Hearings
during a trial.
Powers of the
Court in a Case
Management
Hearing.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

21
(g) strike off the name of any witness or evidence that it deems irrelevant to the
issues framed;
(h) direct a separate trial of any issue;
(i) decide the order in which issues are to be tried;
(j) exclude an issue from consideration;
(k) dismiss or give judgment on a claim after a decision on a preliminary issue;
(l) direct that evidence be recorded by a commission where necessary in
accordance with Order XXVI;
(m) reject any affidavit of evidence filed by the parties for containing irrelevant,
inadmissible or argumentative material;
(n) strike off any parts of the affidavit of evidence filed by the parties containing
irrelevant, inadmissible or argumentative material;
(o) delegate the recording of evidence to such authority appointed by the Court
for this purpose;
(p) pass any order relating to the monitoring of recording the evidence by a
commission or any other authority;
(q) order any party to file and exchange a costs budget;
(r) issue directions or pass any order for the purpose of managing the case and
furthering the overriding objective of ensuring the efficient disposal of the suit.
(2) When the Court passes an order in exercise of its powers under this Order, it may—
(a) make it subject to conditions, including a condition to pay a sum of money
into Court; and
(b) specify the consequence of failure to comply with the order or a condition.
(3) While fixing the date for a Case Management Hearing, the Court may direct that the
parties also be present for such case management hearing, if it is of the view that there is a
possibility of settlement between the parties.
7. (1) The Court shall not adjourn the case management hearing for the sole reason
that the advocate appearing on behalf of a party is not present:
Provided that an adjournment of the hearing is sought in advance by moving an
application, the Court may adjourn the hearing to another date upon the payment of such
costs as the Court deems fit, by the party moving such application.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, if the Court is satisfied that there
is a justified reason for the absence of the advocate, it may adjourn the hearing to another
date upon such terms and conditions it deems fit.
8.  Where any party fails to comply with the order of the Court passed in a Case
Management Hearing, the Court shall have the power to—
(a) condone such non-compliance by payment of costs to the Court;
(b) foreclose the non-compliant party's right to file affidavits, conduct cross-
examination of witnesses, file written submissions, address oral arguments or make
further arguments in the trial as the case may be, or
(c) dismiss the plaint or allow the suit where such non-compliance is wilful,
repeated and the imposition of costs is not adequate to ensure compliance.".
8. In Order XVIII of the Code in rule 2, for sub-rules ( 3A), (3B), (3C) and (3D), the
following shall be substituted, namely:-—
A
djournment
of Case
Management
Hearing.
Consequences
of non-
compliance
with orders.
Amendment
of Order
XVIII.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

22
 "(3A) A party shall, within four weeks prior to commencing the oral arguments,
submit concisely and under distinct headings written arguments in support of his case
to the Court and such written arguments shall form part of the record.
(3B) The written arguments shall clearly indicate the provisions of the laws
being cited in support of the arguments and the citations of judgments being relied
upon by the party and include copies of such judgments being relied upon by the
party.
(3C) A copy of such written arguments shall be furnished simultaneously to the
opposite party.
(3D) The Court may, if it deems fit, after the conclusion of arguments, permit the
parties to file revised written arguments within a period of no more than one week after
the date of conclusion of arguments.
(3E) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written
arguments unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary
to grant such adjournment.
(3F) It shall be open for the Court to limit the time for oral submissions having
regard to the nature and complexity of the matter.".
9. In Order XVIII of the Code, in rule 4, after sub-rule(1), the following sub-rules shall
be inserted, namely:-—
(1A) The affidavits of evidence of all witnesses whose evidence is proposed to
be led by a party shall be filed simultaneously by that party at the time directed in the
first case management hearing.
(1B) A party shall not lead additional evidence by the affidavit of any witness
(including of a witness who has already filed an affidavit) unless sufficient cause is
made out in an application for that purpose and an order, giving reasons, permitting
such additional affidavit is passed by the Court.
(1C) A party shall however have the right to withdraw any of the affidavits so
filed at any time prior to commencement of cross-examination of that witness, without
any adverse inference being drawn based on such withdrawal:
 Provided  that any other party shall be entitled to tender as evidence and rely
upon any admission made in such withdrawn affidavit.".
10.  In Order XIX of the Code, after rule 3, the following rules shall be inserted,
namely:—
4.  (1) The Court may, by directions, regulate the evidence as to issues on which
it requires evidence and the manner in which such evidence may be placed before the
Court.
(2) The Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded in writing,
exclude evidence that would otherwise be produced by the parties.
5. The Court may, in its direction, the reasons to be recorded in writing—
(1) redact or order the redaction of such portions of the affidavit of
examination-in-chief as do not, in its view, constitute evidence;
(2) return or reject an affidavit of examination-in-chief as not constituting
admissible evidence;
6. ( 1) An affidavit must comply with the form and requirements set forth below:—
(a) such affidavit should be confined to, and should follow the chronological
sequence of, the dates and events that are relevant for proving any fact or any other
matter dealt with;
Amendment of
Order XVIII.
Amendment
of Order XIX.
Reacting or
rejecting
evidence
.
Court may
control
evidence.
Format and
guidelines of
affidavit of
evidence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
(b) where the Court is of the view that an affidavit is a mere reproduction of the
pleadings, or contains the legal grounds of any party's case, the Court may, by order,
strike out the affidavit or such parts of the affidavit, as it deems fit and proper;
(c) each paragraph of an affidavit should, as far as possible, be confined to a
distinct portion of the subject;
(d) an affidavit shall state:—
(i) which of the statements in it are made from the deponent's own
knowledge and which are matters of information or belief; and
(ii) the source for any matters of information or belief;
(e) an affidavit should:—
 (i) have the pages numbered consecutively as a separate document (or as
one of several documents contained in a file);
(ii) be divided into numbered paragraphs;
(iii) have all numbers, including dates, expressed in figures; and
(iv) if any of the documents referred to in the body of the affidavit are
annexed to the affidavit or any other pleadings, give the annexures and page
numbers of such documents that are relied upon.".
11. In Order XX of the Code, for rule 1, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) The Commercial Court, Commercial Division, or Commercial Appellate
Division, as the case may be, shall, within ninety days of the conclusion of arguments,
pronounce judgment and copies thereof shall be issued to all the parties to the dispute
through electronic mail or otherwise.".
APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF TRUTH
(Under First Schedule, Order VI- Rule 15A and Order X- Rule 1)
STATEMENT OF TRUTH BY [party position and name of party in full] I, the deponent
above-named, do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. I am [name of party and relevant details] in the above suit and competent to swear
this affidavit.
2. I am sufficiently conversant with the facts of the case and have also examined all
relevant documents and records in relation thereto.
3. I say that the statements made in [mention specific paragraph numbers] paragraphs
are true to my knowledge and statements made in [mention specific paragraph numbers]
paragraphs are based on information received which I believe to be correct and statements
made in [mention specific paragraph numbers] are based on legal advice.
4. I say that there is no false statement or concealment of any material fact, document
or record and I have included information that is according to me, relevant for the present
suit.
5. I say that all documents in my power, possession, control or custody, pertaining to
the facts and circumstances of the proceedings initiated by me have been disclosed and
copies thereof annexed with the plaint, and that I do not have any other documents in my
power, possession, control or custody.
6. I say that the above-mentioned pleading comprises of a total of [number of pages]
pages, each of which has been signed by me.
Amendment
of Order XX.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

24
7. I state that the Annexures hereto are true copies of the documents referred to and
relied upon by me.
8. I say that I am aware that for any false statement or concealment, I shall be liable for
action taken against me under the law.
Place
Date
                                                                DEPONENT VERIFICATION
The statements made above are true to my knowledge.
Verified at [place] on this [date]
DEPONENT

25
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The proposal to provide for speedy disposal of high value commercial disputes has
been under consideration of the Government for quite some time. The high value commercial
disputes involve complex facts and question of law. Therefore, there is a need to provide for
an independent mechanism for their early resolution. Early resolution of commercial disputes
shall create a positive image to the investor world about the independent and responsive
Indian legal system.
2. The Law Commission of India in its 188th Report had recommended the constitution
of the Commercial Division in each High Court. Accordingly, the Commercial Division of
High Courts Bill, 2009 was introduced and passed by the Lok Sabha. However during the
discussion of the aforesaid Bill in the Rajya Sabha, some Members raised certain issues and
in view thereof, the matter was again referred to the Law Commission of India for its
examination. The Law Commission of India, in its 253rd Report, has recommended for the
establishment of the Commercial Courts, the Commercial Divisions and the Commercial
Appellate Divisions in the High Courts for disposal of commercial disputes of specified
value.
3. The Commercial Courts shall be constituted at District level except for the territory
over which any High Court is having ordinary original civil jurisdiction. The Commercial
Divisions shall be set up in those High Courts which are already exercising ordinary original
civil jurisdiction and they shall have territorial jurisdiction over such areas on which it has
original jurisdiction. The minimum pecuniary jurisdiction of such Commercial Courts and
Commercial Division is proposed as one crore rupees.
4. The Commercial Appellate Division shall be set up in all the High Courts to hear the
appeals against the Orders of the Commercial Courts and the Orders of the Commercial
Division of the High Court.
5. It is proposed to have a streamlined procedure which is to be adopted for the
conduct of cases in the Commercial Courts and in the Commercial Divisions by amending
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 so as to improve the efficiency and reduce delays in
disposal of commercial cases. The proposed case management system and provisions for
summary judgment will enable disposal of commercial disputes in a time bound manner. The
proposed amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as applicable to the Commercial
Courts and Commercial Divisions shall prevail over the existing High Court Rules and other
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
6. The proposed Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
Division of High Courts Bill, 2015 shall ensure that the commercial cases are disposed of
expeditiously, fairly and at reasonable cost to the litigant. The proposal to establish the
Commercial Courts and the Commercial Division of the High Court shall,—
(i) accelerate economic growth;
(ii) improve the international image of the Indian justice delivery system; and
(iii) improve the faith of the investor world in the legal culture of the nation.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; D. V .  SADANANDA GOWDA.
The 24th April, 2015.

26
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purpose
of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter
alia, include(a) the manner of appointment of Judge of a Commercial Court under
sub-section (1) of section 5; (b) the terms and conditions of service of the Judges of the
Commercial Courts under sub-section (4) of section 5; and (c) any other matter which is to
be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. The rules made by the Central Government are required to be laid before each
House of the Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government are
matters of administrative details or of procedure and it is not possible to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

27
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
(5 OF 1908)
* * * * *
Costs
35. (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, and to the
provisions of any law for the time being in force, the costs of and incident to all suits shall be
in the discretion of the Court, and the Court shall have full power to determine by whom or
out of what property and to what extent such costs are to be paid, and to give all necessary
directions for the purposes aforesaid. The fact that the Court has no jurisdiction to try the
suit shall be no bar to the exercise of such powers.
(2) Where the Court directs that any costs shall not follow the event, the Court shall
state its reasons in wirting.
35A. (1) * * * * *
(2) No Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount exceeding three
thousand rupees or exceeding the limits of its pecuniary jurisdiction, whichever amount is
less:
Provided that where the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of any Court exercising the
jurisdiction of a Court of small causes under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887, or
under a corresponding law in force in any part of India to which the said Act does not extend
and not being a Court constituted under such Act or law are less than two hundred and fifty
rupees, the High Court may empower such Court to award as costs under this section any
amount not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees and not exceeding those limit by more
than one hundred rupees:
Provided, further, that the High Court may limit the amount which any Court or class of
Courts is empowered to award as costs under this section.
* * * * *
ORDER V
I
SSUE AND SERVICE OR SUMMONS
Issue of Summons
1. (1) When a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may be issued to the defendant
to appear and answer the claim and to file the written statement of his defence, if any, within
thirty days from the date of service of summons on the defendant:
Provided that no such summons shall be issued when a defendant has appeard at the
presentation of plaint and admitted the plaintiff's claim:
Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the
said period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to file the same on such other day as may be
specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, but which shall not be later than
ninety days from the date of service of summons.
* * * * *
Compensatory
costs in
respect of
false or
vexatious
claims or
defences.
Cost.
9 of 1887.
Summons
.

28
ORDER VIII
WRITTEN STATEMENT, SET-OFF AND COUNTER-CLAIM
1. The defendant shall, within thirty days from the date of service of summons on him,
present a written statement of his defence:
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said
period of thirty days, he shall be allowed to the file the same on such other day, as may be
specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, but which shall not be later than
ninety days from the date of service of summons.
* * * * *
ORDER XI
D
ISCOVERY AND INSPECTIONS
1. In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the Court may deliver interrogato-
ries in writing for the examination of the opposite parties or any one or more of such parties,
and such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which
of such interrogatories each of such persons in required to answer:
Provided that no party shall deliver more than one set of interrogatories to the same
party without an order for that purpose:
Provided also that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in question in the
suit shall be deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they might be admissible on the oral
cross-examination of a witness.
2. On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatories
proposed to be delivered shall be submitted to the Court and that Court shall decide within
seven days from the date of filing of the said application. In deciding upon such application,
the Court shall take to account any offer, which may be made by the party sought to
interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make admissions, or to produce documents relating
to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave shall be given as to such only of the
interrogatories submitted as the Court shall consider necessary either for disposing fairly of
the suit or for saving costs.
3. In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any party be made
into the propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the option of the taxing officer
or of the Court, either with or without an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories
have been exhibited unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the costs occasioned
by the said interrogatories and the answers thereto shall be paid in any event by the party in
fault.
4. Interrogatories shall be in Form No. 2 in Appendix C, with such variations as
circumstances may require.
5. Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether incorporated
or not, empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of any
officer or other person, any opposite party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver
interrogatories to any member of officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be
made accordingly.
6. Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it is sacandalous
or irrelevant or not exhibited bona fide for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters inquired
into are not sufficiently material at that stage, or on the ground of privilege or any other
ground, may be taken in the affidavit in answer.
Written
statement.
Discovery by
interrogatories.
Particular
interrogatories
to be
submitted.
Costs of
interrogatories.
Form of
interrogatories.
Corporations.
Objections to
interrogatories
by answer.

29
7. Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have been exhibited
unreasonably or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive,
unnecessary or scandalous; and any application for this purpose may be made within seven
days after service of the interrogatories.
8. Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten days, or within
such other time as the Court may allow.
9. An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in Form No. 3 in Appendix C, with
such variations as circumstances may require.
10. No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the sufficiency or
otherwise of any such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the Court.
11. Where any person interrogated omits to answer , or answers insufficiently, the
party interrogating may apply to the Court for an order requiring him to answer, or to answer
further, as the case may be. And an order may be made requiring him to answer or answer
further, either by affidavit or by viva doce examination, as the Court may direct.
12. Any party may, without filing any affidavit, apply to the Court for an order directing
any other party to any suit to made discovery on oath of the documents which are or have
been in his possession or power, relating to any matter in question therin. On the hearing of
such application the Court may either refuse or adjourn the same, if satisfied that such
discovery is not necessary, or not necessary at that stage of the suit, or make such order,
either generally or limited to certain classes of documents, as may, in its diseretion, be
thougth fit :
Provided that discovery shall not be ordered when and so far as the Court shall be of
opinion that it is not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.
13. The affidavit to be made may a party against whom such order as is mentioned in
the last proceding rule has been made, shall specify which (if any) of the documents therein
mentioned be objects to produce, and it shall be in Form No. 5 in Appendix C, with such
variations as circumstances may require.
14. It shall be lawful for the Court, at any time during the pendency of any suit, to order
the  production by any party thereto, upon oath, of such of the documents in his possession
or power, relating to any matter in question in such suit, as the Court shall think right; and the
Court may deal with such documents, when produced, in such manner as shall appear just.
15. Every party to a suit shall be entitled at or before the settlement of issues to give
notice to any other party, in whose pleadings or affidavits reference is made to any document,
or who has entered any document in any list annexed to his pleadings, to produce such
document for the inspection of the party giving such notice, or of his pleader, and to permit
him or them to take copies thereof; and any party not complying with such notice shall not
afterwards be at liberty to put any such document in evidence on his behalf in such suit
unless he shall satisfy the Court that such document relates only to his own title, he being a
defendant to the suit, or that he had some other cause or excuse which the Court shall deem
sufficient for not complying with such notice, in which case the Court may allow the same to
be put in  evidence on such terms as to costs and otherwise as the Court shall think fit.
16. Notice to any party to produce any documents referred to  in his pleading or
affidavits shall be in Form No. 7 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may
require.
17. The party to whom such  notice is given shall, within ten days from the receipt of
such notice, deliver to the party giving the same a notice stating a time within three days from
the delivery thereof at which the documents, or such of them as he does not object to
produce, may be inspected at the office of his pleader, or in the case of bankers' books or
other books of account or books in constant use for the purposes of any trade or business,
at their usual place of custody, and stating which (in any) of the documents he objects to
produce, and on what ground. Such notice shall be in Form No. 8 in Appendix C, with such
variations  as circumstances may require.
Setting aside
and striking
out
interrogatories.
Affidavit in
answer, filling
Form of
affidavit in
answer.
No exception
to be taken.
Order to
answer or
answer
further.
Application
for discovery
of documents.
Affidavit of
documents.
Production of
documents.
Inspection of
documents
referred to in
pleadings or
affidavits.
Notice to
produce.
Time for
inspection
when notice
given.

30
18. (1) Where the party served with notice under rule 15 omits to give such notice
of a time for inspection or objects to give inspection, or offers inspection elsewhere
than at the office of his pleader, the  Court may, on the application of the party desiring
it, make an order for inspection in such place and in such manner as it may think fit:
Provided that the order shall not be made when and so far as the Court shall be of
opinion that it is not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.
(2) Any application to inspect documents, except such as are referred to in the
pleadings, particulars or affidavits of the party against whom the application is made or
disclosed in his affidavit of documents, shall be founded upon an affidavit showing of
what documents inspection is sought, that the party applying is entitled to inspect
them, and that they are in the possesion or power of the other party. The Court shall not
make such order for inspection of such documents when and so far as the Court shall
be of opinion that it is not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving
costs.
19. (1) Where inspection of any business books is applied for, the Court may, if it
thinks fit, instead of ordering inspection of the original books, order a copy of any
entries therein to be furnished and verified by the affidavit of some person who has
examined the copy with the original entries, and such affidavit shall state whether or
not there are in the original book any and what erasures, inter- lineations or alterations:
 Provided that, notwithstanding that such copy has been supplied, the Court may
order inspection of the book from which the copy was made.
(2) Where on an application for an order for inspection privilege is claimed for any
document, it shall be lawful for the Court to inspect the document for the purpose of
deciding as to the validity of the claim of privilege, unless the document relates to
matters of State.
(3) The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit at any time, and
whether an affidavit of documents shall or shall not have already been ordered or made,
make an order requiring any other party to state by affidavit whether any one or more
specific documents, to be specified in the application, is or are, or has or have at any
time been, in his possession or power; and, if not then in his possession, when he
parted with the same and what has become thereof such application shall be made on an
affidavit stating that in the belief of the deponent the party against whom the application
is made has, or has at some time had, in his possession or power the document or
documents specified in the application, and that they relate to the matters in question
in the suit, or to some of them.
20. Where the party from whom discovery of any kind or inspection is sought
objects to the same, or any part thereof, the Court may, if satisfied that the right to the
discovery or inspection sought depends on the determination of any issue or question
in dispute in the suit, or that for any other reason it is desirable that any issue or
question in dispute in the suit should be determined before deciding upon the right to
the discovery or inspection, order that such issue or question be determined first, and
reserve the question as to the discovery or inspection.
21. (1) Where any party fails to comply with any order to answer interrogatories,
or for discovery or inspection of documents, he shall, if a plaintiff, be liable to have his
suit dismissed for want of prosecution, and, if a defendant, to have his defence, if any,
struck out, and to be placed in the same position as if he had not defended, and the
party interrogating or seeking discovery or inspection may apply to the Court for an
order to that effect, and an order may be made on such application accordingly, after
notice to the parties and after giving them a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) Where an order is made under sub-rule ( I) dismissing any suit, the plaintiff
shall be precluded from bringing a fresh suit on the same cause of action.
Order for
inspection.
Verified
copies.
Premature
discovery.
Non-
compliance
with order for
discovery.

31
22. Any party may, at the trial of a suit, use in evidence anyone or more of the
answers or any part of an answer of the opposite party to  interrogatories without
putting in the others or the whole of such answer:
Provided always that in such case the Court may look at the whole of the answers,
and if it shall be of opinion that any others of them are so connected with those put in
that the last-mentioned answers ought not to be used without them, it may direct them
to be put in.
23. This order shall apply to minor plaintiffs and defendants, and to the next
friends and guardians for the suit of persons under disability.
* * * * *
ORDER XV
D
ISPOSAL  OF THE SUIT AT THE FIRST  HEARING
1. Where at the first hearing of a suit it appears that the parties are not at issue on
any question of law or of fact, the Court may at once pronounce judgement.
2. (1) Where there are more defendants than one, and any one of the defendants
is not at issue with the plaintiff on any question of law or of fact, the Court may at once
pronounce judgement for or against such defendant and the suit shall proceed only
against the other defendants.
(2) Whenever a judgement is pronounced under this rule, a decree shall be drawn
up in accordance with such judgement and the decree shall bear the date on which the
judgement was pronounced.
3. (1) Where the parties are at issue on some question of law or of fact, and issue
have been framed by the Court as hereinbefore provided, if the Court is satisfied that
no further argument or evidence than the parties can at once adduce is required upon
such of the issues as may be sufficient for the decision of the suit, and that no injustice
will result from proceeding with the suit forthwith, the Court may proceed to determine
such issues, and if, if the finding thereon is sufficient for the decision, may pronounce
judgement accordingly, whether the summons has been issued for the settlement of
issues only or for the final disposal of the suit:
Provided that, where the summons has been issued for the settlement of issues
only, the parties or their pleaders are present and none of them objects.
(2) Where the finding is not sufficient for the decision, the Court shall postpone
the further hearing of the suit, and shall fix a day for the production of such further
evidence, or for such further argument as the case requires.
4. Where the summons has been issued for the final disposal of the suit and either
party fails without sufficient cause to produce the evidence on which he relies, the
Court may at once pronounce judgement, or may, if it thinks fit, after framing and
recording issues, adjourn the suit for the production of such evidence as may be
necessary for its decision upon such issues.
* * * * *
ORDER XVIII
H
EARING OF THE SUIT AND EXAMINA TION OF WITNESSES
* * * * *
2. (1) On the day fixed for the hearing of the suit or on any other day to which the
hearing is adjourned, the party having the right to begin shall state his case and produce his
evidence in support of the issues which he is bound to prove.
* * * * *
Using answers
to inter-
orgatories at
trial.
Order to
apply to
minors.
Parties not
at issue.
One of
several
defendants
not at issue.
Parties at
issue.
Failure to
produce
evidence.
Statement
and prodution
of evidence.

32
(3A) Any party may address oral arguments in a case, and shall, before he concludes
the oral arguments, if any, submit if the Court so permits concisely and under distinct head-
ings written arguments in support of his case to the Court and such written arguments shall
form part of the record.
(3B) A copy of such written arguments shall be simultaneously furnished to the oppo-
site party.
(3C) No adjournment shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments
unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such
adjournment.
(3D) The Court shall fix such time-limits for the oral arguments by either of the parties
in a case, as it thinks fit.
*****
ORDER  XX
J
UDGMENT AND DECREE
1. (1) The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment in an open
Court, either at once, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable and when the judgment is
to be pronounced on some future day, the Court shall fix a day for that purpose, of which due
notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders:
Provided that where the judgment is not pronounced at once, every endeavour shall
be made by the Court to pronounce the judgment within thirty days from the date on which
the hearing of the case was concluded but, where it is not practicable so to do on the ground
of the exceptional and extraordinary circumstances of the case, the Court shall fix a future
day for the pronouncement of the judgment, and such day shall not ordinarily be a day
beyond sixty days from the date on which the hearing of the case was concluded, and due
notice of the day so fixed shall be given to the parties or their pleaders.
* * * * *
Judgement
when
pronounced.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division in the High Courts for adjudicating commercial disputes and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda, Minister of Law and Justice )
GMGIPMRND—594RS(S3)—27-04-2015.