     AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 26TH JULY, 2024
Bill No. XXV of 2024 
THE GENERAL CLAUSES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
A 
BILL 
further to amend the General Clauses Act, 1897. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:– 
1. (1) This Act may be called the General Clauses (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 
10 of 1897. 
40 of 2019 
5 
10 
2. In section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (hereinafter referred  to as the
‘principal Act’),—
(i) after clause (62), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(62A) “transgender person”, with its grammatical variations and
cognate expressions, shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause 
(k) of section (2) of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 
2019;” and 
Amendment of 
section 3. 

2 
(ii) clause (62A) shall be renumbered as ‘(62AA)’.
Amendment of 
section 13.
3. For sub -section (1) of section 13 of the principal Act, the following shall be
substituted, namely,-
“(1) words importing the masculine gender shall be taken to include females 
and transgender persons; and”. 5 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The General Clauses Act, 1897 (Act No. 10 of 1897 ) has been a 
cornerstone of our legal framework, providing a foundation for the 
interpretation and application of statutes promulgated in the country.  It is 
the Interpretation Act of India and has often bee n called the "Law of all 
laws". The General Clauses Act, 1897 has been expressly made applicable 
for the interpretation of the Constitution as well by virtue of clause (1) of 
article 367. It makes provisions as to the construction of General Acts and 
other laws of all -India application. The Supreme Court had pointed out in 
the Chief Inspector of Mines and Anr. v. Lala Karam Chand Thapar, Etc 
(1961) that the purpose of the General Clauses Act is to place in one single 
statute different provisions pertaining to interpretations of words and legal 
principles which would otherwise have to be specified separately in many 
different acts and regulations. Whatever the General Clauses Act says, 
whether as regards the meanings of words or as regards legal principles, 
has to be read into every statute to which it applies. 
Sub-section (1) of section 13 of the Act provides that, in all Central 
Acts and Regulations, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context, words importing the masculine gender shall be t aken to include 
females. However, this narrow interpretation no longer aligns 
harmoniously with our present-day comprehension of gender and justice. It 
has become imperative for our legal structure to evolve in tandem with 
societal progress, ensuring that it is all -encompassing and just for all its 
citizens. 
It must be noted that queerness is a natural phenomenon which is 
known to India since ancient times. In fact, historically, Hijra or 
transgender persons had played a prominent role in Indian society. 
However, with the onset of colonial rule, the situation changed drastically , 
and since then, the transgender community in India has been marginalized 
and discriminated against, socially, economically and politically. 
The Supreme Court, in its judgment dated 15th April, 2014 in 
National Legal Services Authority Vs. Union of India and Ors.,  
unequivocally pronounced that the State is obliged to acknowledge 
individuals who exist beyond the traditional male -female binary, 
designating them as 'third gender persons, ' and affirming their entitlement 
to all constitutionally guaranteed rights. The directive further called upon 
the Union and State Governments to confer legal recognition upon the 
self-identified gender of transgender persons. While the dictum laid down 
by the Apex court represented a significant stride forward, there remains a 
compelling imperative for a comprehensive legal recognition with the aim 
of empowering the transgender community. 
The landmark judgment of the Supreme Court in 2018 in Navtej 
Singh Johar & Ors. v. Union of India  played a pivotal role in safeguarding 
the rights of the LGBTQ community. This seminal judicial pronouncement 
resulted in the decriminalization of consensual homosexual acts among 
adults and a resolute affirmation of the dignit y and rights of LGBTQ 
individuals. The Supreme Court, in essence, ruled that LGBTQ individuals 
are to be recognized as equal citizens, underlining that any form of 
discrimination rooted in sexual orientation or gender is impermissible and 
in violation of t he law and the fundamental rights enshrined in the 
Constitution. 
While the Parliament subsequently enacted the Transgender 
Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019, to protect the rights of the 
transgender community and provide welfare measures for their betterment, 

4 
the members of this community continue to confront var ious 
manifestations of violence, oppression, contempt, and ridicule on a daily 
basis. They continue to face economic, social and political oppression in 
both visible and invisible ways. 
In Supriyo @ Supriya Chakraborty & Anr. v. Union of India 
(2023), while examining the question of incorporating gender -neutral 
provisions within the Special Marriage Act, 1954, the Supreme Court, 
while adhering to the doctrine of separation of powers, observed against 
judicial legislations and placed the responsibility on th e Parliament to fill 
the vacuum in due course of time vis-à-vis the transgender community. 
Including the transgender community in the General Clauses Act 
would ensure that they are not discriminated against while interpreting or 
applying any laws enacted i n the country. It would be a significant as well 
as a symbolic step towards recognizing their rights and promoting 
inclusivity. In light of the observations of the Supreme Court and 
international human rights norms, Parliament has a unique responsibility 
to affirm the rights of every individual, regardless of their sexual 
orientation, gender identity, or expression. In a democratic and diverse 
nation like India, fostering inclusivity and non -discrimination is not just a 
legal responsibility but a moral and ethical imperative as well. 
Recognizing the rights of transgender persons within the General Clauses 
Act, 1897, is thus a pivotal step toward dismantling the societal barriers 
and stigma that have hindered their full participation in all aspects of life. 
As such, by addressing this matter, a powerful message can be sent 
that India stands firmly on the side of equality and justice for all its 
citizens. Ultimately, passage of this legislation would be a vital step 
towards fulfilling the promise of a just and compassionate society where 
social justice prevails. 
Hence, this Bill. 
JOHN BRITTAS 

5 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE GENERAL CLAUSES ACT, 1897 
[10 OF 1897] 
* *  * *  * 
13. In all Central Acts and Regulations, unless there is anything repugnant in
the subject or context,—
(1) words importing the masculine gender shall be taken to include
females; and
(2) words in the singular shall include the plural, and vice versa.
Gender and number. 
* *  * * *

RAJYA SABHA 
   __________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the General Clauses Act, 1897. 
  __________ 
(Dr. John Brittas, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—159—30.07.2024. 