Bill No.  XXV of  2013
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 183 for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely,—
"(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred
to in section 112 shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to rupees five thousand,
or with both, and for any second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to rupees ten thousand,
or with both and if such an act results in the death of any person, the convict shall be
punished with life imprisonment.
Short  title  and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 183.
59 of 1988 5
10
[AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH JULY, 2014]

2
(2) Whoever causes any person who is employed by him or is subject to his
control to drive a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred to in
section 112 shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to rupees five thousand,
or with both, and for any second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to rupees ten thousand,
or with both and if such an act results in the death of any person, the convict shall be
punished with life imprisonment."
3. In section 184 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words "imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees", the words, "imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees" shall be substituted;
(b) for the words, "imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both", the words,
"imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both and if such an act results in the death of
any person, the convict shall be punished with life imprisonment" shall be substituted.
4. In section 185 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words "imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both", the words,
"imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees, or with both" shall be substituted;
(b) for the words, "imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both", the words,
"imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both and if such an act results in the death of
any person, the convict shall be punished with life imprisonment" shall be substituted.
5.  In section 186 of the principal Act, for the words "with fine which may extend to
two hundred rupees and for a second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees", the words," with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and
for  a second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and
if such an act results in the death of any person, the convict shall be punished with life
imprisonment" shall be substituted.
6. After section 186 of the principal  Act, the following shall be inserted, namely,—
“186A. Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of section 129 shall be
punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to rupees two thousand, or with both,
and for any second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to rupees five thousand, or with
both.”
Amendment
of section
184.
Amendment
of section
185.
Amendment
of section
186.
Insertion of
new section
186A.
Punishment
for not
wearing
protective
head gear.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a sharp  rise in the number of two wheelers on the roads. The majority
of them are high end bikes capable of attaining high speeds in short time. In the majority of
the accidents involving the two-wheelers, it has been observed that the fatality could have
been avoided, if the drivers and companion had been wearing helmets. It is very strange that
though the people purchase expensive bikes, yet they are not ready to invest in purchasing
a helmet which can save lives in an accident. In this connection, the deterrence provided by
way of fine in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is too low and has filed to instill discipline among
the two-wheeler drivers regarding compulsory wearing of helmets while driving.
Similarly, there has been a sharp increase in the number of other four wheeler vehicles
on the roads. The new vehicles coming on the roads are again capable of reaching high
speeds in seconds, which at times pose great danger to other vehicles and pedestrians as
well who also use roads at the same time. The owners of these high end vehicles are elite and
affluent who drive these vehicles dangerously specially after consuming alcohal as for them
the punishment provided in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is meagre and thus does not act as
an effective deterrent.
The offences of causing death by rash and negligenc driving are a matter of grave
public concern and are among the most difficult cases for courts to decide quantum of
imprisonment.  There is a growing perception among public that punishment in such cases
which come after a long time, is very lenient. Thus, it is felt that the fine and punishment in
the Motor Vehciles Act, 1988 for offences of driving two wheelers without helmets, causing
death by rash and dangerous driving or driving under the influence of alcohol or other
intoxicants may be raised substantially so that besides being more deterrent it can instill a
sense of discipline among the drivers.
Hence this Bill.
MANSUKH  L. MANDA VIYA
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988
(59 OF 1988)
* * * * * * *
CHAPTER XIII
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
183. (1) Whoever drive a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred to
in section 112 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to four hundred rupees, or, if
having been previously convicted of an offence under this sub-section is again convicted of
an offence under this sub-section, with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever  casues any person who is employed by him or is subject to his control in
driving to drive a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred  to in section 112
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees, or, if having been
previously convicted of an offence under this sub-section, is again convicted of an offence
under this sub-section, with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
* * * * * * *
184. Whoever drives a motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to
the public, having regard to all the circumstances of the case including the nature, condition
and use of  the place where the vehicle is driven and the amount of traffic which actually is at
the time or which might reasonably be expected to be in the place, shall be punishable for the
first offence with imprisonment of a term which may extend to six months or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, and for any second or subsequent offence if committed
within three years of the commission of a previous similar offence with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees,
or with both.
185. Whoever, while driving, or attempting to drive, a motor vehicle ,—
(a) has, in his blood, alcohol exceeding 30 mg. per 100 ml. of  blood detected in a
test by a breath analyser, or
 (b) is under this influence of a drug to such an extend as to be incapable of
exercising proper control over the vehicle,
shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both; and for a
second or subsequent offence, if committed within three years of the commission of the
previous similar offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years , or with
fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation.— For  the purposes of this section, the drug or drugs specified by the
Central Government in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette, shall be deemed to
render a person incapable of exercising proper control over a motor vehicle.
186. Whoever drives a motor vehicle in any public place when he is to his knowledge
suffering from any disease or disability calculated to casue his driving of the vehicle to be a
source of danger to the public, shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may
extend to two hundred rupees and for a second or subsequent offence with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees.
* * * * * *
Driving at ex-
cessive speed,
etc.
Driving dan-
gerously.
Driving by a
drunken person
or by a person
under the influ-
ence of drugs.
Driving when
mentally or
physically
unfit to drive
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
————
(Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1071RS(S4)—11.07.2014.