THE WORKING CHILDREN (RESCUE, REHABILITATION
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the identification of children employed in industries, occupations,
households and establishments, eateries etc., for rescuing them from such employment
and for their proper rehabilitation and for welfare measures to be undertaken by the
State through education, training and such other measures for the rescued working
children and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Working Children (Rescue, Rehabilitation and
Welfare) Act, 2006.
      (2) It extends to the whole of India.
     (3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXV of 2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "child" means any boy or girl who is below the age of fifteen years;
(c) "competent authority" means such authority which has been so auhorized
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette to perform all or
any of the functions of competent authority under this Act and also for such area or
areas as may be specified therein;
(d) "employer" means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment the person who has the ultimate control
over the affairs of such establishment;
(ii) in relation to a house, the head of the family;
(iii) in relation to a shop, dhaba stall, restaurant, hotel, kiosk, rehri or
similar places the owner thereof; and
(iv) in relation to agricultural operation, the person for whom the agricul-
tural operation or work is done, undertaken or accomplished.
(e) "establishment" includes a household, factory, mine, plantation site, agricul-
tural field, shop, Kiosk, stall, dhaba, rehri, tea stall Hotel, restaurant, circus, exhibition,
vending place or vehicle, garage or auto repair shop, or any place or permises in which
children are employed for working;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1) On the commencement of this Act, child labour in any form whatsoever shall
stand abolished and every working child on such commencement shall stand freed and
discharged from any obligation to render any work, be it forced or bonded labour for any
employer or establishment.
(2) After the commencement of this Act,—
(a) no person shall for himself or for any establishment either employ a child or
compel any child to render any forced or bonded labour;
(b) no parent or guardian of a child shall pledge his child to anybody for any
work; and
(c) any custom or tradition or any contract, agreement or other instrument by
virtue of which any child is required to do any work or render any service as a worker
shall be void and inoperative.
4.  (1) The appropriate Government shall, from time to time as per the need, make
surveys to identify and enumerate children working in various establishments and prepare
a record thereof in such manner and with such details, as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall rescue all the working children identified and
enumerated under sub-section (1) in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The working children rescued under sub-section (2) shall be lodged in shelters
established by the appropriate Government for rehabilitation of such working children
where such children shall be provided the following facilities, namely:—
(a) free food, clothing, boarding, lodging and other necessities of daily life;
(b) free medical care; and
(c) such other facilities as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Abolition of
Child labour.
Survey,
enumeration
and rescue of
working
Children.

3
5. The working children covered under this Act shall be provided the following
educational facilities by the appropriate Government, namely:—
(a) free education as per his calibre for such level and period as may be
prescribed;
(b) free vocational education and training;
(c) free medical and engineering education and computer training wherever
necessary; and
(d) provision of employment after the completion of education.
6. The appropriate Government shall establish and run such number of shelters as the
Competent Authority may deem necessary for the rehabilitation of rescued working children
under this Act.
7.  (1) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may, by noification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act,
a fund to be called the 'National Child Labour Rehabilitation cum Welfare Fund' to be oper-
ated by the Competent Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Fund established under sub-section (1) shall consist of all receipts from,—
(a)  the Central and State Governments and institutions and organizations;
(b)  body corporates, both of public and private sectors; and
(c)  individuals, associations and others in the form of contributions or dona-
tions.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. Whoever, after the commencement of this Act, employs or compels any child to
render labour shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
four years but may extend to seven years and also with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees.
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
every offence under this Act shall be cognizable, non bailable and shall be tried summarily by
a magistrate.
11. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Company, every person
who, at the time, offences were committed, was incharge of and was responsible to the
Company for the conduct of the business of the Company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
12. No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter to which any provi-
sion of this Act applies and no injunction shall be granted by any Civil Court in respect of
anything which is done or intended to be done by or under this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Educational
Facilities.
Establishment
of Shelters.
Establishment
of National
Child Labour
Rehabilitation
Cum Welfare
Fund.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Penalty.
Offences to
be cognizable,
non-bailable
and sum-
marily triable.
Offences by
Companies.
Jurisdiction of
Civil Courts
barred.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to 2001 Census, in the age group of 5-14 years there are nearly 1.26 crore
working children in our country. Most of them work in hazardous conditions and are consis-
tently exploited. Quite a large number of them work in carpet factories, brick kilns, stone and
limestone mines etc., as a bonded labourer. Children also work in Beedi rolling factories,
bangle manufacturing units, cracker factories, hotels, tea stalls, dhabas, garages, cycle and
other vehicle repairing shops, agricultural fields, ferriwallas, domestic servants and various
other kinds of working places. At the school going age and when it's time to enjoy the
childhood the hapless children are forced to work from the very tender age either for their
own survival or to support their poor families. Many a time alcoholic or drug addict, or
gambler parents also force their wards to work. These unfortunate children remain illiterate
and exploited. They generally get meagre salary and many a time only two square meals and
a pair of clothes. They do not get proper medical care at the time of need and are left to their
destiny.
Though child labour is prohibited by law but laws are flouted without any fear because
the laws are not credibly deterrent. Such Law breakers must get stringent punishment. In a
Welfare State like ours the State has to come forward to rehabilitate the child workers through
education, training and other means. A National Child Labour Rehabilitation-cum-Welfare
Fund should be established for them so that their childhood is saved from exploitation and
they grow as responsible citizens.
Hence this Bill.
E.M.  SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for rehabilitation of the rescued children by giving them
free food, medical care etc. Clause  5 provides for educational facilities for working children.
Clause 6 provides for the establishment of shelters for such children. Clause 8 makes it
mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of two thousand crore rupees may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two thousand crore may also involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the identification of children employed in industries, occupations,
households and establishments, eateries etc., for rescuing them from such
employment and for their proper rehabilitation and for welfare measures
to be undertaken by the State through education, training and such
other measures for the rescued working children and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—494RS(S5)—12-05-2006.