1
Bill No. XXV of 2019
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by  Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2019.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act) after section 29C, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
  ''29D. ( 1) Every political party registered under section 29A and contesting
election at the State or national level, shall publish a paper or a list or a manifesto,
detailing the public policies that it shall adopt in the administration, or promises or
assurances that it shall fulfill in the event of winning such elections, at least six months
before elections are due.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 26TH JULY, 2019
Short title and
commencement.
Publishing of
manifesto.
43 of 1951.
5
10

2
  (2) Each promise, assurance and policy so published by a political party under
sub-section (1) shall be treated as a promise made with public by the political party for
that election.
  ( 3) Failure to fulfill the promises or assurances or failure to implement the
policies declared under sub-section (1) before the end of the term of the political party
in Government shall be treated as cheating and shall be subject to trail under the
Indian Penal Code, 1860.''
 3. In the principal Act, in section 123, after sub-section (8), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted namely:—
   ( 9) Publication of a paper or a list or a manifesto by a political party or a
candidate contesting an election or their agent or any person with their consent,
containing policies, promises and assurances that appear fiscally imprudent and are
made without any reasonable basis or convincing reasons which does not withstand
the scrutiny by the appropriate authority and prima facie appear to have been made
only to obtain undue gain in the electroal process by attracting the voters.
Bribery is already a "corrupt practice" under S/123 (1) of principal Act.
 (10) Transfer of individual benefits, including monetary transfers under Direct
Benefit Transfer scheme announced by the appropriate government, to an voter or his
family members, if arising out of or consequent to a scheme or program commenced by
the appropriate Government within six months from general election to the House of
People or election to a State Legislative Assembly, as the case may be.''
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section
123.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Every political party wants to get elected and govern. But unfortunately, unable to
please the people with a constant to-do list of waging a war on poverty, tackling the issue of
rising inequality, spurting the farmer income's, boosting the job creation, catalysing investment
growth, plugging infrastructure deficits, and solving the energy crisis etc., they choose to
offer them unrealistic manifestos apart from distribution of individual benefits and distribution
of freebies to the voters.
There is a general tendency among political parties to attract the electors with individual
benefits and making unrealistic promises in their manifestos. People also get attracted to
these individual benefits and start believing in such unrealistic policies and show interest in
voting them to power. Almost all the regional and national political parties are competing
with each other to announce schemes attractive to the people and detrimental to the interest
of the nation. Some political parties, inspite of having some interest in the country's future
and aversion towards such schemes, are somehow compelled to fall on the same line to
impress people and win the public mandate.
The system of announcing or promising freebies, consumer goods benefitting the
individual and familes and making unrealistic promises to people in a Manifesto without any
and promising fiscally imprudent polices should be discontinued. Otherwise, country will
face an economic turmoil in future.
Though all the political parties declare their election manifestos, it was not made
mandatory under law. Publication of a manifesto much before elections containing the policies
and promises and treating the failure in implementation of those promises by the party in
government after winning the election as cheating, shall be one of the options to ensure
accountability in political parties.
Therefore, the Bill seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to the
extent to make it mandatory to publish a manifesto much before elections with only
implementable policies and also to declare freebies and consumer goods distribution and
making unrealistic promises and assurances in the manifesto without a valid basis, a corrupt
practice. Further the Bill also seeks to amend the Act to curtail individual benefits under
Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme of the Government before 180 days of general elections or
elections to State Assembly by declaring it as one of the currupt practices.
DR. K.V.P. RAMACHANDRA RAO
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2366RS(S3)—02.08.2019.