1
Bill No. XXV of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022;
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After clause (2) of article 246 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall by
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the power of the Parliament to make laws with respect to any of
the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List shall be subject to ratification by the
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 22ND JULY, 2022
Amendment of
article 246.
5

2
Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States by resolutions to that effect passed
by those Legislatures before the Bill seeking such provisions is presented to the
President for assent."
3. In clause (1) of article 254 of the Constitution, after the words, figure and brackets
"subject to the provisions of clause ( 2)", the words, figures and brackets "and proviso to
clause (2) of article 246" shall be inserted.
Amendment of
article 254. 5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Constitution of India commences with the sentence “India, that is Bharat, shall
be a Union of States”. While resolving the above terms, the founding fathers would have
borne in mind the need to enshrine, enrich and encourage the rich diversity of the Nation.
There won’t be an iota of doubt that the Union Government has a bounden duty to enrich
federalism, diversity and pluralism in the Country. Union Government and its instrumentalities
are expected to perform in a befitting manner to uphold and nurture the democratic and
federal values that the framers of our Constitution had infused into it.  Insofar as the legislative
powers are concerned, the basic structure of the Constitution is not unitary but quasi-federal
in character.
The distribution of legislative powers of Parliament and State Legislatures are mainly
delineated in Articles 245 to 253 under Part XI of the Constitution read with the Seventh
Schedule thereto. Similarly, Article 254 elucidates the position in case of inconsistency
between laws  made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States.
But there are reasonable perturbations now-a-days in respect of legislations put forth
by the Union Government with respect to the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh
Schedule (Concurrent List). Such actions will obliterate the values of co-operative federalism
and social fabric of the States. Introduction of  National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET)
applying to all States taking away their sovereignty to regulate medical education in the
States, apparently conducting Common University Entrance Test (CUET) for admission to
Central Universities without giving any weightage for Class XII marks awarded by the State
Boards, insertion of Part IXB in the Constitution vide the Constitution (Ninety Seventh
Amendment) Act, 2011 vis-a-vis the Co-operative Societies (which was subsequently struck
down by the Supreme Court as far as it relates with the co-operative societies working within
a State, by declaring that Part IXB of the Constitution is operative only insofar as it concerns
multi-State cooperative societies both within the various States and in the Union territories
of India), etc. are some examples of this inclination by the Union Government.
Any legislation by the Parliament with respect to the matters enumerated in the
Concurrent List ought to have been made only after due consultations and deliberations
with States, by taking the State Governments into confidence. It is pertinent to note that the
frontline activities of the State Governments put them in the vanguard for the people and to
judge the requirements better. Hence consultations and concurrence with the State
Governments will ensure a new legislation by the Parliament with respect to the matters
enumerated in the Concurrent List more reasonable, justifiable, democratic and inclusive.
In view of the above, there is a need to amend article 254(1) and to insert a new Proviso
to article 246(2) of the Constitution of India to ensure inclusive legislation by the Parliament
with respect to the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule.
Hence this Bill.
JOHN  BRITTAS
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
246. * * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament, and, subject to clause (1), the
Legislature of any State also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the
"Concurrent List").
* * * * *
254. (1) If any provision of the law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to
any provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to any
provision of an existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent
List, then, subject to the provisions of clause ( 2), the law made by Parliament, whether
passed before or after the law made by the Legislature of such State, or, as the case may be,
the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislature of the State shall, to the
extent of the repugnancy, be void.
4
Subject-
matter of laws
made by
Parliament
and by the
Legislatures
of States.
Inconsistency
between laws
made by
Parliament
and laws made
by the
Legislatures of
States.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri John Brittas, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—652RS—25-07-2022.