AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XXV of 2025 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
      BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of  the Republic of 
 India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 
  5 2. In article 282 of the Constitution, the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:—
Amendment of 
article 282. 
        “Provided that the devolution of grants by the Union to the States by 
way of Centrally Sponsored Schemes pertaining to subjects enumerated in 
the Concurrent List or State List shall be routed through the budgets of the 

2 
State Governments, and the States shal l, independently of the Union, 
formulate the modalities for the implementation of the Schemes, including 
the branding and nomenclature criteria, with the overarching objective of 
tailoring initiatives to address local needs: 
            Provided further that the Union shall strive to bear complete financial 
responsibility under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, and in no 
circumstance shall any State be mandated to contribute in excess of twenty-
five per cent. of the total funding pattern and such an obligation shall only 
be countenanced in exceptional and compelling circumstances, with the 
concept of shared cost constituting an exceptional deviation: 
           Provided also that the formulation of the contours and general 
guidelines of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes referred to in the preceding 
provisos shall be culminated only subsequent to consultation and approval 
by not less than one-half of the States.” 
5 
1
0 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 282 of the Indian Constitution enables the Central as well as the State 
Governments to make grants for any ‘public purpose’, even beyond their 
respective legislative competences. The execution of Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSSs) falls within the purview of article 282, whereby the States 
undertake implementation of the CSSs. While the Central Sector schemes are 
directly funded and executed by the Centre, CSSs are funded jointly by the Centre 
and the State. The budget estimates for 2023-24 reveal that more than 20 per cent. 
of the total fiscal transfers to the States are designated for CSSs, amounting to over 
Rupees 3.6 lakh crore. 
Numerous concerns afflict the framework governing CSSs in India. Unlike 
articles 270 (Taxes lev ied and distributed between the Union and the States) and 
275 (Grants from the Union to certain States), the transfers effected by the Union 
to the States under article 282 are not based on the recommendations of the 
Finance Commission, thereby increasing the discretionary authority of the Union 
Government. These schemes pertain to subjects enumerated in the State or 
Concurrent Lists in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. However, the Union 
Government unilaterally determines the scope, nature, and design of the CSSs. 
Most States are currently constrained to contribute 40 per cent. of the outlay in 
majority of the CSSs, thereby straining their overall fiscal resources. CSSs are at 
present based on a ‘one size fits all approach’ often neglecting State-specific needs 
and contexts. The recent push by the Central Government to enforce Centrally 
decided branding and naming guidelines of CSSs further exacerbates the 
prevailing imbalance in Centre-State relations.  
Successive Finance Commissions (FCs) have deal t with the issue of CSSs 
and highlighted the need for their restructuring. The Fourteenth Finance 
Commission recommended that the existing arrangements for transfers need to be 
reviewed with a view to minimise the discretion of the Central Government and 
to promote co-operative federalism. The Fifteenth Finance Commission expressed 
concern over the large number of CSSs and sub-schemes and the resultant lack of 
flexibility for the States. The Arvind Verma Committee (2005) recommended that 
all the CSSs should  
have terminal dates and targeted outcomes. The B.K. 
Chaturvedi Committee (2011) recommended that the States should have the 
flexibility to tailor schemes as per their own ground realities. The Sub -Group of 
Chief Ministers (2015) recommended rationalisation of schemes by grouping them 
into Core of Core, Core and Optional Categories. Despite all these measures, fiscal 
autonomy of the States are substantially eroded by the gradual increase in the 
States’ share in CSS, lack of flexibility for States in the implementation of CSSs, 
etc. 
In light of the above, there arises an imperative need to amend article 282 of 
the Constitution, affording greater autonomy to States for the implementation of 
CSSs in alignment with local needs and aspirations. To rectify the prevailing fiscal 
imbalance, the Central Government must also assume a heightened financial 
responsibility under Centrally Sponsored Schemes. Likewise, any formulation of 
guidelines in this regard necessitates consultation with the State Governments and 
their concurrence thereof. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the said objectives. 
 JOHN BRITTAS. 

4 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the Central Government 
responsible to bear the complete financial responsibility in Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes, and to ensure that States are insulated from contributing anything more 
than 25 
per cent. of the total funding pattern, that too in exceptional and 
compelling circumstances. 
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify 
the recurring or non-recurring expenditure involved.  

5 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
*      *                 *     *              *      
282. The Union or a State may make any grants for any public purpose,
notwithstanding that the purpose is not one with respect to which Parliament or 
the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, may make laws.  
Expenditure 
defrayable by 
the Union or a 
State out of its 
revenues. 
*      *                 *     *            *

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India.  
___________ 
(Dr. John Brittas, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–315–08.12.2025. 