THE CIGARETTES AND OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS (PROHIBITION
OF ADVERTISEMENT AND REGULATION OF TRADE AND COMMERCE,
PRODUCTION, SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to amend the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition
of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and
Distribution) Amendment Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No.  XXV  of 2007
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 27TH APRIL, 2007

2
Amendment
of section 6.
2. In section 6 of the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution)
Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), clause (b) shall be omitted.
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, after the words ‘‘cigarettes or any other tobacco
products’’ wherever they occur, the words ‘‘except beedis’’ shall be inserted.
4.  In section 8 of the principal Act, after the words ‘‘cigarettes or any other tobacco
products’’ wherever they occur, the words ‘‘except beedi’’ shall be inserted.
5. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1) after the words “cigarettes and other tobacco products”
the words “except beedis” shall be inserted.
(ii) in sub-section (2) after the words “cigarettes or other tobacco products” the
words ‘‘except beedis’’ shall be inserted.
6.  In section 10 of the principal Act, after the words “cigarettes and any other tobacco
products”, the words “except beedis” shall be inserted.
7.  In section 11 of the principal Act, after the words “cigarettes and any other tobacco
products”, the words “except beedis” shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 11.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of  Advertisement and Regu-
lation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003 (Act No. 34 of
2003) was enacted by Parliament to prohibit the advertisement and to provide the regulation
of trade and commerce, production, supply and distribution of cigarettes and other tobacco
products and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Some of the Sections of the Act have direct effect on the workers employing in the
beedi industry. Like, section 6 (b) of the Act prohibits no person shall sell, offer for sale, or
permit sale of cigarettes or any other tobacco products in an area within a radius of one
hundred yards of any educational institution. As in big cities and towns, there are large
number of educational institutions at very short distance from each other, it would not
be possible to maintain the stipulation of one hundred  yards radius. Similarly, the sections
7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 have provisions to restrict trade & commerce, production, supply &
distribution of cigarettes and other tobacco products and related matters.
The warning of a pictorial depiction of  skull and cross bones and such other warning
on cigarettes and tobacco products as stated in the clause 1 of section 7 of the Act has led
to catastrophic effect on the beedi industry and beedi workers, rendering lacs of beedi
workers jobless. Clause 4 of the section 7 of the Act stated that the specified warning shall
appear on not less than one of the largest panels of the package. But as the packets of beedis
have no panels, this provision could not be applied in case of beedi. Similarly, according to
clause 5 of  section 7 of the Act, nicotine and tar contents should be indicated on the label of
cigarettes and other tobacco products. Quantifying of nicotine and tar contents is not
possible in case of beedi, since the beedi industry is mainly home based industry located in
interior villages, related  provisions are there in sections 8, 9, 10 and 11, which directly effect
beedi industry.
In view of the above and to protect the interest of beedi workers it is proposed to
amend sections 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 of the Act suitably.
Hence this Bill.
TAPAN  KUMAR SEN
3
SERVER 5 \ BILL2007 \ RAJYA SABHA \ 1487RS

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CIGARETTES AND OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS (PROHIBITION OF
ADVERTISEMENT AND REGULATION OF TRADE AND COMMERCE, PRODUCTION
SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 2003
* * *
6. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or permit sale of, cigarette or any other tobacco
product—
(a) to any person who is under eighteen years of age, and
(b) in an area within a radius of one hundred yards of any educational
institution.
* * *
Prohibition
on sale of
cigarette or
other tobacco
products to a
person below
the age of
eighteen years
and in
particular
area.
4
SERVER 5 \ BILL2007 \ RAJYA SABHA \ 1487RS

MGIPMRND— 1770RS (S3)—27-04-2007.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003.
————
(Shri Tapan Kumar Sen, M.P.)