1
THE CONSULTATION AND RATIFICATION OF
TREATIES BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to establish a procedure for the ratification by Parliament of treaties entered into by the
Central Government  and  to  ensure  accountability  and  democratic  consultation in
respect of power of the Union to enter into a treaty and for other matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Consultation and Ratification of Treaties Act, 2011.
(2) It shall extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th day of July, 2005.
2.  In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “binding”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means
the creation of enforceable rights and liabilities arising from a treaty that has obtained
the ratification of Parliament;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XXV of 2011
5
10

2
(b) “enter into”,  with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means
the signing of a treaty by the Central Government, on behalf of India, with the intention
that such treaty be binding in respect of India;
(c) “ratification” means the approval of a treaty by resolution of both the Houses
of Parliament in the manner prescribed under this Act;
(d) “State Legislature” means the Legislature of a State and also includes, for
purposes of this Act, the primary legislative body of a Union Territory;
(e)  “treaty” means an International Agreement in writing that is intended to
have binding effect between its signatories, whether embodied in a single instrument
or in two or more related instruments and whatever its particular title, designation or
form, concluded between the Central Government and the Government or Governments
of any other foreign country or countries, as the case may be, or any international
organization or international organizations, as the case may be.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION IN RESPECT OF TREA TY MAKING POWER
3.  No treaty shall be entered into by the Central Government, or ratified by the
Parliament, save in accordance with the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder.
CHAPTER III
PUBLIC TO BE CONSULTED
4. (1) The Central Government shall, in such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed inform the public of the content, nature, effect and scope of any treaty that it is
negotiating or intends to negotiate.
(2) The Central Government shall, at least ninety days before entering into a treaty,
(a) Publish the draft provisions of such treaty that it intends to enter into in the
Official Gazette;
(b) disseminate, or cause the dissemination of, the draft provisions of such
treaty that it intends to enter into, along with an explanation as to its nature, scope and
effect, for discussion by the Public;
(c) invite, facilitate, receive and consider views and suggestions regarding the
draft provisions of such treaty that it intends to enter into, from the public.
(3) Every treaty entered into by the Central Government shall, within fifteen days of
the date of it being entered into, be circulated for discussion by the public.
CHAPTER IV
C
IRCULATION TO STATE LEGISLATURES
5. (1) The Central Government shall, at least ninety days before entering into any
treaty, circulate, or cause the circulation of, such treaty that it intends to enter into to each
State Legislature in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Each State Legislature to which a treaty has been circulated under sub-section (1)
of this section may, if it thinks fit, make responses or objections upon such treaty in such
form, manner and time as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
PARLIAMENT TO RATIFY CERTAIN TREATIES
6.  (1) No treaty entered into by the Central Government shall be binding in respect to
India unless it has obtained the ratification of Parliament.
(2) Parliament may, by resolution to that effect passed by each House, exclude from
the operation of this section, any treaty or treaties or class or classes of treaties, as the case
may be.
Central
Government
to enter into
treaties in
accordance
with the
provisions of
this Act.
Public to be
consulted on
treaty before
it is entered
into.
Treaties to be
circulated to
State
Legislatures.
No treaty
binding unless
ratified by
Parliament.
5
45
10
40
35
30
25
20
15

3
7. (1)  Subject to sub-section (2) of section 6, every treaty entered into by the Central
Government shall be laid, within fifteen days of the date of it being entered into, before each
House of Parliament in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that where a treaty has been entered into at a time when either House of
Parliament is not in session or has been dissolved, the period of fifteen days shall be
reckoned from the date on which both Houses of Parliament are reassembled, and if the
Houses of Parliament are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period aforesaid
shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the purposes of this section.
(2) Each House of Parliament may, within a period of ninety days, which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more consecutive sessions, of a treaty being laid
before it under sub-section ( 1) of this section, pass a resolution to approve, disapprove,
modify, or make reservations to, the said treaty:
Provided that each House of Parliament may extend the period of ninety days for such
further periods as it thinks fit to facilitate discussion by the public.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of this section, Parliament
may, by resolution, indicate the treaties or classes of treaties that have to be ratified by
resolution of both Houses of Parliament.
(4) A treaty that has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament under
sub-section (2) of section 7 shall be deemed to have obtained the ratification of Parliament:
Provided that where Parliament makes a reservation or reservations to a treaty that has
been laid before it, the treaty shall be deemed to be ratified subject to such reservation or
reservations, as the case may be:
Provided further that where a treaty has been modified, by resolution of either House
of Parliament, the treaty shall not be deemed to be ratified and may be referred to the Central
Government for further negotiation.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
8.  ( 1) Notwithstanding any resolution of Parliament under sub-section ( 2) of the
section 6 or any other provisions of this Act, every treaty entered into by the Central
Government shall be published, within seven days of such entrance into, in the Official
Gazette.
(2) Every treaty that has obtained the ratification of Parliament shall be published,
with seven days from the date of such ratification, in the Official Gazette.
9.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters namely—
(a) the dissemination of treaties to the public under Section 4;
(b) the circulation of treaties to the State Legislatures under Section 5;
(c) the commentary on treaties by the State Legislature under Section 5;
(d) the laying of treaties before Parliament under Section 7;
(e) the effective implementation of this Act;
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules.
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a period of thirty days which may
Treaties to be
laid before
Parliament.
Treaties to be
published.
5
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
be comprised in one session or in two consecutive sessions and if before the expiry of the
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
10.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
 Parliament is empowered to make laws in respect of entering into treaties and agreements,
and implementing conventions, with foreign countries under Entry 14, List  I, Seventh Schedule
read with Article 246 of the Constitution of India. However, in the absence of relevant
legislation, the Central Government has been entering into treaties and agreements with
foreign countries in exercise of its executive power that is coterminous with the legislative
power of Parliament by virtue of Article 73 of the Constitution.
2. The treaty making power of the Union may sometimes be exercised in relation to
matters that are within the competence of the States. The Report of the National Commission
to Review the Working of the Constitution recommended: "that for reducing tension or
friction between States and the Union and fore expeditious decision making on important
issues involving States, the desirability of prior consultation by the Union Government
with the inter-State Council may be considered before signing any treat vitally affecting
the interests of the States regarding matters in the State List."
3. India has entered into bilateral and multilateral treaties that are capable of international
enforcement irrespective of their specific incorporation into Indian law. These treaties raise
issues of fundamental importance to the governance of India. It is in the interests of democracy
and accountability to ensure that the people, Parliament and the Legislatures of the States be
consulted in matters of treaty making and their ratification.
4. The Consultation and Ratification of Treaties Bill, 2011 aims at estalishing a procedure
for the ratification by Parliament of treaties entered into by the Central Governement and to
ensure accountability and democratic consultation in respect of the treaty making power of
the Union and for other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Bill, inter
alia, provides for the following matters, namely:—
(i) no traty shall be entered into by the Central Government save in accordance with
the provisions of this Act;
(ii) the Central Government shall consult the public during negotiations to treaty,
after entering into it and before it has been ratified by Parliament;
(iii) no treaty entered into by the Central Government shall be binding in respect of
India unless it has obtained the ratification of Parliament;
(iv) every treaty entered into by the Central Government shall be laid before each
House of Parliament, within fifteen days of its signature by the Central Government,
for a period of ninety days, and each House of Parliament may, within such period,
by resolution, approve or disapprove such treaty;
(v) a treaty shall have obtained the ratification of Parliament if, within the period of
ninety days from its laying before each House of Parliament, it has been approved
by resolution by such Houses of Parliament, or, if, on the expiry of the period of
ninety days, it has not been disapproved by resolution by either House of
Parliament;
(vi) every treaty entered into by the Central Government shall be circulated to each
State Legislature and such State Legislature or State Legislatures may make
comments upon such treaty;
(vii) every treaty entered into by the Central Government shall be disseminated to the
public for discussion;
(viii) the Central Government shall have the power to make rules for the purpose of
carrying out the objects of the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
PRAKASH  JA V ADEKAR
5

MEMORANDUM   REGARDING  DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—948RS(S3)—05-08.2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a procedure for the ratification by Parliament of treaties entered into by the
Central Government  and  to  ensure  accountability  and  democratic  consultation in
respect of power of the Union to enter into a treaty and for other matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prakash Javadekar, M.P.)