1
THE WAQF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Waqf Act, 1995.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 54 of the Waqf Act, 1995, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
the following section shall be substituted, namely—
“54. (1) In the event of any encroachment being made on any land, building,
space or other property which is waqf property and if such encroachment was done
without the sanction of the competent authority, it shall be lawful for the Chief Executive
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XXVII of 2022
Substitution of
section 54.
Removal of
encroachment
from waqf
property.
43 of 1995.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON  22ND JULY, 2022

2
Officer to summarily abate or remove any such encroachment or cause any article
whatsoever hawked or exposed for sale to be removed and the expenses incurred
therein shall be leviable from the person in occupation of the waqf property encroached
upon or used as aforesaid.
(2) The person responsible for such encroachment or who is in unauthorised
occupation of the waqf property so encroached upon shall pay, if the waqf property
encroached upon forms part of an assessed survey number, assessment for the entire
survey number for the whole period of the encroachment, and if the waqf property
has not been assessed, such amount of assessment as would be leviable for the said
period in the same village on the same extent of similar waqf property used for the
same purpose.
(3) Such person as referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall pay in addition to the
amount under sub-section ( 2), a fine which shall be not less than one thousand
rupees but not more than ten thousand rupees if the encroached waqf property is
used for an agricultural purpose, and if used for a purpose other than agriculture a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that if such person is caught hawking or selling any articles on the
encroached waqf property, he shall be liable to pay fine of a sum not exceeding one
thousand rupees as the Chief Executive Officer may determine.
(4) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice duly served to the person
responsible for encroachment, specifying the particulars of the encroachment, prohibit
or require the abatement or removal of encroachments on any such waqf property,
and shall fix in such notice a date, which shall be a reasonable time after such notice,
on which the same shall take effect.
(5) Every person who makes, causes, permits or continues any encroachment
on any waqf property referred to in a notice issued under sub-section ( 4), shall in
addition to the penalties specified in sub-section (3), be liable at the discretion of the
Chief Executive Officer to a fine not exceeding five hundred rupees in the case of
encroachment for agricultural purposes and one thosuand rupees in other cases for
every day during any portion of which the encroachment continues after the date
fixed for the notice to take effect.
(6) An order passed by the Chief Executive Officer under this section shall be
subject to appeal before waqf Tribunal and revision before the State Government in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(7) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1) to (5) shall prevent any person from
establishing his rights in a Waqf Tribunal within a period of six months from the date
of the final order under this Act.
(8) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Chief Executive Officer, if the
person making the encroachment so desires, to charge the said person a sum not
exceeding five percent of the value of the waqf property so encroached upon and to
fix a rent not exceeding five times of the ordinary rent as per lease rules thereon and
to allow the person on lease to the encroacher on such terms and conditions as the
Chief Executive Officer may impose subject to rules made in this behalf.
(9) For the purposes of this section, the value of waqf property that has been
encroached upon shall be fixed by the Chief Executive Officer according to the market
value of similar land in the same neighbourhood at the time of such valuation and the
annual revenue of such property shall be assessed at the same rate as the land
revenue of similar property in the vicinity.
(10) The Chief Executive Officer’s decision as to the value of waqf property
shall be conclusive.”
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
3. For section 55 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted:
"55. ( 1) If in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, any person is
unauthorisedly occupying or wrongfully in possession of any waqf property or is not
entitled or has ceased to be entitled to continue the use, occupation or possession of
any such property by reason of the expiry of the period of lease or termination of the
lease or breach of any of the conditions annexed to the tenure, it shall be lawful for the
Chief Executive Officer to evict such person.
(2) Before evicting any such person, the Chief Executive Officer shall give him a
reasonable opportunity or being heard and the Chief Executive Officer Waqf Board
may make a summary enquiry, if necessary:
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer shall record his reasons, for arriving at
any opinion.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall, on their finding as aforesaid, serve a notice
on such person requiring them within such time as may appear reasonable after receipt
of the said notice to vacate the waqf property and if such notice is not complied with,
the Chief Executive Officer may remove them from such property.
(4) A person unauthorisedly occupying or wrongfully in possession of waqf
property after they have ceased to be entitled to continue the use, occupation or
possession by virtue of any of the reasons specified in sub-section ( 1), shall also be
liable at the discretion of the Chief Executive Officer to pay a penalty not exceeding ten
times the rent for the property, for the period of such unauthorised use or occupation.
(5) After summary eviction of any person under this section, any building or
other construction erected on the waqf property or any crop raised in the property
shall, if not removed by such person after such written notice as the Chief Executive
Officer may deem reasonable, be liable to forfeiture or to summary removal.
(6) Forfeitures under this section shall be adjudged by the Chief Executive
Officer and any property so forfeited shall be disposed of as the Chief Executive
Officer may direct and the cost of the removal of any property under this section shall
be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue."
4. Section 55A of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Substitution of
section 55.
Enforcement
of orders made
under section
54.
Omission of
section 55A.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In the last few decades, encroachments on Waqf properties has increased exponentially.
This has created an undue obstruction of such properties through unauthorized means. It
creates a barrier for easementary rights and goes against the right to unobstructed use of
such land. While the Waqf Act, 1995 does have provisions to deal with such encroachments,
it has been observed that provisions that deal with such removal of encroachments entail a
multiplicity in the proceedings required, before such encroachments can be legally removed.
Chapter II of the Act deals notification of properties listed as Waqf properties and includes
a dispute resolution mechanism. Hence, it becomes pertinent to amend Sections 54 and 55,
while omitting Section 55A, in order to remove multiplicity of proceedings. Additionally, the
Supreme Court has time and again directed authorities to rigorously remove such
encroachments. To enable this, the powers of the Chief Executive Officer of the Waqf Board
need enhancement for summarily removing such obstructions. There is a need to improve
the procedure for the removal of unauthorized encroachments upon such Waqf properties
and safeguard the rights of the Waqf.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  FAUZIA  KHAN
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE WAQF ACT, 1995
(43 OF 1995)
* * * * *
54. (1) Whenever the Chief Executive Officer considers whether on receiving any
complaint or on his own motion that there has been an encroachment on any land, building,
space or other property which is waqf property and, which has been registered as such
under this Act, he shall cause to be served upon the encroacher a notice specifying the
particulars of the encroachment and calling upon him to show cause before a date to be
specified in such notice, as to why an order requiring him to remove the encroachment before
the date so specified should not be made and shall also send a copy of such notice to the
concerned mutawalli.
(2) The notice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be served in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) If, after considering the objections, received during the period specified in the
notice, and after conducting an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, the Chief
Executive Officer is satisfied that the property in question is waqf property and that there has
been an encroachment on any such waqf property, he may, make an application to the
Tribunal for grant of order of eviction for removing such encroachment and deliver possession
of the land, building, space or other property encroached upon to the mutawalli of the waqf.
(4) The Tribunal, upon receipt of such application from the Chief Executive Officer, for
reasons to be recorded therein, make an order of eviction directing that the waqf property
shall be vacated by all persons who may be in occupation thereof or any part thereof, and
cause a copy of the order to be affixed on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of
the waqf property:
Provided that the Tribunal may before making an order of eviction, give an opportunity
of  being heard to the person against whom the application for eviction has been made by the
Chief Executive Officer.
(5) If any person refuses or fails to comply with the order of eviction within forty-five
days from the date of affixture of the order under sub-section (2), the  Chief Executive Officer
or any other person duly authorised by him in this behalf may evict that person from, and
take possession of, the waqf property.
* * * * *
55. Where the person, ordered under sub-section ( 4) of section 54 to remove any
encroachment, omits or fails to remove such encroachment, within the time specified in the
order or, as the case may be, fails to vacate the land, building, space or other property to
which the order relates, within the time aforesaid, the Chief Executive Officer may refer the
order of the Tribunal to the Executive Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
the land, building, space or other property, is situate for evicting the encroacher, and,
thereupon, such Magistrate shall make an order directing the encroacher to remove the
encroachment, or, as the case may be, vacate the land, building, space or other property and
to deliver possession thereof to the concerned mutawalli and in default of compliance with
the order, remove the encroachment or, as the case may be, evict the encroacher from the
land, building, space or other property and may, for this purpose, take such police assistance
as may be necessary.
* * * * *
Removal of
encroachment
from waqf
property.
Enforcement
of orders made
under section
54.
5

6
55A.  ( 1) Where any person has been evicted from any waqf property under
sub-section (4) of section 54, the Chief Executive Officer may, after giving fourteen days'
notice to the person from whom possession of the waqf property has been taken and after
publishing the notice in at least one newspaper having circulation in the locality and after
proclaiming the contents of the notice by placing it on conspicuous part of the waqf property,
remove or cause to be removed or dispose of by public auction any property remaining on
such premises.
(2) Where any property is sold under sub-section ( 1), the sale proceeds shall, after
deducting the expenses relating to removal, sale and such other expenses, the amount, if any,
due to the State
* * * * *
Disposal of
property left
on waqf
property by
unauthorised
occupants.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Waqf Act, 1995.
————
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—640RS(S3)—25-07-2022.