1
THE CRIMINAL LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Laws (Amendment)  Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Penal
Code) in section 228A, after clause 1, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that if the victim is the wife of the accused, the prohibition referred to
in sub-section (1) shall apply in relation to the person against whom the allegation or
accusation of rape offence is made as it applies to the women, but shall continue in
force for the duration of the woman’s life only.”
Bill No. XXVIII  of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28H NOVEMBER, 2014
Short title
and Com-
mence-
ment.
45 of 1860. Amendment
of Section
228A.
5
10

2
3. In section 375 of the Penal Code,—
(i) after the proviso to Explanation 2, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided further that a woman who is in a relationship, marital or otherwise,
with the accused, shall not by the reason only of that fact, be regarded as
consenting to the sexual activity.”
(ii) Exception 2 shall be omitted.
4. For section 376B of the Penal Code, the following section shall be substituted
namely:—
“376B. When imposing a sentence in respect to the offence of rape, the existing
or past marital relationship between the accused and the complainant shall not be
considered as justification for the imposition of lesser sentence.”
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
5. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the
Code of Criminal Procedure) section 198B shall be omitted.
6. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, under the heading
“OFFENCES UNDER INDIAN PENAL CODE”, the entries related to section 376B shall be
omitted.
Amendment
of Section
375.
Amendment
of Section
376B..
Amendment
of Section
198B.
Amendment
of First
Schedule.
2 of 1974.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS
Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 states that sexual intercourse by a man with
his own wife who is not less than 15 years of age is not considered as rape.
Section 376B provides for a lesser punishment for the perpetrator for committing a sexual
offence is the victim is his own wife, living separately, under a decree  or otherwise. These
provisions are based on the archaic notion of marriage which regards wives as no more than
the property of their husbands. Specifically, Section 375 leaves child brides, already
vulnerable, open to sanctioned marital rape.
The Prohition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, prohibits the marriage of a girl less than the
age of 18 years and according to the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2013, the age of sexual
consent is recognised as 18 years. This being the case, the exception given in Section 375 to
marital rape is contradicting other laws. While one set of laws prohibit marriage of girls below
the age of 18 years, the Indian Penal Code allows for sexual intercourse in marriage above the
age of 15 years. For the law to be applied in an equitable manner, it is necessary to extent
protection to minor girls under Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code.
The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action recognises marital rape as a form of
violence against women. The Justice Verma Committee had recommended that a marital
relationship between the perpetrator and the victim should not be considered as valid defence
against the crime of rape and sexual assault. The report said that ‘a rapist remains a rapist
regardless of his relationship with the victim’. The UN Committee on Elimination of
Discrimination of Women had also recommended that India should remove the exception of
marital rape from the definition of rape. At least 52 countries had explicitly outlawed marital
rape in their criminal codes by April 2011.
In view of the need to ensure equal protection of minor girls, protect the dignity of
women in a marital relationship and in order to eliminate the notion of treating wives as the
property of men, it is essential to repeal exception under Section 375 and 376 B of the Indian
Penal Code.
Hence the Bill.
KANIMOZHI

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
228A. (1) Whoever prints or publishes the name or any matter which may make known
the identity of any person against whom an offence under section 376, section 376A, section
376B, section 376C or section 376D is alleged or found to have been committed (hereafter in
this section referred to as the victim) shall be punished with impriosnment of either description
for a term which may extent to two years and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * *
375. A man is said to commit “rape” if he—
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of
a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) inserts to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis,
into the vagina, the urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any
other person; or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into
vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with
him to any other person; or
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do
so with him or any other person,
First.—Against her will.
Secondly.— Without her consent.
Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or
any person in whom she is interested, in fear of death or hurt.
Fourthly.— With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband and
that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or
believes herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly.—With her consent when, at the time of giving such consent, by reasons of
unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through
another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the
nature and consequences of that to which she gives consent.
Sixthly.—With or without her consent, when she under eighteen years of age.
Seventhly.—When she is unable to communicate consent.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “Vagina” shall also include labia
majora.
Explanation 2.—Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when woman
by words, gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates
willingness to participate in the specific sexual act:
Provided that a woman who does not physically resist to the act of penetration shall
not by the reason only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
Exception 1.—A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape.
Exception 2.—Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife
not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.
376B. Whoever has sexual intercouse with his own wife, who is living separately
whether under a decree of separation or otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than two years but
which may extent to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned
in clauses (a) to (d) of Section 375.
4

5
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
198B. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 376B of
the Indian Penal Code where the persons are in a marital relationship, except upon prima face
satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a complaint having been filed or
made by the wife against the husband.
F
IRST SCHEDULE OF CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
I. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
12 3 4 5 6
376B Sexual Imprisonment for Cagnizable (but only Bailable Court of
intercourse by not less than 2 on the complaint of session
husband upon years but which the victim)
his wife during may extent to 7
separation years and with fine

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
—————
(Smt. Kanimozhi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3080RS(S3)—28.11.2014.