THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
WEST BENGAL BILL, 2016
BY
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal for providing
an impetus to the financial and economic capabilities of the state administration
to carry out developmental activities in the State by making effective
utilisation of its resources thereby ensuring that the fruits of
development reaches each and every citizen of the State
and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of West
Bengal Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XXVIII of 2016
Short title, and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH AUGUST, 2016

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law provide, as special financial
assistance to the State of West Bengal to meet the cost of such programmes and schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of Union Government for
the purposes of—
(i)  promoting the welfare of the backward sections of the society;
(ii) implementing the welfare measures with a view to improving the quality of
life of the citizens living in the State;
(iii) allocating adequate funds for special development projects;
(iv) developing adequate infrastructure for promotional of equitable
development across the State;
(v) effective development and utilisaiton of resources in the State; and
(vi) such other purposes which the Government of West Bengal may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President of
India may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition and not in derogation of any other
Law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
Special
Financial
Assistance to
State of West
Bengal.
Act to
supplement
other Laws.
Power to
Remove
Difficulties.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
West Bengal has been at the center-stage in the country's journey to achieve
prosperity since time immemorial. The rich cultural legacy of Bengal ensured that it remained
the capital of the undivided India for the majority of the period before independence.
Since the beginning of this decade, West Bengal has initiated its journey to attain
unprecedented progress and development in social as well as economic spheres. However,
the lack of financial resources has been one of the major deterrents in attaining the optimal
potential by the state. With a large proportion of the population in the state belonging to
backward communities, the dearth of financial assistance comes in the way of providing
fruitful opportunities to these citizens for their growth. Though ample natural resources
are availble with the state, West Bengal has not been able to make optimal allocation of
these resources due to lack of financial funds.
Various developmental projects are being implemented in the state. However, adequate
financial allocation of resources will provide the much needed impetus to the West Bengal.
This Bill is an earnest attempt to ensure that appropriate financial resources are allocated
to the state of West Bengal.
Hence, I this Bill.
VIVEK GUPTA

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of this Bill will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India
for providing special financial assistance to West Bengal. As the sum of monies to be
provided to the State of West Bengal will be known only after the welfare schemes to be
implemented by the State Government with the approval of the Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give an estimate of recurring expenditure at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated  Fund of
India.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal for providing
an impetus to the financial and economic capabilities of the state administration
to carry out developmental activities in the State by making effective
utilisation of its resources thereby ensuring that the fruits of
development reaches each and every citizen of the State
and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2240RS(S3)—05-08-2016.