Bil] No. XXVIII of 796
| SN RE EERE ET «०.
THE TERRITORIAL WATERS, CONTINENTAL SHELF, EXCLUSIVE
ECONOMIC ZONE AND OTHER MARITIME ZONES BILL, 976 ...
(As INTRODUCED IN THE RagyA SaBHA)
A i 23
BILL ah
to provide for certain matters relating to the territorial waters, con.
tinental shelf, exclusive economic zone and other maritime zones of
India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
4. (7) This Act may be called the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf,
Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, i976. ~ 906
5 (2) Sections 5 and 7 shall come into force on
different dates as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint; and the remaining provisions of this Act shall
come into force at once. 4
2. In this
ro nental shelf,
India, means the limit of such waters, shelf
487
Act, “limit”, in relation to the territorial waters, the conti-
the exclusive economic zone or any other maritime zone of
or zone with reference to
the mainland of India as well as the individual or composite group or
groups of islands constituting part of the territory of India. |
3. (7) The sovereignty of India extends and has always extended to
i5 the territori
waters) and
such waters.
al waters of India (hereinafter referred to as the territorial
to the seabed and subsoil underlying, and the air space over,,
such date or on such;
Shorts e-
» title and -~
com-
mence-
ment,
* Defini-
tion, ~
Soverei-
over,
* Timits
of terri.
torial ,


Contigu-
ous zone:
of India. ©
हि 2
(2) The limit of the territorial waters is the line every point of which
is at a distance of twelve nautical miles from the nearest point of the
appropriate baseline.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Cen-
tral Government may, whenever it considers necessary so to do having
regard to International Law and State practice, alter, by notification in
the Official Gazette, the limit of the territorial waters.
(4) No notification shall be issued under sub-section (3) unless resolu-
tions approving the issue of such notification are passed by both Houses
of Parliament.
4, (7) Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law for the
time being in force, all foreign ships (other than warships including sub-
marines and other underwater vehicles) shall enjoy the right of innocent
passage through the territorial waters.
Explanation—for the purposes of this section, passage is innocent so
long as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of India.
(2) Foreign warships including submarines and other underwater
vehicles may enter or pass through the territorial waters after giving
prior notice to the Central Government:
Provided that submarines and other underwater vehicles shal] navigate
on the surface and show their flag while passing through such waters.
(3) The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary so
to do in the interests of the peace, good order or security of India or any
part thereof, suspend, by notification in the Official Gazette, whether
5
Bie)
T5
20
absolutely or subject to such exceptions and qualifications as may be 25
specified in the notification, the entry of all or any class of foreign ships
into such area of the territorial waters as may be specified in the noti-
fication.
5. (7) The contiguous zone of India (hereinafter referred to as the
contiguous zone) is an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial waters
and the limit of the contiguous zone is the line every point of which is
at a distance of twenty-four nautical miles from the nearest point of the
' paseline referred to in sub-section (2)-of section 3.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section - (7), the Cen-
tral Government may, whenever it considers necessary so to do having
regard to International Law and State practice, alter, by notification in
the Official Gazette, the limit of the contiguous zone.
5 (3) No notification shall be issued under sub-section (2) unless resolu-
tions approving the issue of such notification are passed by both Houses
of Parliament.
(4) ‘The Central Government may exercise such powers and take suck
measures. in or in relation to the contiguous zone as it may consider
necessary with respect to,—
(a) the security of India, and
(b) immigration, sanitation, customs and other fiscal matters,
30
40
45


3.
_{5) The Central Government may, by notification in. the OfficialGazette— sigs ie
(@) extend with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks
fit, any enactment, relating to any matter referred to in clause (a)
5 or clause (b) of sub-section (4), for the time being in force in India
or any part thereof, to the contiguous zone, and
(6) make such provisions as it may consider necessary. in such
notification for facilitating the enforcement of such enactment,
and any enactment so extended shall have effect as if the contiguous
Io zone is a part of the territory of India. :
6. (7) The continental shelf of India (hereinafter i referred to as the Conti-
continental shelf) comprises the seabed and subsoil of the’ submarine nental
areas that extend beyond the limit of its territorial waters throughout Shelf.
the natural prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge’ of the
उ5 continental margin or to a distance of two hundred nautical miles from
the baseline referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 where the outer
edge of the continental margin does not extend up to’ that distance.
(2) India has, and always had, full and exclusive sovereign rights in
respect of its continental shelf.
25 (8) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (2), the Union has in the continental shelf, —
(७) sovereign rights for the purposes of exploration, exploitation,
conservation and management of all resources;
(9) exclusive rights and jurisdiction for the construction, main-
tenance or operation of artificial islands, off-shore terminals,
installations and other structures and devices necessary for the ex-
ploration and exploitation of the resources of the continental shelf or.
for the convenience of shipping or for any other purpose;
— (c) exclusive jurisdiction to authorise, regulate and control
30 scientific research; and 5
(d) exclusive jurisdiction to preserve and protect the .marine
environment and to prevent and control marine. pollution. _
(4) No person (including a foreign Government) shall, except under,
and in accordance with, the terms of a licence or a letter of authority -
granted by the Central Government, explore the continental shelf or -
exploit its resources or carry out any search or exeavation or conduct
any research within the continental shelf or drill therein or construct,
maintain or operate any artificial island, off-shore terminal, installa=
tion or other structure or device therein for any purpose whatsoever.
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official49
Gazetie,— oi OE 4 a
(a) declare any area of the continental shelf and its superjacent
waters to be a designated area; and :


Exclus
sive
economic
zone.
4
(b) make such provisions as it may deem necessary with respect
to,
(i) the exploration, exploitation and protection of the re-
हु sources of the continental shelf within such designated area; or
(#) the safety and protection of artificial islands, off-shore
\ terminals, installations and other structures and devices in such
designated area; oree
(६8) the’ protection of marine environment of such designat-
ed area: or
(iv) customs and other fiscal matters in relation to such
designated area.
Explanation.—A notification issued under this sub-section may provide
for the regulation of entry into and passage through the designated area
of foreign ships by the establishment of fairways, sealanes, traffic separa-
tion schemes or any other mode of ensuring freedom of navigation which
is not prejudicial to the interests of India.
(6) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette,—
4
(a) extend with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks
fit, any enactment for the time peing in force in India or any part
e thereof to the continental shelf or any part [including any designated
area under sub-section (5)] thereof; and
(b) make such provisions as it may consider necessary
“gor facilitating the enforcement of such enactment,
and any enactment so extended shall have effect as if the continental
shelf or the part [including, as the case may be, any designated area
under sub-section (5) j thereof to which it has been extended is a part of
the territory of India.
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2) and subject
te any measures that may be necessary for protecting the interests of
India, the Central Government may not impede the laying or maintenance
of submarine cables or pipelines on the continental shelf by foreign
States: :
) Provided that the consent of the Central Government shall be neces-
sary for the delineation of the course for the laying of such cables or
pipelines.
7, (7) The exclusive economic zone of India (hereinafter referred to
as the exclusive economic zone) is an area beyond and adjacent to the
territorial waters, and the limit of such zone is two hundred nautical
miles frora the baseline referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3.
4
= (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7), the Cen-
tral Government may, whenever it considers necessary so to do having
0
20
25
30
35
40


Io
IS
25
30
35
40
5
regard to International Law and State practice, alter, by notification in
the Official Gazette, the limit of the exclusive economic zone.
(3) No notification shall be issued under sub-section (2) unless resolu-
tions approving the issue of such notification are passed by both Houses
of Parliament.
(4) In the exclusive economic zone, the Union has—
(2) sovereign rights for the purpose of exploration, exploita-
tion, conservation’ and management of the natural resources, both
living and non-living as well as for producing energy from tides
winds and currents |
(9) exclusive rights and jurisdiction for the construction, main-
tenance or operation of artificial islands, off-shore terminals, installa-
tions and other structures and devices necessary for the exploration
and exploitation of the resources of the zone or for the convenience
of shipping or for any other purpose;
(c) exclusive jurisdiction to authorise, regulate and control
scientific research; :
(d) exclusive jurisdiction to preserve and protect the marine
environment and to prevent and control marine pollution; and
(e) such other rights as are recognised by International law,
(5) No. person (including a foreign Government) shall, except under,
and in accordance with, the terms of any agreement with the Central
Government or of a licence or a letter of authority granted by - the
Central Government, exiplore or exploit any resources of the exclusive
economic zone or carry out any search or excavation or conduct any
research within the exclusive economic zone or drill therein or construct,
maintain or operate any artificial island, off-shore terminal, installation
or other structure or device therein for any purpose whatsoever:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in relation to
fishing by a citizen of India.
(6) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette,—
(2) declare any atea of the exclusive economic: zone : to be a
designated area; and —
(b) make such provisions as it may deem necessary with respect
to,—
(i) the exploration, exploitation and protection. of the re-
soutces of such designated area; or
(ii) other activities for the economic exploitation and ex-
ploration of such designated area such as the production of ->
energy from tides, winds and currents; or
(iii) the safety and protection of artificial islands, off-shore
- terminals, installations and other structures’ and devices in such
designated area; or ;


Historic
waters.
those of
India.
(iw) the protection of marine environment of such designated
area; or
(v) customs and other fiscal matters in relation to such
designated area.
Explanation.—A notification issued under this sub-section may provide
for the regulation of entry into and passage through the designated area
of foreign ships by the establishment of fairways, sealanes, traffic separa-
tien schemes or any other mode of ensuring freedom of navigation which
is not prejudicial to the interests of India,
(7) The Central Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette,—
: (6) extend, with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks
' fit, any enactment for the time being in force in India or any part
thereof to the exclusive economic zone or any part thereof; and
(9) make such provisions as it may consider necessary for faci-
litating the enforcement of such enactment,
and any enactment so extended shall have effect as if the exclusive eco-
nomic zone or the part ‘thereof to which it has been extended is a part
of the territory of India.
(8) The provisions of sub-section (7) of section 6 shall apply in rela-
tion to the laying or maintenance of submarine cables or pipelines on
the seabed of the exclusive economic zone as they apply in relation to
the laying or maintenance of submarine cables or pipelines on the seabed
of the continental shelf, }
(9) In the exclusive economic zone and the air space over the zone,
ships and aircraft of all States shall, subject to the, exercise by India of
its rights within the zone; enjoy freedom of navigation and overflight.
8. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify the limits of such waters adjacent to its land territory
as are the historic waters of India.
(2) The sovereignty of India extends, and has always extended, to
the historic waters of India and to the seabed and subsoil underlying,
and the air space over, such waters.
9. (7) The maritime boundaries between India and any State whose
coast is opposite or adjacent to that of India in regard to their respective
territorial waters, contiguous zones, continental shelves, exclusive eco-
nomic zones and other maritime zones shall be as determined by egree-
ment (whether entered into before or after the commencement of this
section), between India and such State and pending such agreement
between India and any such State, and unless any other provisional
arrangements are agreed to between them, the maritime boundaries
between India and such State shall not extend beyond the line every
point of which is equidistant from the nearest point from which the
breadth of the territorial waters of India and of such State are measur-
ed.
(2) Every agreement referred to in sub-section (7) shall. as soon as
may be after it is entered into, be published in the Official Gazette.
io
मठ
20
25
30
35
40
45


= 7 मा
(8) The provisions of sub-section (7) shall have effect notwithstand-
ing anything contained in any other provision of this Act.
30, The Central Government may cause the baseline referred to in
sub-section (2) of section 3, the limits of the territorial waters, the con-
5 tiguous zone, the continental shelf, the exclusive economic zone and the
historic waters of India and the maritime boundaries as settled by agree-
ments referred to in section 9 to be published in charts.
J4. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any notifica-
tion thereunder shall (without prejudice to any other action which may
yo be taken against such person under any other provision of this or of any
other enactment) be munishable with imprisonment which may extend
to three years, or with fine, or with both.
42. (7) Where an offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder
jhas been committed by a company, every person who at the time the
offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
IS
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shail render any
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exer-
cised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
20
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7) where an
offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder has been committed
by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
5 the consent or the connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on: the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be “deemed to
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
30 punished accordingly. ere
Explanation—For the purposes of this section,—
i (a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm
3 or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
43. Any person committing an offence under this Act or any rules
35 made thereunder or under any of the enactments extended under this
Act or under the rules made thereunder may be tried for the offence in.
any place in which he may be found or in such other place asthe
Central Government may, by general or special order, published in the
Official Gazette, direct in this pehalf.
44, No prosecution shall be instituted against any @erson in respect
of any offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder without the
previous sanction of the Central Government or such officer or authority
as may be authorised by that Government by order in writing in this
45 behalf.
40
Publica-
tion of
charts.
Offences.
Offences
by com-
panies.
Place
of trial.
Previous
sanction
of the
Central
Govern-
ment for».
© prosecuz, >
_ tion.


है
Bower 45. (7) The Central Government may, py notification in the Official
to make Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
rules: . . .
(2) In particuiar and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following mat-
ters, namely:—
(a) regulation of the conduct of any person in the territorial
waters, the contiguous zone, the continental shelf, the exclusive eco-
nomic zone or any other matitime zone of India;
i (8) regulation of the exploration and exploitation, conservation
and management of the resources of the continental sheif;
(c) regulation of the exploration, exploitation, conservation and
management of the resources of the exclusive economic zone;
(d) regulation of the construction, maintenance and operation of
artificial islands, off-shore terminals, installations and other struc-
‘tures and devices referred to in sections 6 and 7;
(e) preservation and protection of the marine environment and.
prevention and controj of marine poliution for the purposes of this
Act;
(f) authorisation, regulation and control of the conduct of scien-
tific research for the purposes of this Act;
(@) fees in relation to licences. and Ietters of authority referred
to in sub-section (4) of section 6 and sub-section (5) of section 7 or
for any other purpose; or
(hk) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in
‘elauses (a) to (9).
(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Government
may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with im-
prisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine which may
extend to any amount, or with both.
% (4) Every rule made under this Act and every notification issued
under sub-section (5) of section 6 or sub-section (6) of section 7 shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House
of Patliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session of in two or more successive
sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or the notification or both Houses
agree that the rule or notification should not be jssued, the rule or noti-
fication shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or notification.
- 46, (0) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
- Act or of any of the enactments extended under this Act, the Central
culties, Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not. inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or, as the case
may be, of such enactment, as may appear to it to be necessary or expe-
dient for removing the difficulty:
A
Io
20
25
30
33
4०
45


5
8
Provided that no order shall be made under this section--
ra}
(a) in the case of any difficulty arising in giving effect to any
provision of this Act, after the expiry of three years from the com-
mencement of such provision;
(b) in the case of any difficulty arising in giving effect to the
provisions of any enactment extended under this Act, after the
expiry of three years from the extension of such enactment,
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Bill is a sequel to the latest Constitution Amendment Bill relat-
ing to the substitution of article 297 by a new article. According to
new article 297, all lands, minerals and other things of value underlying
the ocean within the territorial waters, or the continental shelf, or the
exclusive economic zone, as well as all other resources of the exclusive
economic zone, vest in the Union to be held for the purposes of the
Union. The new article also provides that the limits of the territorial
waters, the continental shelf, the exclusive economic zone and other
maritime zones of India shall be such as may be specified, from time to
time, by or under any law made by Parliament.
2. At present, India does not have a comprehensive legislation on the
Law of the Sea. The limits of the territorial waters and the continental
shelf are governed by the Proclamations issued by the President. As
envisaged by new article 297, it is intended to provide for the limits of
the territorial waters, the continental shelf, the exclusive economic
zone and other maritime zones of India by a Parliamentary law. For
safeguarding the interests of the nation, it is also necessary to provide
for a general legal framework specifying the nature, scope and extent
of India’s rights, jurisdiction and control in relation to the various mari-
time zones, the maritime boundaries between India and other States
whose coasts are opposite or adjacent to those of India, and for the
exploration, exploitation and protection of the resources of our continental
shelf and exclusive economic zone. Hence this Bill.
3. The maritime zones of India include the territorial waters, the
contiguous zone, the continental shelf, the exclusive economic zone and
the historic waters of India. The territorial waters and the continental
shelf are traditional concepts in International Law and the national
jurisdiction in these zones is well established. The concept of the ex-
elusive economic zone which has been developed at the initiative of
developing countries has gained acceptance of the international com-
munity of States. The concept of contiguous zone which is located within
the exclusive economic zone and over which additional jurisdiction is
claimed by coastal States has also been accepted by the international
community of States. Provision has also been made in the Bill regard-
ing the historic waters of India which are adjacent to its land territory
and over which India has sovereignty. The limits of these waters, such
as the waters in the Palk Bay and the Gulf of Manaar, will be specified
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette. The
limits of other maritime zones of India have been specified in the Bill
itself. The Bill empowers the Central Government to alter, by noti-
fieation in the Official Gazette, the limits of these maritime zones. It
has been made clear that notifications for altering the limits as specified
in the Bill shall not be issued unless both Houses of Parliament have
passed resolutions approving the issue of such notifications.
‘ है to


it
4. It is proposed to undertake separate legislation in future as and
when need arises for dealing in greater detail with the regulation,
exploration and exploitation of particular resources or particular groups
of resources of the continental shelf and the exclusive economic zone
as well as with other matters in which India has jurisdiction in the
maritime zones, and with regard to these matters the Bill makes only
broad general provisions.
New छापा; ; ५. B. CHAVAN.
The 25th May, .976.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill provides for the limits of India’s maritime zones and for
the nature, scope and extent of India’s rights, jurisdiction and control
in relation to the various maritime zones. The Bill also makes pro-
visions for the regulation, exploration and exploitation of the resources
of the continental shelf and the exclusive economic zone of India.
2. Sub-clause (4) of clause 5 of the Bill relating to the contiguous
zone of India empowers the Central Government to exercise such powers
and take such measures in or in relation to the contiguous zone as it
may consider necessary with respect to security of India, and immigra-
tion, sanitation, customs and other fiscal matters.
3. Sub-clause (5) of clause 6 of the Bill relating to the continental
shelf provides for the declaration of any area of the continental shelf
and its superjacent waters to be a designated area and for the making
of such provisions with respect to the exploration, exploitation and
protection of the resources of the continental shelf within such designat-
ed area and other matters mentioned in the sub-clause, as may be deem-
ed necessary by the Central Government. Sub-clause (6) of clause 7
of the Bill relating to the exclusive economic zone also makes similar
provisions with regard to designation of areas in the exclusive economic
zone and for the making of such provisions as the Central Government
may deem necessary with respect to the exploitation, exploration and.
protection of such designated area and other matters mentioned in the
sub-clause.
4. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the making of rules, inter alia,
with regard to the regulation and conduct of persons in any maritime
zone of India, regulation of the exploration, exploitation, conservation
and management of the resources of the continental shelf and the
exclusive economic zone, the preservation and protection of the marine
environment and the prevention and control of marine pollution, and
the authorisation, regulation and control of the conduct of scientific
research.
5. While the various measures which may be taken in pursuance of
the aforementioned provisions of the Bill, when enacted and brought
into operation, will involve expenditure, both of a recurring and non-
recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India, at the present
stage it is not possible to indicate with any degree of accuracy the
quantum of such expenditure. A carefully planned programme will
have to be evolved with regard to the various maritime zones for the
exploration and exploitation of their resources, and the priorities with
regard to different matters will have to be fixed: Bearing these pro-
grammes and priorities in mind, and having regard to the available fin-
ances, the expenditure to be incurred will have to be determined. Any
expenditure whether of a recurring or non-recurring nature, which may
eS gy 2 : Se


Bete 40200 382 8
have to be incurred, will be met from out of the grants to the different
Ministries and after due appropriation made by Parliament by law. It
may also be mentioned in this connection that the intention is to
undertake separate legislation in future for dealing in greater detail
with the regulation, exploration and exploitation of particular resources
or particular groups of resources of the continental shelf and exclusive
economic zone, and the Bill, as stated in the Statement of Objects and
Reasons, is intended to provide only the broad general legal framework.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (5) of clause 5 of the Bill seeks to empower ihe Central
Government to. extend any enactment relating to the security of India,
immigration, sanitation, customs and other fiscal matters for the time
being in force in India or any part thereof to the contigucus zone. Sub-
clause (6) of clause 6 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Govern-
ment to extend, by notification in the Official Gazette, any enactment for
the time being in force in India or any part thereof to the continental
shelf or any part thereof. Sub-clause (7) of clause 7 of the Bill makes
a similar provision in respect of extension of enactments to the exclu-
sive economic zone or any part thereof.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 6 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central
‘Government to declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, any area
of the continental shelf and the superjacent waters to be a designated
area and to make such provisions as it may deem necessary in such
notification with respect to the exploration, exploitation and protection
of the resources of the continental shelf within such designated area, the
safety and protection of artificial islands and other structures and devices
in such designated area, the protection of marine environment of such
designated area and customs and other fiscal matters in relation to such
designated area. Sub-clause (6) of clause 7 of the Bill makes similar
provisions in respect of the exclusive economic zone. |
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this legislation. These relate,
inter alia, to the regulation of the conduct of any person in the territorial
waters, contiguous zone, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone oF
any other maritime zone, the exploration and exploitation, conservation
and management of the resources of the continental shelf and of the
exclusive economic zone, the construction, maintenance and operation of
artificial islands, off-shore terminals, installations and other structures
and devices in the continental shelf and exclusive economic zone, pre-
servation and protection of the marine environment and prevention and
control of marine pollution, conduct of scientific research, fees for various
purposes, etc. Sub-clause (3) of the clause provides that in making any
rule, the Central Government may provide that a contravention thereof
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years,
or with fine which may extend to any amount, or with both.
rights, jurisdiction and controlThe nature, scope and extent of India’s
have been set out in the Bill
in relation to the various maritime zones
jtself. The rules and other provisions will be confined to specifie mea-
sures for the regulation and conduct of persons in various zones, technical
matters, matters of procedure and other matters of administrative detail.
In the present stage of the scientific, technological and other develop-
ments, it is not practicable to visualise the various enactments which
have to be extended to these zones and the specific measures which will
have to be taken for the protection of the nation’s interests in these zones
and for the proper exploration and exploitation of the resources of the
various zones to the best advantage of the nation. Having regard to the
Sot a era, ह


45
immense value of the resources of the zones, it is necessary to provide
for effective sanctions against persons acting contrary to the national
interests. Further, the rules and the notifications under clauses 6(5)
and 7(6), when made or issued, will be laid before both Houses of Parlia-
ment. In the circumstances, the delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.
