THE PROHIBITION AND ERADICATION OF RAGGING BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to prohibit and eradicate ragging in colleges and educational institutions and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition and Eradication of Ragging Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and for different States, and any reference to commencement in any provision of
this Act in relation to any State shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of
that provision in that State.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 19TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XXVII  of  2011
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) “Committee” means the anti-ragging committee constituted under section 7;
“helpline” means the anti-ragging helpline established under section 9 of this Act;
(c) “educational institution” means any college, institute, university whether
established by the Government or by any citizen or body of citizens and whether in
receipt of aid from  Government or not, recognised by Central or State Government for
the award of a certificate, diploma or a degree in any course of study, education or
training;
(d) “freshers” means those students who have taken admission in the first year
of under-graduate or post-graduate level in any stream in any college or educational
institution;
(e) “head of the institution” means the Vice-Chancellor in case of a university or
a deemed university and in case of any other institution or college, the Principal or the
Director;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “ragging” means display of disorderly conduct by a student as defined
under section 4 of this Act;
(h) “seniors” means those students who are not in first year of under-graduate
or post-graduate level in any stream in any college or educational institutions.
3. (1) The Act shall apply to all institutions coming within the definition of a University
under sub-section (f) of section 2 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, and to all
institutions deemed to be a university under section 3 of the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956, to all other higher educational institutions, or elements of such universities or
institutions, including its departments, constituent units and all the premises, whether
being academic, residential, playgrounds, canteen, hostel or other such premises of such
universities, deemed universities and higher educational institutions, whether located within
the campus or outside, and to all means of transportation of students, whether public or
private, accessed by students for the pursuit of studies in such universities, deemed
universities and higher educational institutions.
(2) In addition to the educational institutions mentioned in sub-section ( 1), also
applies to all vocational and professional institutions that admit students after twelve years
of schooling.
4. The ragging shall constitute one or more of the following acts,—
(i) any conduct by any student or students whether by words spoken or written
or by an act which has the effect of teasing, treating, torturing, or handling with
rudeness a fresher or any other student;
(ii) indulging in rowdy or indisciplinary activities by an student or students
which causes or is likely to cause annoyance, hardship, physical or psychological
harm or to raise fear or apprehension thereof in any fresher or any other student;
(iii) asking any student to do any act which such student shall not in the
ordinary course do and which has the effect of causing or generating a sense of
shame, or torment or embarrassment so as to adversely affect they physique or
psyche of such fresher or any other student;
(iv) any act by a student that prevents, disrupts or disturbs the regular academic
activity of any other student or a fresher;
(v) exploiting the services of a fresher or any other student for completing the
academic tasks assigned to an individual or a group of student;
(vi) any act of financial extortion or forceful expenditure burden put on a fresher
or any other student by students;
Application
of the Act.
Acts which
constitute
ragging.
3 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(vii) any act of physcial abuse including all variants of it; sexual abuse,
homosexual assaults, stripping, forcing obscene and lewd acts, gestures, causing
bodily harm or any other danger to health or person;
(viii) any act or abuse, by use of spoken words, telephone, short message
service (SMS), e-mails, multi-media messaging service, post, public insults,
pornographic material, photographs or video clips, etc., to derive perverted pleasure,
vicarious or sadistic thrill from actively or passively participating in the discomfiture
to fresher or any other student;
(ix) any act that affects the mental health and self-confidence of a fresher or any
other student with or without an intent to derive a sadistic pleasure or showing off
power, authority or superiority by a student over any fresher or any other student.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force, in
any trial under this Act, the burden of proof as to the innocence shall be on the accused.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, formulate such directives for prohibition of ragging in all colleges
and educational institutions functioning under Central Government as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall, issue similar directives to all State Governments for
prohibition of ragging in all colleges and eductional institutions in their respective
jurisdiction.
(3) The prohibition under sub-section ( 1) shall also be extended to all colleges and
educational institutions in all Union Territories.
(4) Every public declaration of intent by any educational institution for admission of
students to any course of study, brochure of admission or instruction booklet or the
prospectus, in any electronic, audio-visual or print or any other media shall expressly
provide that ragging is prohibited in the institution and anyone found guilty or ragging or
abetting ragging whether actively or passively or being a part of conspiracy to promote
ragging is liable to be punished in accordance with this Act.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that an anti-ragging committee is
constituted in every educational institution headed by the senior most faculty of the
institution and consisting of representatives of civil and police administration including at
least one female representative other representation from non-governmental organisation,
parents, freshers and seniors.
(2) The appropriate Government shall extend its full support to the anti-ragging
committee to enable it to perform its duties to the fullest to ensure that all colleges and
educational institution are free from ragging and harassment of freshers.
(3) The anti-ragging committee shall perform the following functions:—
(a) to receive complaints on ragging and submit a report to the head of the
institution;
(b) to take inputs from various people including staff and freshers on any
incident of ragging;
(c) to conduct necessary awareness programme to enlighten the students
regarding the effects of ragging;
(d) after conducting thorough investigation, action to be taken against the
offenders as per the rules prescribed under this Act.
8. (1) Every educational institution shall have a anti-ragging squad.
(2) The anti-ragging squad shall function under the guidance of anti-ragging committee
consisting of the representatives nominated by the head of the educational institution.
Bruden of
proof.
Prohibition
of ragging.
Constitution
of Anti-
ragging
committee
and its
functions.
Constitution
of Anti-
ragging squad
and its
functions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) The anti-ragging squad shall perform the following functions:—
(a) to make surprise checks in hostel and campus to keep a check on ragging;
(b) to report any incident of ragging to the committee;
(c) to be in constant touch with the staff and students and consult various
incidence of ragging.
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute an anti-ragging helpline, in the
country round the clock, to register complaint from students, parents, friends or anybody
who is a witness to the act of ragging.
(2) Every educational institution shall publish the telephone numbers of the helpline
and other functionaries in the district in the brochure of admission or prospectus.
(3) The complaint shall be lodged through phone, fax, e-mail or SMS or anywhere in
the country throughout the year round the clock.
(4) After registration of the complaint, necessary action shall be taken by the
appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
10. (1) Any student convicted under this Act shall be debarred from continuing his
studies in any educational institutions for a period of three years.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with fine which
shall not be less than rupees twenty-five thousand but which may extend to rupees one lakh
or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or, with both.
(3) The appropriate Government shall direct University Grants Commission or the
funding agency of the college or the educational institution, as the case may be, to take
such steps against the head of the educational institution was fails to curb ragging as it may
deem necessary.
11. The proceeding under this Act shall be tried by the Educational Tribunal or the
High Court in the respective State as far as possible.
12. Save as provided under this Act, the provisions of the Code of  Criminal Procedure
1973 shall be applicable to any trial under this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force.
14. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Anti-ragging
helpline.
Penalty.
Proceeding.
Power to
make rules.
Provisions of
the Code of
Criminal
Procedure to
be applied.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ragging is a serious problem. Besides the humanitarian and social aspects, which
need no elaboration, it has also serious economic implications and has a bearing on the
standards of education. It is a recognised form of Human Right violation. These are also
instances whose students also suffered death due to forced ragging. There is a national
outcry to prohibit ragging and all sections of the society demanded that the Government
must take proactive steps to eradicate this menace. On the 8th May, 2009, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court ordered the Union Government to implement a plan for prevention of ragging.
Following this Judgment the (UGC) University Grants Commission and other regulatory
authorities like All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), Medical Council of India
(MCI), Dental Council of India (DCI), etc. published a single set of regulations that would
cover the entire nation and all educational institutions. The regulations of University Grants
Commission (UGC) came into effect on June, 2009.
This Bill combines the essential elements of UGC regulations and the order of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court. Therefore, in a certain sense, the Bill simply formalises what exists
as of today. All elements of the Bill are actually in place at present.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. JANARDHAN W AGHMARE

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to constitute an anti-ragging helpline by the appropriate
Government to register complaint with regard to ragging. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible
to quantify the exact amount of recurring and non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—1364RS(S3)—19-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit and eradicate ragging in colleges and educational institutions and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr . Janardhan Waghmare, M. P .)