AS INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya Sapna

Bill No, XXVII of 2000

THE RELIGIOUS CONVERSIONS (PROHIBITION OF
ALLUREMENT AND USE OF COERCIVE METHODS) BILL, 2000
A .
BILL

to prohibit the allurement by promising employment, free education in reputed schools for
the wards, easy money and decent life by religious bodies, missionaries etc. for attracting
people for converting their religion and use of coercive methods for such conversions and
for deterrent punishment for the violators and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Religious Conversions (Prohibition of Allurement — Short tide,

and use of coercive Methods) Act, 2000. extent and
commence-
(2) In extends to the whole of India. ment.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. Allurement of any kind including employment, free education in reputed school Prohibition of
tun by a missionary or religious body, easy money, decent life and use of coercive methods aiuremert
for religious conversions by religious bodies, missionaries or by whatever name called is Seruive
hereby prohibited. methods for

religious


Parties to
offence.

Offences to be
non bailable,

2

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,

.whoever commits an offence under this Act shall on conviction by a court of law be liable to

rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten
years and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.

4. When an offence is committed under this Act, each of the following shall be deemed
to have taken part in committing the offence and to be guilty of the offence, and shall be
charged with actually committing it, that is to say,—

(a) every person who actually does the act which constitutes the offence;

(b) every person who does or omits to do any act for the purpose of enabling or
aiding another person to commit the offence;

(c) every person who aids or abets another person in committing the offence;
(व) any person who counsels or procures any other person to commit the offence.

5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 every
offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non bailable.

2 of 1974,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Quite a good number of persons belonging to a particular religion across the country
particularly the poor, tribals and such other vulnerable categories are being lured by certain
religious organisations, missionaries etc. for converting their religion by offering them with
jobs, money, free education to their wards and promise of decent life and as a result these
innocent poor people are migrating to other religions, In many cases these people are coerced
to convert into other religion. These organisations and missionaries are getting funds in
plenty from home and abroad for this purpose.

Since religion is completely a personal matter nobody should be allowed to lure and
coerce the people for religious conversion. For such conversions there should be deterrent
punishment for the persons and organisations who are responsible for such conversions.

Hence this Bill.

S. S. AHLUWALIA


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to prohibit the allurement by promising employment, free education in reputed schools
for the wards, easy money and decent life by religious bodies, missionaries etc. for
attracting people for converting their religion and use of coercive methods for
such conversions and for deterrent punishment for the violators and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Shri S. 5. Ahluwalia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—342RS—20.04.2000.