AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 26TH JULY, 2024
Bill No. XXVII of 2024 
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
 to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
     BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows: 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (Amendment)
Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commen-
cement 
45 of 2023 2. In the Bharatiya Nyaya  Sanhita, 2023 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 63, Exception. 2 shall be omitted.
Amendment of 
Section 63. 
3. Section 83 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of 
Section 83. 
10 
4. In the principal Act, after section 110, the following new  section shall be
inserted, namely, –
“110A. Whoever, voluntarily harms the dignity or right of a dead person,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to ten years and
shall also be liable to fine.”
Insertion of 
new Section 
110A. 
Punishment for 
harming the 
dignity or right 
of a dead 
person. 

2 
S
TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 The Indian Penal Code, 1860 has been replaced by the Bhar atiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS). The main ground of the Government to 
replace the Code was that the existing criminal law reflect ed colonial 
outlook and to get rid of the colonial past, a new law is required. There is 
no doubt that colonial moral imprints were clearly visible in the 
provisions that criminalized homosexuality, adultery, enticing married 
women and even marital rape exemption in the Indian Penal Code (IPC). 
However, it seems that the Government failed to grab the opportunity to 
truly decolonise the law. 
2. While the BNS has dropped the provisions on criminalizing adultery
(Section 497 IPC), thus giving effect to the Supreme Court decision i
n
J
oseph Shine v. Union of India (2019) , it continues to retain the
provisions on enticing a married woman (Section 83) and the marital rape
exemption (Section 63, Exception 2).  Section 498 of the repealed IPC
criminalized enticing or taking away a married woman with the intention
of sexual intercourse. Since, women were perceived as a property of their
husbands, any form of sexual transgression with a wife is considered an
infringement of the husband's proprietary right over her. Th e section was
designed to protect the right of the husband and not the wife. Similar is
the case of  retention of marital rape exemption from the IPC in BNS,
based on the belief that husbands have ownership over their wives post
marriage. This exemption to the offence of rape grants immunity to the
husband to have non -consensual sexual intercourse with their wives. This
is even when marital rape has been recognized as cruelty and a ground for
divorce. All of  this is at the cost of women's dignity, bodily integrity and
her right to sexual autonomy. Therefore, these provisions should be
deleted from the BNS.
3. Further in Rangaraju and Vajapeyi Vs. State of Karnataka, th
e
K
arnataka High Court has observed that the act of sexual harassment or
assault on a dead body does not come under any of the provisions of the
Indian Penal Code (IPC). The Court has recommended that the IPC
should be amended to make necrophili a, i.e., sexual attraction or act
involving a person engaging in sexual activities with a deceased body, an
offence. The Division Bench passed the order acquitting  the accused from
the charges of raping a 25 year old woman after murdering her.
4.
Necrophilia is a paraphilia in which the perpetrator derives pleasure
from a heinous crime such as having sex with dead bodies. Necrophilia is
a "psychosexual disorder" identified as a "paraphilia" by the DSM -IV
(
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders) which includes
pedophilia, exhibitionism and sexual mutilation.
5.
Even in the new Nyaya Sanhita, a dead person does have right and
dignity. Section 315 of the BNS recognizes dishonest misappropriation of
the dead man's property, as an offence. Further, section 351 of BNS,
which deals with defamation, stipulates that libel or slander against a dead

3 
person also constitutes the offence of criminal defamation. Section 356 of 
the same law, which defines criminal intimidation, includes threatening a 
person with injuring the reputation of a dead person dear to him, as an 
offence. Section 301, deals with the offence of trespassing on burial 
grounds etc., states that if any person offers any indignity to any human 
corpse, or causes disturbance to any person assembled for the 
performance of funeral ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
6
. T
he Supreme Court in its various judgements has held that the right
to dignity prevails even after  death. In S. Sethu Raja Vs. The Chief
Secretary (W.P. (MI) No. 3888 of 2007) , the petitioner had brought to the
court's attention, the Supreme Court's stand on right to accord decent
burial or cremation to a dead body. The Supreme Court's stand be
interpreted from its decision in Ram Sharan Autyanuprasi Vs. Union of
India (AIR 1989 Supreme Court 549) in which it held thus,
"13... It is true that the life in its expanded horizons today includes all 
that give meaning to a man's life including his tradition, culture and 
heritage and protection of that heritage in its full measure would 
certainly come within the encompass of an expanded concept of Art. 
21 of the Constitution." 
Further the Apex Court in Pt. Parmanand Katara Vs. Union of India 
(1995 (3) SCC 248) had observed thus, 
"the word and expression "person in article 21, would include a dead 
person in a limited sense and that his rights to his life which includes 
his right to live with human dignity, to have an extended meaning to 
treat his dead body with respect, which he would have deserved, had 
they been alive subject to his tradition, culture and the religion, which 
he professed. The State must respect a dead by allowing the body of 
that dead person to be treated with ignity and unless  it is required for 
the purposes of establishing a crime, to ascertain the cause of death 
and the subjected to post -mortem or for any scientific investigation, 
medical education or to save life of another person in accordance with 
the law, the preservation  of the dead body and its disposal in 
accordance with human dignity" 
In Ashray Adhikar Abhiyan Vs. Union of India (AIR 2002 SC 554)  the 
Supreme Court had upheld the right of a homeless deceased to have a 
decent burial as per their religious belief and the corresponding obligation 
of the State towards such people. 
7
.
Many countries in the world have laws on necrophilia. In the UK,
any kind of sexual harassment or inappropriate physical conduct with a
dead body is against the law, and conviction in this  case can lead to a jail
term of six months to two years or a fine. Legislation against necrophilia
also exists in Canada, New Zealand and South Africa. In Canada, without
using the word necrophilia, it is mentioned that maximum sentence of 5
years can be cited for harming the dignity and rights of a dead body.

4 
At the same time, in New Zealand, a provision has been made for a 
maximum punishment of 2 years regarding this law. 
8. It is therefore the need of the society that a law for providing
punishment for necrophilia should be made by creating a new offence
under BNS.
The Bills seeks to achieve the above said objectives. 
A.D. SINGH

5 
AN
NEXURE 
E
XTRACTS FROM THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023 
(45 OF 2023) 
 *            *             *         *              
CHAPTER V 
OF
 OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILDREN 
O
f Sexual offences 
63. A
 man is said to commit “rape” if he—
*             
                  *                                  *     *
Exception.2––Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his 
own wife, the wife not being under eighteen years of age, is not rape. 
Rape. 
*             *              *          * 
Of offences relating to marriage 
*             *                *    * 
83. Whoever takes or entices away any woman who is and whom he
knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of any other man, with
intent that she may have illicit intercourse with any person, or
conceals or detains with that intent any such woman, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term whic h
m
ay extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Enticing or 
taking away 
or detaining 
with criminal 
intent a 
married 
woman. 
*             *               *     * 

RAJYA
 SABHA 
________ 
A 
BILL 
 to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,  2023 
__________ 
(Shri A.D. S
ingh, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)-158-31.07.2024 