THE COMPULSORY VOTING  BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
 follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Voting Act,  2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Representation of the People Act,
1951 or any other law for the time being in force every voter shall exercise his right to vote
compulsorily when called for by the Election Commission in an election to Lok Sabha or
Legislative Assembly of a State as the case may be:
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. XXVI of 2002
G:BILL2002\RS\382RS. PM5
Compulsory
voting by
electorate.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5
10

Provided that a voter may be exempted from exercising his right to vote only when he
becomes incapable of voting due to sickness or infirmity and unable to move or he is
physically incapacitated from an illness of a serious nature and produces a medical certificate
from a registered medical practitioner testifying to such incapacity.
3. The Election Commission shall arrange for adequate mobile booths in each
constituency for casting of votes by those persons who are not in a position to cast their
votes as polling booths.
4. (1) Any voter who fails to cast his vote at any election when called by Election
Commission shall be liable to fine of rupees one hundred or one day imprisonment or both.
(2) If failure to cast the vote by voter at any election when called by Election
Commission is by deliberate avoidance, he shall be liable to forfeiture of his ration card and
will be debarred from contesting any election for a period of six years from the date of his
conviction.
(3) If such eligible voter being an employee of the Union Government or any public
sector undertaking owned or controlled by Union Government fails to cast the vote at any
election called by Election Commission by deliberate avoidance, he shall be punished also
with forfeiture of four days salary and delay in promotion for at most a period of one year.
5.  Any voter who inspite of his illness or physical incapacity has cast his vote at an
election or any person who has cast his vote at all elections held during a period of
twenty year preceding the commencement of this Act without any break shall be—
(a) provided with a certificate of reward of value of rupees one thousand;
(b) given preference in jobs in services under the Central Government; and
(c) given preference in admission to the institutions of higher technical education.
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
2
Special
arrangement
for mobile
booths.
Penalty.
Incentives for
Casting Vote.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

3
G:\BILL 2002\RS\382RS PM5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is a very sad feature that the number of voters who cast their votes is far less than
those who are eligible most of the time. The average number of votes polled is around 50
per cent. It is a glaring commentary on the responsibility of citizens that the fate of the
country’s democratic institutions has been left to be decided by about 50 per cent of the
electorate. Since the trend of voting from time to time does not show any appreciable
increase in the number of those who exercise their franchise, time has come to ensure that
all the citizens exercise their sovereign right to choose their representatives, so that the
elections may reflect the will of the whole electorate and not merely a part of it. In 11th Lok
Sabha, in number of States, the voting was less than 40 per cent, and in number of cases
people had boycotted elections and thus did not vote deliberately.
With a view to increasing the voting percentage, the present Bill purpose to make it
compulsory for every eligible voter to vote and provide for exemption only in cases where
the voter is physically incapacitated due to illness of serious nature. In these cases also
Election Commission shall arrange for mobile booths for those who are unable to cast their
votes at polling booths.
Since the provision is being made compulsory, punishment is also sought to be given
to those who do not vote at elections. However, reward is also proposed to be given to those
persons who vote at elections inspite of their illness or without any break.
Hence this Bill.
T. SUBBARAMI  REDDY

4
G:\BILL 2002\RS\382RS PM5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Election Commission shall make arrangements
for mobile vans for the purpose of casting of votes by those persons who are not in a
position to cast their votes at polling booths in each constituency. Clause 5 of the Bill
provides for certificate of reward of value of rupees one thousand to those persons who
inspite of their illness or physical incapacity exercise their right to vote at an election or to
those who exercise their right at all elections held during a period of twenty years without
any break.
This Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum.
A non-recurring of about rupees one lakh is also likely to be involved.

5
G:\BILL 2002\RS\382RS PM5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill which will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of legislative
power is therefore, of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
—————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—382RS—19-04-2002.