AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XXVIII of 2025 
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:― 
 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment)
Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Insertion of 
new section 
43B. 
Liability of 
digital 
service 
providers for 
inaccurate or 
misleading 
technological 
guidance and 
compensation 
for faulty 
algorithm, 
misleading 
data, 
incorrect 
mapping etc. 
 2. In the Information Technology Act, 2000, after section 43A, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"43B. (1) Any person or entity either operating a digital service 
platform or providing a digital service or both, including but not limited 
to mapping, navigati on, or automated route guidance services or apps, 
shall ensure accuracy and reliability of the information so provided, in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) Where any digital service provider, such as a navigation app, 
is found to be negligent in provi ding accurate and reliable information 
due to its faulty algorithm, misleading data, or incorrect mapping and the 
misleading or inaccurate navigation guidance results in bodily harm, 
injury, or death, of any user of such services, such service provider sha ll 
be liable to pay compensation up to twenty- five lakh rupees to the person 
so affected or to the legal heir and shall also in addition be liable to the 
criminal liability under the existing laws for the time being in force.   
Explanation:―  For the purposes of this section,–– 
(a)  digital service provider includes any individual, 
private agency, private company, partnership firm, sole proprietor 
firm or any such other body or agency which has been granted 
permission by the appropriate Government to offer services 
through digital or electronic means in accordance with the policy 
governing such service sector; and 
(b)   navigation app means an application that provides 
navigational directions in real time and includes any mapping app, 
Global Positioning System or navigation system. 
(3)  The liability under sub -section (2) shall not be excluded 
solely on the basis of a general disclaimer accepted by the user, unless the 
provider demonstrates that— 
(a) the erroneous guidance resulted from force majeure  
conditions beyond reasonable technological control; or 
(b) the user was sufficiently warned of the risk and expressly 
disregarded safety advisories in reliance on such information.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
21 of  2000. 
 
 
 
  

3 
 
 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
 Recently, two 29 -year-old doctors lost their lives in Kerala, India, 
when their car plunged into the Periyar River while following a route 
recommended by Google Maps. This tragic event highlights the perilous 
outcomes of over -reliance on technology. In a s imilar incident, three 
individuals enroute to a wedding in Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, also fell into a 
river while adhering to Google Maps' guidance. This serves as a reminder 
that the information provided by Google Maps is not always reliable and can 
sometimes lead users astray. Furthermore, a family from Bihar inadvertently 
found themselves in the forests of Karnataka after using Google Maps for 
directions to Goa. In the 2011 case of Rosenberg v s. Harwood in the United 
States, a district court in Utah dismissed a woman's lawsuit after she was hit 
by a vehicle while trying to cross a busy road, which she navigated using 
Google Maps. The woman sued both Google and the driver, but the C ourt 
determined that there was no direct legal relationship between her and 
Google. In India, incidents resulting from inaccurate Google Maps data are 
becoming a significant concern. As technology has advanced, more people 
are relying on Google Maps on their smartphones for navigation. However, 
accidents can sometimes occur due to erroneous information or directions 
provided by the app. According to Section 43A of the I nformation 
Technology Act, 2000, all organizations must take reasonable measures to 
ensure the security and accuracy of their users' data.  
 
The use of navigation apps is growing rapidly each year; however, 
there is a significant gap in legal regulations to guarantee their accuracy. To 
improve traveller safety, it is crucial to revise the provisions of the I T Act. 
Therefore, this Bill seeks to fix liability on the part of the digital service 
provider, such as a navigation app, if it is found to be negligent  in providing 
reliable and accurate information  due to its faulty algorithm, misleading 
data, or incorrect mapping, resulting in bodily harm, injury, or death of the 
user concerned and to pay suitable compensation to the persons affected. 
Hence, this Bill. 
 
 
AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE. 
 
 
 
   
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 
__________ 
(Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)―309― 08.12.2025 