1
Bill No. XXVI of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 4 of the Constitution, clause (2) shall be omitted.
3. In article 55 of the Constitution, in the proviso to the Explanation, for the figure
"2026", the figure "2051" shall be substituted.
4. In article 81 of the Constitution, for the proviso to clause (3), the following proviso
shall be substituted, namely:
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON  22ND JULY, 2022
Amendment
of article 4.
Amendment
of article 55.
Amendment
of article 81.
5

2
"Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of which
the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first
census taken after the year 2051 have been published, be construed,—
(i) for the purpose of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to that
clause, as a reference to the 1971 census; and
(ii) for the purpose of sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 2) as a reference to the
2011 census.".
5. In article 82 of the Constitution, for the third proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:
"Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the
year 2051 have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust—
(i) the allocation of seats in the House of People to the States as readjusted
on the basis of the 1971 census; and
(ii) the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be
readjusted on the basis of the 2011 census, under this article.".
6. In article 170 of the Constitution,—
(a) in clause ( 2), in the proviso to the Explanation, for the figure "2026", the
figure "2051" be substituted; and
(b) in the third proviso to clause (3), for the figure "2026", the figure "2051" shall
be substituted.
7. In article 330 of the Constitution, in the proviso to the Explanation, for the figures
“2026” and “2001”, the figure “2051” and “2011” shall respectively be substituted.
8. In article 332 of the Constitution,
(a) in clause (3A), for the figure “2026, the figure “2051” shall be substituted; and
(b) in clause (3B), for the figure “2026”, the figure “2051” shall be substituted.
9. In article 368 of the Constitution, in clause ( 2), for sub-clause ( a), the following
sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) article 2, article 3, article 54, article 55, article 73, article 162, article 241 or
article 279A or”.
Amendment
of article 82.
Amendment
of article 170.
Amendment
of article 330.
Amendment
of article 332.
Amendment
of article 368.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is called a Union of States and therefore the States are an indestructible and
integral part of it. Most of the States have completed more than half a century of existence as
stable political entitites. The different States now present in India not only denote the
particular territorial regions or the administrative divisions, but also represent a culturally
integrated democratic community, which has become central to the lives of the people in the
States.
2. India being a democratic country upholding federal principles, the States should not
be altered without the consensus of the people of these States. Therefore, it is required that
the existence of all the States should be protected from any alteration by law with a simple
majority in the Parliament. Hence, any changes made to the States should have the protection
of article 368 of the Constitution of India.
3. By the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, the share of seats of the
States in the Parliament was protected from change. This protection is only upto the year
2026. The rationale for undertaking this amendment was ensuring justice to the States who
have lowered their population growth through consistent efforts.
4. Keeping in view of the difference in the degrees progress of family planning
programmes in different parts of the country, there is a need to extend the current freeze on
the number of representatives (Members of Parliament and Members of Legislative Assembly)
by not undertaking fresh delimitation up to the year 2051 as a measure so that the States
which have succeeded in the adoption of family planning methods are not affected adversely
by the reduction in the respective seats allotted to them in the Parliament.
5. At the same time, in order to promote the empowerment of the marginalized sections
there is a need to refix the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States on the basis
of the population ascertained at the census for the year 2011 in such a manner that the
respective share of the States in the Parliaments is not altered.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.
DR. V . SIVADASAN
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
4. (1) Any law referred to in article 2 or article 3 shall contain such provisions for the
amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as may be necessary to give effect
to the provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental and
consequential provisions (including provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the
Legislature or Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law) as Parliament may
deem necessary.
(2) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution
for the purposes of article 368.
* * * * * * *
55. (1) As far as practicable, there shall be uniformity in the scale of representation of
the different States at the election of the President.
(2) For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States inter se as well as
parity between the States as a whole and the Union, the number of votes which each elected
member of Parliament and of the Legislative Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at such
election shall be determined in the following manner:—
(a) every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall have as many
votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient obtained by dividing the
population of the State by the total number of the elected members of the Assembly;
(b) if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder is not less than five
hundred, then the vote of each member referred to in sub-clause (a) shall be further increased
by one;
(c) each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have such number of votes
as may be obtained by dividing the total number of votes assigned to the members of the
Legislative Assemblies of the States under sub-clause (a) and (b) by the total number of the
elected members of both Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half being counted
as one and other fractions being disregarded.
(3) The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the system of
proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such
election shall be by secret ballot.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression—population means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which
the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census
taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a reference to the
1971 census.
* * * * * * *
81. * * * * * * *
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),—
(a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House of the People in
such manner that the ratio between that number and the population of the State is, so far as
practicable, the same for all States; and
Laws made
under articles 2
and 3 to
provide for the
amendment of
the First and
the Fourth
Schedules and
supplemental,
incidental and
consequential
matters.
Manner of
election of
President.
Composition
of the House
of the People.

5
(b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that the
ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is,
so far as practicable, the same throughout the State:
Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a) of this clause shall not be applicable for
the purpose of allotment of seats in the House of the People to any State so long as the
population of that State does not exceed six million.
(3) In this article, the expression—population means the population as ascertained at
the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census
taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed,—
(i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to that clause, as a
reference to the 1971 census; and
(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) as a reference to the 2001 census.
82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the House of the
People to the States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be
readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the House of the
People until the dissolution of the then existing House:
Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President
may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the House
may be held on the basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the
year 2026 have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust—
(i) the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States as readjusted on the
basis of the 1971 census; and
(ii) the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be readjusted on the
basis of the 2001 census, under this article.
* * * * * * *
170. * * * * * * *
(2) For the purposes of clause ( 1), each State shall be divided into territorial
constituencies in such manner that the ratio between  the population of each constituency
and the number of seats allotted to it shall,  so far as practicable, be the same throughout the
State.
Explanation.—In this clause, the expression—population means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which
the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census
taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a reference to the
2001 census.
(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial constituencies
shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law
determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the Legislative
Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly:
Readjustment
after each
census.
Composition
of the
Legislative
Assemblies.

6
Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President
may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the Legislative
Assembly may be held on the basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such
readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the
year 2026 have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust—
(i) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State as readjusted on
the basis of the 1971 census; and
(ii) the division of such State into territorial constituencies as may be readjusted  on
the basis of the 2001 census, under this clause.
* * * * * * *
330. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for—
(a) the Scheduled Castes;
(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of
Assam; and
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State or Union territory for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause ( 1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of seats allotted to that State or Union territory in the House
of the People as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or Union territory or of
the Scheduled Tribes in the State or Union territory or part of the State or Union territory, as
the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the
State or Union territory.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (2), the number of seats reserved in
the House of the People for the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam shall
bear to the total number of seats allotted to that State a proportion not less than the population
of the Scheduled Tribes in the said autonomous districts bears to the total population of the
State.
Explanation.—In this article and in article 332, the expression—population means the
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have
been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which
the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census
taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a reference to the
2001 census.
* * * * * * *
332. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes,
except the Scheduled  Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam, in the Legislative
Assembly of every State.
(2) Seats shall be reserved also for the autonomous districts in the Legislative Assembly
of the State of Assam.
(3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled  Tribes in
the Legislative Assembly of any State under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the
same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the
Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled  Tribes in the State or part of the State, as
the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the
State.
Reservation of
seats for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in the
House of the
People.
Reservation of
seats for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in the
Legislative
Assemblies of
the States.

7
(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the taking effect, under
article 170, of the readjustment, on the basis of the first census after the year 2026, of the
number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya,
Mizoram and Nagaland, the seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled  Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly of any such State shall be,—
(a) if all the seats in the Legislative Assembly of such State in existence on the date of
coming into force of the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1987 (hereafter in this
clause referred to as the existing Assembly) are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes, all
the seats except one;
(b) in any other case, such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a
proportion not less than the number (as on the said date) of members belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes in the existing Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the existing
Assembly.
(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the re-adjustment, under
article 170, takes effect on the basis of the first census after the year 2026, of the number of
seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura, the seats which shall be reserved
for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly shall be, such number of seats as bears
to the total number of seats, a proportion not less than the number, as on the date of coming
into force of the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992, of members belonging
to the Scheduled  Tribes in the Legislative Assembly in existence on the said date bears to
the total number of seats in that Assembly.
(4) The number of seats reserved for an autonomous district in the Legislative Assembly
of the State of Assam shall bear to the total number of seats in that Assembly a proportion
not less than the population of the district bears to the total population of the State.
(5) The constituencies for the seats reserved for any autonomous district of Assam
shall not comprise any area outside that district.
(6) No person who is not a member of a Scheduled Tribe of any autonomous district of
the State of Assam shall be eligible for election to the Legislative Assembly of the State from
any constituency of that district:
Provided that for elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam, the
representation of the Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled  Tribes in the constituencies
included in the Bodoland Territorial Areas District, so notified, and existing prior to the
constitution of Bodoland Territorial Areas District, shall be maintained.
* * * * * * *
368. * * * * * * *
(2) An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a
Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed in each House
by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the members of that House present and voting, it shall be presented to the President
who shall give his assent to the Bill and thereupon the Constitution shall stand amended in
accordance with the terms of the Bill:
Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in—
(a) article 54, article 55, article 73, article  162, article  241 or article  279A or
(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI, or
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or
(d) the representation of States in Parliament, or
(e) the provisions of this article,
Power of
Parliament to
amend the
Constitution
and procedure
therefor.

8
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one-half
of the States by resolutions to that effect passed by those legislatures before the Bill making
provision for such amendment is presented to the President for assent.
* * * * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—644RS(S3)—25.07.2022.