Short title,
and
commencement.
THE  RIGHT TO EARLY CHILDHOOD CARE  BILL,  2023
A
BILL
to provide for the right to early childhood care to all children in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Early Childhood Care Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this 
Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" means any child living within the territory of India under the age of six
years;
(c) "early childhood care" means proper nutritious food, healthcare, play and
early education within a protective and enabling environment to ensure proper growth,
scientific upbringing and proper mental and physical wellbeing and development of
the child.
Bill  No. XXVI of  2023
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023 
5
10

2
Right to early
childhood
care.
(d) "local authority" means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council of
Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat, by whatever name called, and includes such other
authority or body having administrative control or empowered by
, or under any law
for the time being in force to function as a local authority in any city, town or village;
(e) "parent" means either the natural or step or adoptive father or mother or a
guardian who has legal custody of the child and who is responsible for bringing up
and caring for a child or a group of children; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this 
Act.
3. (1) Every child shall have the right to early childhood care.
(2) No parent shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses which may
prevent him or her from accessing the benefits of universal early childhood care for his/
her child.
4. The appropriate Government shall while ensuring universal access to early
childhood care to all children, take special measures to address the special needs of and
provide special facilities to the differently-abled children.
5. The access to early childhood care should be designed in such a way that no child
is left out of the ambit of its benefit due to income inequality
, social inequity or information
asymmetry.
6. (1) The Central Government shall have the primary responsibility for providing
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments, to meet
such percentage of expenditure as may be prescribed, in consultation with the State
Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the purposes of this
Act.
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government or local authority, as the case
may be, to—
(a) ensure free early childhood care to every child;
(b) ensure that no child is discriminated against and/or prevented from
accessing early childhood care;
(c) notify or establish, where it is not so established, a well-equipped early
childhood care centre, within such area or limits of neighbourhood, as may be
prescribed; and
(d) provide necessary infrastructure for the care centres including building,
equipments and well-trained staff.
8.
(1)
 The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for carrying out
the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3)
Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Special
provisions for
differently-
abled children.
Universal
access to early
childhood care.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Duties of
appropriate
Government
or local
authority.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Early childhood refers to the formative stage of the first six years of life, which is the
period of most rapid growth and development and critical for survival of a child. Deficiencies
during this stage will have substantive and cumulative adverse impact on human development.
As children are the future of our country, it is imperative to accord priority attention to early
childhood care including proper nutrition, health care, play and early learning within a
protective and enabling environment.
2. Child malnutrition is one of the most serious problems being faced by our country
today
. Stunted growth and malnutrition are affecting our children and we are lagging behind
many nations in this regard. This is an issue which needs to be addressed soon.
3. The Central Government shall take it up as statutory responsibility backed by sound
legislation to ensure right to early childhood care to all children of India.
The Bill seeks to achieve this objective.
V . SIVADASAN
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (2) of Clause 3 of the Bill provides that no parent shall be liable to pay any
kind of fee or charges or expenses which may prevent him or her from accessing the benefits
of universal early childhood care for his/her child.
Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall take special measures to
address the special needs of and provide special facilities to the differently-abled children.
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall have the primary responsibility
for providing funds and shall provide funds to the State Governments, to meet such
percentage of expenditure, as may be prescribed, as grants-in-aid of revenues, to enable
them to carry  out the purposes of this Bill.
Clause 7 provides that it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government or the local
authority, as the case may be, to notify or establish, a well-equipped early childhood care
centre, within such area or limits of neighbourhood, as may be prescribed and also provide
infrastructure including building, equipments and well-trained staff.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the expenditure involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Governments to
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the right to early childhood care to all children in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)-133-17.12.2023.