 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026 
Bill No. XXVI of 2025 
THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED 
TRIBES (PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES)  
AMENDMENT BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:⸺ 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Amendment of 
section 4. 
 
 2. 
 
 
In section 4 of the Scheduled Cast es and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention 
of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for 
clause (1), the following shall be substituted, namely⸺ 
“(1) Whoever, being a public servant, wilfully neglects his duties 
required to be performed by him under this Act,⸺ 
(i) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than one year; 
(ii) in addition to the punishment specified under clause (i) , 
such public servant shall be subject to departmental proceedings, in 
accordance with the applicable service rules; and 
(iii)  where such public servant is found to have repeatedly 
failed in the discharge of such duties without reasonable cause, he 
may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, be dismissed from the service.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
33 of 1989. 
Amendment of 
section 21. 
 
 3. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), after clause (vii), the 
following new clauses shall be inserted, namely,⸺ 
“(viii) the conduct of regular training programs for law 
enforcement offices, judicial officers, and government officials to ensure 
they are well -versed with the provisions of this Act and sensitive to the 
issues faced by members of the Scheduled Castes and the Sc heduled 
Tribes; and 
 (ix) the launching of public awareness campaigns to educate the 
general public about the rights and protections provided under this Act.”  
15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
  

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
     As per ‘Crime in India 2022’, published by National Crime Records Bureau, a 
total of 57582 and 10064 crimes were registered against Scheduled Castes (SC) and 
Scheduled Tribes (ST) respectively, in the year 2022. Both of these numbers were an 
increase from what was registered  in the previous year. In the same report, the number 
of victims reported under the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989 (PoA Act) alone,  i.e., in cases not involving any provisions of the 
Indian Penal Code, for the year 2022, was 4713.  
     In Lata Singh v. the State of UP (AIR 2006 SCC 2522), Supreme Court has 
said, “The caste system is a curse on the nation and the sooner it is destroyed the better. 
In fact, it is dividing the nation at a time when we have to be united to face the 
challenges before the nation unitedly.” 
    In the case of Subhash Kashinath Mahajan v . The State of Maharashtra (AIR 
2018 SC 1498), the Supreme Court opined that SC/ST Prevention of Atrocities Act 
(i.e., the PoA Act) is being misused and checks are needed to prevent such misuse. The 
act had to be interpreted in a manner which will ensure that “casteism is not 
perpetuated” through the implementation of the law. The court also noted that the 
legislature never intended for innocent citizens to be termed as accused through this act. 
However, it noted that this Act has become an instrument to blackmail or to wreak 
personal vengeance which wasn’t the motive of the legislators while bringing forward 
the Act. This judgement was nullified through the insertion of Section 18A in the Act 
whose constitutionality was upheld in the case of Prathvi Raj Chauhan v. Union of 
India. However, observations as made above can’t be absolutely neglected.  
     In P. Mariappan v. The Deputy Inspector General of Police, Coimbatore Range 
and Ors. (MANU/TN/0657/2014), the Madras HC directed the Superintendent of Police 
to register a case against the Inspector of Police under Section 4 of the PoA Act, 
because he had investigated into the complaint of the Petitioner himself, and had failed 
to put the files on record for the orders of the Superintendent of Police. The Court noted 
that this investigation could not have been done by the Inspector of Police, but had to be 
done by an officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police as per Section 
7 of the PoA Act. The Court also held the State Government responsible for 
compensating the Petitioner, because the police officials of the State Go vernment had 
passed an order to bar the Petitioner from entering the village altogether. 
      Various studies and reports like that of National Dalit Movement for Justice 
Report, 2020, State of Policing in India Report (2018) by Common Cause and Lokniti -
CSDS etc. indicate that biases against marginalised communities often influence how 
cases are handled. Many public servants also lack comprehensive knowledge of the 
Act, hence mandatory sensitivity training can play a key role in combating prejudices 
that may otherwise hinder the fair treatment. Regular training would create a culture of 
accountability, making it easier to identify and address failures in enforcement. This 
sort of training also aligns with Article 46 of the Constitution which directs the state to 
promote the educational and economic interests of SC/ST communities and protect 
them from social injustice and exploitation.  
      Public servants often handle a high volume of cases, and negligence can 
sometimes stem from a lack of accountability. Increasing the minimum punishment 
from six months to one year emphasizes the gravity of neglect and signals that willful 
negligence will not be tolerated. Departmental proceedings can be initiated more 
promptly than criminal trials, providing an immediate accountability mechanism for 
dereliction of duty. When public servants know that departmental actions like 
suspension, demotion, or reprimand are possible, they are more likely to approach 
SC/ST cases with diligence and seriousness.  
     Hence this Bill. 
      
MANOJ KUMAR JHA. 

4 
 
 
  ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES 
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES) ACT, 1989 
(33 OF 1989) 
 
  *                               *                               *                            *                             *  
Punishment for 
neglect of duties. 4. (1) Whoever, being a public servant but not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe, wilfully neglects his duties required to be performed by him under this 
Act and the rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to one year. 
 
  *                               *                               *                            *                             *   
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
_________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Act, 1989. 
_________ 
(Shri Manoj Kumar Jha, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—053—10.02.2026. 