THE INFIRM, DESTITUTE AND NEGLECTED OLD WOMEN AND
WIDOWS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the
infirm, destitute and neglected old women and the widows by extending financial
assistance, rehabilitation, medical care and other facilities through a Welfare Board
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Infirm, Destitute and Neglected Old Women and
Widows (Protection and Welfare) Act, 2009.
(2) It extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Board" means the Infirm, Destitute and Neglected Women and Widows
Welfare Board established under Section 3;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2009
Bill  No.  XXVII of  2009

2
(c) "destitute" in relation to a woman means any female human being who lives
uncared for and has become infirm due to old age or chronic or incurable disease,
physical deformity or mental imbalance and has no independent and adequate means
of livelihood or is not being looked after by her family members or relatives;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "widow" means a female human being who has attained the age of eighteen
years and whose husband has died after her legal marriage.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Board to be known as the Infirm, Destitute and Neglected Women and
Widows Welfare Board for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Chennai in the State of Tamil Nadu and the
Board may establish its branches in other States and Union Territories at conspicuous
places as the Board may deem fit and necessary;
(4) The Board shall consist of—
(a) the Minister of Women and Child Development of the Union Council of
Ministers who shall be ex-officio chairperson of the Board;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson preferably a woman with such qualifications and
experience, as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) five women Members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha
and two from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of
each House;
(d) five members representing Union Ministries of Home Affairs, Human
Resource Development, Health and Family Welfare, Finance and Social Justice and
Empowerment;
(e) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Governments of the States, by rotation in alphabetical order, to
represent the Governments of the States;
(f) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) working for destitute women or widows,
as the case may be.
(5) The Board shall follow such procedure for holding its meetings and quorum for
such meetings shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Board shall have a Secretariat consisting of a member Secretary and such
number of officers, employees and establishment, with such conditions of service,
emoluments and perks, as may be prescribed or determined from time to time for the efficient
functioning of the Secretariat of the Board;
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the Board shall promote by such measures as it thinks appropriate, necessary
and fit, the protective and welfare measures including rehabilitation measures for the infirm,
destitute and neglected old women suffering from chronic or incurable disease, physical
deformity and mental imbalance and for the widows who have become destitute or have
been abandoned by their kith and kin and remain neglected and left to fend for themselves
without independent and adequate means of livelihood who are languishing all over the
country.
Establishment
of the Infirm,
Destitute and
Neglected
Women and
Widows
Welfare
Board.
Functions of
the Board.

3
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of Sub-Section (1), the Board
shall,—
(a) maintain district-wise register of the infirm, destitute and neglected old women
and widows who are subsisting on begging or alms given by general public, chanting
bhajans at religious places who are to be rehabilitated and are in need of assistance
from the Board with such particulars and details and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) work out various plans and formulate schemes for the overall welfare and
rehabilitation of the infirm, destitute, and neglected old women and widows covered
under this Act and implement them in letter and spirit;
(c) conduct a special survey of the old women including widows who have
become infirm suffering from chronic or incurable disease, physical deformity or mental
imbalance and abandoned by their kith and kin and subsisting on alms as begger or
bhajan chanting in the temples of Mathura, Vrindavan and other places in Uttar Pradesh
and other parts of the country and formulate appropriate medicare and rehabilitation
programmes for such old women in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the welfare and
rehabilitation measures being undertaken by the Board so that the women covered
under this Act may avail them in a big way;
(e) perform such other functions not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government from time to time.
5. On the recommendation of the Board or otherwise, the appropriate Government
shall provide the old women and widows covered under this Act, the following facilities,
namely:—
(a) monthly subsistence allowance of not less than three thousand rupees if the
old woman or the widow, as the case may be, is having any dependent children and not
less than one thousand five hundred rupee in case she is alone;
(b) residential accommodation free of cost wherever necessary;
(c) free medical care with medicines both indoor and outdoor facilities;
(d) free education to the dependent children as per their calibre;
(e) gainful employment as per the physical condition after imparting vocational
training wherever possible;
(f) assistance for rehabilitation like self employment, etc. wherever required;
(g) free legal aid in case the old woman or widow has been thrown out or abandoned
by her kith and kin;
(h) such other facilities, as may be necessary for the welfare, rehabilitation,
proper development, regaining her lost status in the family and for maintaining a
respectable life in the society:
Provided that if the woman covered under this Act either gets remarried, gainful
employment and taken back by her kith and kin in the family the facilities being provided to
her shall be withdrawn from the date she gets gainful employment, re-entry into her family or
her remarriage, as the case may be.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of old women Homes
as conspicuous places in various parts of its territorial jurisdiction as it may deem necessary
for board and lodging of infirm old women or suffering from chronic or incurable disease,
physical deformity or mental imbalance or such other physical conditions including widows
in such homes with necessary facilities of daily life as may be prescribed.
Facilities
by the
appropriate
Government.
Old women
homes.

4
(2) The appropriate Government shall also provide necessary free medical aid and
medicines and means of entertainment to the old women in such Homes. The inhabitants of
such old Homes shall not be entitled for subsistence allowance under this Act.
(3) The inhabitants of such old Homes shall not be entitled for subsistence allowance
under this Act.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
in any custom prevalent, an old woman or widow covered under this Act shall,—
(a) not be evicted or thrown out of the house of the in-laws or parents; as the
case may be, where such woman or widow was last residing;
(b) be entitled to inherit the property or her share of jointly owned property from
her in-laws;
(c) be entitled for maintenance from her in-laws or kith or kin who neglect or
abandon the old woman or widow, as the case may be.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this
behalf by law, provide the requisite and adequate funds to the States, Union Territories and
the Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The Board shall submit an Annual Report in such form and in such manner, as may
be prescribed, of its activities in implementing the provisions of this Act to the President of
India, who shall cause the Report to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament along with
action taken thereon by the Central Government as soon as it is received.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
11. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the old women and widows
covered under this Act.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Protective
provisions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual Report
of the Board.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect and
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In a vast country like ours which is the second most populous nation of the globe it is
but natural that there are millions of hapless, unfortunate widows and other destitute old
women who are infirm, suffering from chronic or incurable disease, physical deformity or
mental imbalance particularly, belonging to poor and middle class groups who live uncared
for and neglected by their near and dear ones without independent and adequate means of
livelihood. They lead a lonely and miserable life and very often subsist on alms which they
get from begging and many a time their physical condition do not allow them to beg which
puts a question mark on their very survival. Similarly, millions of women lose their husbands
untimely and become widows. Most of them become destitute and their lives become miserable
if they do not have a roof over their head and means of livelihood. They are driven out of
their in-laws homes or even from their parental homes. If they have children to support their
condition goes from bad to worse and they have no option but to beg for survival. They are
sexually exploited and many a time forced into prostitution. Many of the widows subsist
working as maids or doing petty works. In the society they are treated as a bad women and
are not allowed auspicious occasions. Unfortunately to be present on even their kith and kin
do not hesitate in ill treating them. Many old women take shelter in old age homes but their
number is awfully very short.
Since our democracy is wedded to welfare, it is the sacred duty of the State to initiate
protective welfare measures for the infirm, destitute, neglected old women and widows
through a Board which will exclusively look after the welfare, rehabilitation and protection of
such old women and widows.
Hence this Bill.
JAYANTHI  NATRAJAN
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Board. Clause 5 provides for
the facilities to be provided to the old women and widows by appropriate Government.
Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide funds for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupee ten thousand crores may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupee fifteen thousand crores may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the
infirm, destitute and neglected old women and the widows by extending financial
assistance, rehabilitation, medical care and other facilities through a Welfare
Board and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Jayanthi Natrajan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5135RS(S-5)—04-12-2009.