1
G:\GAZETTE\RS\381RS
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to provide for population control through compulsory sterilisation of certain persons
and measures for promoting small family norm and for matters connected
therewith..
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a state, the Government of that
state and in other cases, the Central Government.
3. The appropriate Government shall ensure that either of the spouse the husband or
the wife in the case of every married couple who have two or more living children, on the date
of coming into force of this Act, or whose second living child is born after the commence-
ment of this Act, shall be required to undergo compulsory sterilisation:
(b) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this.
Provided that the husband or wife, as the case may be, shall not be required to
undergo sterilisation if he or she is above the age of fifty years.
Bill No. XXVII of 2002
Compulsory
sterilisation
in certain
cases.
Definition.
Short title
extent and
commencement.
5
10
15

2
G:\GAZETTE\RS\381RS
4. Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be a gap of not less than five years
between the birth of two children.
5. If either of the spouse in the case of a married couple, who have only one child on the
date of commencement of this Act, voluntarily undergoes sterilisation, the appropriate
Government shall provide them with the following benefits, namely:—
(i) supply of essential commodities such as wheat, milk, sugar and such other
commodities as may be prescribed at concessional rates;
(ii) free education including higher education to the first child and to the sec-
ond child, born within one year from the date of commencement of this Act;
(iii) suitable employment to such child after he completes his education; and
(iv) such other benefits as may be prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
6. The appropriate Government shall introduce a compulsory subject relating to
population control in all educational institutions for all children who have attained the age
of fifteen years, irrespective of class in which they are studying and the course they are
pursuing.
7. No marriage shall be solemnised between a male who is less than twenty-five years
of age and a female who is less than twenty-two years of age.
8. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the National Population Control
fund by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government and every State Government shall contribute to the
fund in such ratio as may be determine by the Central Government.
9. The fund constituted under section 8 shall be utilised for the following purposes
Namely:—
(i) giving of national population control award to that State or Union territory
which has recorded least population growth rate during the year; and
(ii) giving of national population control certificate to a person or an organisation
which in the opinion of the Central Government, has contributed in awakening the
masses towards importance of population control and adoption of various methods
for population control.
10. (1) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union Govern-
ment or in any undertaking or organisation under the control of the Union Government and
who has only one living child or who has not procreated any child or who is unmarried on
the date of commencement of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he shall not procreate
more than one living child.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be subject to
such disciplinary action as may be determined by the Central Government.
11. Any person violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less than four years and with fine which shall be
not less than five thousand rupees.
12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect not withstanding anything contained
to the Contrary in any other law for the time being in force.
13. The Central Government may by notification  in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Minimum
Gap between
the birth of
two children.
Penalty.
Benefits for
voluntary
sterilisation.
Introduction
of
compulsory
subject on
population
control in
educational
institution.
Minimum
marriagable
of male and
female.
Constitutional
of National
Population
Control Fund.
Utilisation of
National
Population
Control Fund.
Government
employees to
undertake to
procreate
more than
one child.
Overriding
effects of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Rapid increase in the population has given birth to many socio-economic problems
like proverty, food, housing, employment and environmental pollution. We are the second
highest populous country after China. China has controlled the rapid growth in its popula-
tion. Our population has crossed the figure of one hundred crore. If the present trend
continues, it will not be possible to recover from socio-economic problems occuring due to
increase in population.
It is, therefore, imperative that certain effective steps be taken to check this menace.
Since our resources are limited. Despite the existence of various birth control measures and
various family planning programmes to motivate the people  to accept these birth control
methods, the problem of population explosion still remains.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to make sterilisation compulsory for all persons having two
or more living children. It also provides for certain measures like fixing the minimum age
for marriage, minimum gap between the birth of two children, etc. and for promoting small
family norm in future generation.
Hence this Bill.
T. SUBBARAMI REDDY

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for certain benefits to be give to those who undergo
sterilisation voluntaily. Clause 6 provides for introduction of compulsory subject relating
to population control in all educational institutions. (Clause 8 provides for establishing
National Population Control Fund to which the Central Government shall also contribute).
The Central Government shall have to incur some expenditure for implementing the provi-
sions of this Bill in respect of Union territories. The State Governments will incur expendi-
ture in respect of their State out of their respective Consolidated Funds. The Bill, therefore,
will involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of details only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for population control through compulsory sterilisation of certain persons
and measures for promoting small family norm and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU) MRND—381RS—19-04-2002.