‘SHOZ89\S)

As INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya 50804

Bill No. XXVI of 2001

THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

A
BILL
further to amend the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Securities and Exchange Board of India  Shorttitle,
(Amendment) Act, 2001.

5 2. For section 4 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, the following Substitution of
shall be substituted namely:— new section for
section 4.
“4(1) The Board shall consist of the following seven members, namely:— Management of
the Board.
(a) a Chairman;
(6) two members from amongst the officials of the Ministries of the Central
10 Government dealing with Finance and Law;
(c) one member from amongst the officials of the Reserve Bank of India
2 of 1934 constituted under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;

(वी one member from a recognised Stock Exchange;


(S\6870RS

2

(e) one member representing investors; and
६) one member representing the Industry.

(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the
Board shall vest in a Board of members, which may exercise all powers and do all acts
and things which may be exercised or done by the Board.

(3) Save as otherwise determined by regulations, the Chairman shall also have
powers of general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the Board and may
also exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done
by that Board.

(4) The Chairman and members referred to in clauses (a), (४), (e) and (/) of
sub-section (1) shalf be appointed by the Central Government and members referred to
in clauses (6) and (c) of that sub-section shall be nominated by the Central Govern-
ment and the Reserve Bank of India respectively.

(5) The Chairman and the other members referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have shown capacity in dealing with
problems relating to securities market or have special knowledge or experience of law,
finance, economics, accountancy, administration or in any other discipline which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, shall be useful to the Board.”

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Securities and Exchange Board of India was set up in 1992 to regulate the
activities of capital market. One of the main objects of the Board is to protect the interests
of small investors. At present, there is no representative of the small investors in the Board.
It is felt that for more efficient functioning of the Board it is necessary to strengthen the
composition of the Board. It is accordingly proposed to include one representative each
from a recognised stock exchange, small investors and the industry as the members of the
Board. It if also proposed to carry out some consequential amendments in Section 4 of the
Act.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

P. PRABHAKAR REDDY.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill makes provisions for appointment of one more member. This
will involve expenditure of about rupees four lakh per annum from Consolidated Fund
of India as a recurring expenditure.

Tt will also involve a non-recurring expenditure of rupees five lakh.


2 of 1934

ANNEXURE,

EXTRACT FROM THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE 8008 OF Inpia Act, 1992

* * * * * *

4. (1) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely —
(a) a Chairman,

(6) two members from amongst the officials of the Ministries of the Central
Government dealing with Finance and Law,

(c) one member from amongst the officials of the Reserve Bank of India
constituted under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934,

(d) two other members,
to be appointed by the Central Government

(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the
Board shall vest in a Board of members, which may exercise all powers and do all acts and
things which may be exercised or done by the Board

(3) Save as otherwise determined by regulations, the Chairman shall also have powers
of general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the Board and may also exercise
all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by that Board

(4) The Chairman and members referred to in clauses (a) and (व) of sub-section (/)
shall be appointed by the Central Government and the members referred to in clauses (b)
and (c) of that sub-section shall be nominated by the Central Government and the Reserve
Bank of India respectively

(5) The Chairman and the other members referred to in clauses (a) and (4) of sub-
section (/) shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing who have shown capacity in
dealing with problems relating to securities market or have special knowledge or experience
of law, finance, economics, accountancy, administration or in any other discipline which,
1n the opinion of the Central Government, shall be useful to the Board

* * * * * *

‘Management of
the Board


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.

(Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6870RS—28-02-2001.