Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
.
THE PREVENTION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN
EMPLOYEES, GIRL STUDENTS, INMATES OF WOMEN
PROTECTION HOMES, HOUSEWIVES AND
GIRLS BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of sexual harassment and exploitation of women employees at
their work places by their employers, superiors, or colleagues and of girl students in
schools, colleges, universities by their teachers or by the employees or research
guides and of inmates of women protection homes or naari niketans by their
in charges and employees and of housewives and girls at homes by their near and
dear ones through deterrent punishment and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Sexual Harassment of Women Employees,
Girl Students, Inmates of Women Protection Homes, Housewives and Girls Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. XXVIII of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2009
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “educational institution” includes all schools, colleges, universities institutes,
vocational training centres and other centres where education or any kind of training
is imparted to the girl students;
(c) “employer” means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment under the control of the appropriate
Government, the Secretary or head of the Department or the Chairman and
Managing Director, as the case may be;
(ii) In relation to an establishment under any local Authority or local self
Government, the Chief Executive Officer by whatever designation called;
(iii) in relation to other cases, the person or the authority who has the
ultimate control over the affairs of the work place;
(iv) in relation to a household the head of the family or Karta of the family;
(d) “establishment” includes a factory, plantation, mine, agriculture field, orchard,
livestock rearing site including poultry, shop or business establishment, hospital or
nursing home, brick kiln, construction site, banks, financial institutions, cooperatives,
Government, semi-Government, local-self Government organizations including Post
office and telecom centres, private office or service provider, cyber cafes and call
centres, mobile phone companies, firms and such other establishments wherein persons
are employed for various performances, airlines, film industry and other places where
a woman is employed for any work;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “sexual harassment or exploitation” include any unwanted or unwarranted
gesture or sexual advances, avoidable and unwarranted physical contacts, sexually
explicit and derogatory statements or remarks, willfully touching or patting, suggestive
sexual remarks, sexually slanted and obsence jokes, vulgar comments about physical
appearance of the woman, indecent invitation, showing pornographic material, demand
for sexual favours either in person or through telephonic call or SMS, threat of physical
assault or molestation on refusal by the women employee by their male superiors,
colleagues, employer or any one who for the time being is in a position to sexually
exploit or harass the working woman at any establishment including a house or
demanding sexual favour from a girl student by her male teacher by promising her to
pass the examination or increase her marks or by her male research guide or professor
by promising her to clear her research thesis or helping her in preparing her research
paper or thesis and such other acts of male teacher towards his girl students;
(g) “Woman employee” means any woman who is employed, whether directly or
through any agency for wages or for similar other considerations at any establishment
or household as the case may be.
3. (1) Sexual harassment of any working woman at an establishment including household
or of a girl student in any school, college or university or research centre in any manner
whatsoever is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. (1) No housewife or a girl shall be subjected to sexual exploitation or harassment by
husband and near and dear relation.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provision of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
Definitions.
Prohibition of
sexual harass-
ment of women
employees, girl
students,
research
scholars etc.
Prohibition of
Sexual
harassment of
housewife or
girl.

3
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than five years but may extend to seven years and also with fine
which shall not be less than two lakh rupees but may extend to five lakh rupees.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Evidence Act, 1872, the onus of
proving innocence shall be on the accused and the sexually harassed woman employee, girl
student or research scholar, as the case may be, shall have the right to lead evidence in
rebuttal.
(2) The trial of an offence committed under this Act shall be held in camera.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being force, the
case of a sexually harassed woman employee shall be pleaded either by herself or by her
counsel or with her consent by any Women’s Organisation or the trade union of which she
is a member and in case of a girl student either by herself, or by her counsel or by her parents,
relatives or friends as the case may be with her consent.
7.  (1) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, set up or cause to be set
up sufficient number of Complaint Committees in all its Ministries and Departments,
Subordinate offices, Public Sector Enterprises, Semi-Government Organisations, Banking
and Financial Institutions, Trusts and local bodies, Constitutional and autonomous bodies,
educational institutions, colleges, universities, institutes and in all the district headquarters
and block levels for redressal of complaints made by sexually harassed housewife, woman
employee, girl student or research scholar, as the case may be within a time frame.
(2) The Complaint Committee set up under sub-section (1) shall consist of such
members and shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.
(3) The findings and recommendation of the Committee shall be implemented in such
manner as may be prescribed.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty.
Burden of
proof, etc.
1 of 1872.
Provision of
Complaint
Committees.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Women and girls are nearly fifty per cent of our population and have remained an
exploited lot due to various customs, traditions and beliefs prevailing in the country. Now,
there is a visible change and with the spread of education amongst them they form a large
part of the nations workforce and their number is increasing very fast. Despite this positive
trend, unfortunately, the women employees have to work under the most disadvantageous
service conditions in many of the establishments and due to this, cases of their sexual
harassment are also increasing day by day. They are sexually harassed very often by their
male colleagues, bosses, employers and others but in most of the cases the harassed women
do not complain due to fear of social ostracism, family pressure or reprisal through threats
and discriminatory treatment of late, there have also been incidents of sexual harassment of
housewives and girls at homes by husband and near and dear relations. Such cases of
harassment are generally not reported in the first instance unless they become intolerable.
Though the offences like physical assault and molestation are punishable under the Indian
Penal Code but all aspects of sexual harassment have not been covered by the Indian Penal
Code. As a result, the working women feel insecure at their workplaces. The Supreme Court
has taken this issue very seriously and in the case of Vishaka and Others vs State of Rajasthan
and Others the Supreme Court has laid down norms and guidelines to be followed by
employers to prevent cases of sexual harassment and also to provide the procedures for
resolution, settlement or prosecution of acts of sexual harassment by taking all steps required
including setting up of Complaint Committees for redressal of the complaints made by the
victims. The National Commission for Women and various Women’s Organisations have
also taken up this issue very seriously. However, despite the seriousness of the issue,
unfortunately, Complaint Committees do not exist in most of the Government establishments
let alone the private ones.
Of late, cases of sexual harassment of girl students by their teachers in schools,
colleges and universities have made headlines. Some characterless teachers ask for sexual
favour from their girl students promising good marks in examination, get them passed or
make such other pretexts. Such cases of sexual harassment need to be dealt with strictly by
providing deterrent punishment for the offenders.
Despite the judgment of the Supreme Court, no law has been enacted to prevent sexual
harassment of girls and women in establishments and educational institutions.
Hence this Bill.
JAYANTHI  NATARAJAN
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for setting up of Complaint Committees in all the district
headquarters and Block levels. The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupee seventy crore may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of sexual harassment and exploitation of women employees at
their work places by their employers, superiors, or colleagues and of girl students in
schools, colleges, universities by their teachers or by the employees or research guides
and of inmates of women protection homes or naari niketans by their incharges and
employees and of housewives and girls at homes by their near and dear ones through
deterrent punishment and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5131RS(S-5)—04.12.2009.