AS INTRODUCED IN THE RaJyA SABHA

Bill No. XXVII of 2001

THE FOREIGN AID FUND OF INDIA (REGULATION) BILL, 2001
A
BILL

to regulate the utilisation of foreign aid and for matters incidental or consequential
thereto

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second of the Republic of India as
follows: —

1. This Act may be called the Foreign Aid Fund of India (Regulation) Act, 2001.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires :—
5 (a) “fund” means the Foreign Aid Fund of India set up under section 3;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3.(1) The Central Government shall, as 5001 as may be after the commencement of this

Act set up a Fund to be known as “The Foreign Aid Fund of India”, into which shall be

credited all monies received as from aid or assistance or donation or contribution from any

10 foreign country or any organisation or an individual or an institution in a foreign country or

United Nations Organisation for providing relief to people affected by any natural calamity or
mishap.

Short title,

Definitions.

The Foreign
Aid Fund of
India,


Utihzation of
the Fund.

Power to
make rules

Audit of the
Fund

2
(2) The fund shall be administered in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The fund shall be utilised—
(a) for payment of compensation to victims of natural calamities or mishaps;

(b) for providing assistance to State Government for carrying out relief and
rehabilitation measures in the event of any natural calamity or mishap; and

(c) for any other purpose as may be prescribed.

(2) The terms and conditions for the grant of money out of the fund and the amount to
be provided shall be such as may be prescribed.

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.

6. The audit of the fund shall be carried out by the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India or person authorised by him in this behalf.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Our country receives from time to time huge assistance and donations from foreign
countries and United Nations Organisation to meet the unforeseen expenditure to provide
relief measures to people affected by natural calamities and other mishaps. However since
the received are not credited into any central pool, the Government do not seem to have any
effective control with regard thereto and there are occasions when the money is not utilised
for the purposes for which they were received.

It is, therefore, desirable to create a Fund to take care of the donations so received and
make statutory provision for the regulation of the Fund. It is also necessary to subject the
Fund to the audit control of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

The Bill seeks to achieve these objects.

P. PRABHAKAR REDDY


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
Legislative power is of a normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to regulate the utilisation of foreign aid and for matters incidental or consequential
thereto.

(Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6869RS—28-2-2001.