THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constituion of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. After article 21 A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“21B. (1) All citizens shall have the right—
(a) to pollution free environment that is to say environment free from air
pollution, water pollution, noise pollution and having the appropriate and requisite
forest cover in the country; and
(b) to civic amenities such as potable water, appropriate sewerage and
drainage system, periodic removal of garbage and cleaning of localities, roads
and other surroundings and healthcare facilities.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
Bill NO. XXVII of 2006
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to
pollution free
environment
and civic
amenities.

2
(2) The State shall protect the environment from being polluted and provide
civic amenities to the citizens referred to in clause (1).”
3. In article 51A of the Constitution, after clause (k) the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
(l) to maintain cleanliness and hygiene in residential homes or dwelling units,
streets, localities, roads and work places by not littering and depositing the litter,
wastes, and garbage in the dustbins and places meant for that purpose and by preventing
others from littering and polluting the atmosphere in any manner whatsoever;
(m) to maintain cleanliness in public places such as parks, bus stops, railway
stations, markets, etc. and roads by not littering, spitting, urinating, defecating, defacing
such places.
Amendment of
article 51A.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
These days a number of cases of dangerous diseases like gastroentities, cholera,
hepatitis, encephlities, Viral fever, chronic ashthma, allergy, etc. are on the rise and many a
times these appear in the epidemic form mainly because of insanitation and unhygienic
conditions prevailing almost every nook and corner of the country. The air has been polluted
by vehicular emissions, dust, burning of piles of leaves of trees, grass and emission of smoke
by the factories, homes and eateries like hotels, dhabas, etc. by smoking and gases released
in the environment. The water too has been polluted by industrial effluents and wastes from
homes, shops and other establishments and excess of chemicals and metals in the ground
water and pesticides and chemicals dissolved in the water. Noise pollution is another problem.
Few years ago Gujarat and northern parts of the country had the Plague epidemic caused by
insanitation and neglect of civic amenities. Even today it is common that garbage stinks in
the garbage fins germinate dangerous virus because it is not removed periodically by the
local bodies. People too do not adhere to cleanliness. They litter, spit, urinate or defecate
anywhere be it roadside, park, street, lane and wall of a building resulting in unhygienic
conditions everywhere and piling of garbage and dirt at most of the places.
The citizens have no means to force the local Governments to provide civic amenities.
It is therefore, proposed to make pollution free environment and civic amenities as
Fundamental Right of the citizens. At the same time maintenance of cleanliness has also to
be made a fundamental duty of the citizens.
Hence this Bill.
E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—492RS—(S-5)—12.05.2006.