Short title,
and
commencement.
Bill No. XXVI of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 7TH AUGUST, 2015
THE  CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the 'The Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015'.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For article 130 of the Constitution, the following shall be substituted, namely,—
"130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi and Kolkata or in such other place or
places, as the Chief Justice of India, may, with the approval of the President, from time
to the, appoint."
Amendment
of article 130.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The appeallants are already burdened and are further shunned to face the ordeal of
having to travel thousands of kilometres to the seat of the Supreme Court in Delhi for their
trial and the consequent follow up of their cases.
Moreover, the number of pending court cases in the country has crossed three crore
mark. Figures on the chronic backlog of court cases are an indictment of the country's
beleaguered legal system. The plight of persons awaiting trial needs to be understood and
addressed. It is not just the wastage of time, but also an increased financial burden that
makes the process inconvenient, cumbersome and expensive.
Article 130 of the Constitution of India envisages that the Supreme Court shall sit in
Delhi or in such other place or places as the Chief Justice of India may with the approval of
the President from time to time appoint. The language of the article clearly indicates that
there was an intention of the founding fathers of the Constitution to have more than one seat
of the Supreme Court.
Hence, the Bill seeks to establish a permanent bench of the Supreme Court in Kolkata
in West Bengal bench Delhi. Calcutta High Court is the oldest and geographically, Kolkata is
a strategic location for a permanent bench as it is easily accessible for litigants of central,
eastern, south-eastern and especially north-eastern states. This will provide for a robust
mechanism to not only manage pendency of court cases but simultaneously makes the
justice opportune, public-friendly and efficient.
Hence, the Bill.
VIVEK GUPTA
2

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of this Bill amends article 130 of the Constitution to establish a permanent
bench of the Supreme Court in Kolkata, West Bengal.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involved recurring expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India to the tune of rupees ten crore per annum.
However, a non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore is also likely to
be involved.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
ARTICLE 130
130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief
Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
* * * * *
Seat of the
Supreme
Court.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2149RS(S3)—07-08-2015.