1
THE  CRIMINAL  LAW (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 497 of the Indian Penal Code 1860, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“497. Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who is and whom he
knows or has reason to believe to be the spouse of another person, such sexual
intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of the offence of adultery,
and shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.”.
Short, title and
commencement.
5 of 1860.
Bill No. XXVI of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD AUGUST, 2018
Amendment
of section
497.
5
10

2
3. In section 198 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,—
(i) in sub-section (2), the words and figure “section 497 or” shall be omitted.
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following shall be insterted, namely:—
(3) “For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), no person other than the spouse shall be
deemed to be aggrieved by any offence punishaable under 497 of the said Code.”
Amendment of
section 198.
2 of 1974.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS
The provisions with regard to the offence relating to marriage seek to protect the
sanctity of marital ties in society. Section 497 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) is such a
provision that criminalizes adulterous relationships. The IPC which was drafted in 1860 was
based on archaic notions of morality that existed in those periods where women were seen to
be inferior to men. In particular, married women were considered to be the property of the
husband. These notions of morality and marital relations manifested itself as penal provisions
in the code.
Such laws, violative of equality and based on an age old sense of morality need to be
changed. Section 497 of the IPC exists in violation of the basic principles of equality as well
as of human dignity. Under the section, it is only the husband who can prosecute another
man for having an adulterous relationship with his wife. The wife is seen as a property in the
dispute matter and is absolved from any liabilities in the matter. Furthermore, the section also
provides for an illicit sexual relationship to be legal if the husband has consented to the
wife’s sexual relationship with another man. The wife’s sexuality and actions are subjected to
the will of the husband by means of this section. The section fails to provide women with the
necessary right to send their husbands to court on the grounds of adulterous relationship.
These patriarchal concepts which exist in the statute controlling the behaviour of
women must be removed. The sanctity of marriage is to be maintained through the means of
gender equality and not on discriminatory grounds. The section cannot be said to be in
protection of women when it views women as mere objects of possession in the hands of
their husbands. It is necessary to bring about changes in such old laws to protect the
autonomy and dignity of women in a social institution such as marriage.
The Supreme Court had in the case of Sowmithri Vishnu v. Union of India (1985) while
dealing with the constitutional validity of the Section stated that it is for the legislature to
decide the policy of law with respect to adultery. A three judge bench of the Supreme Court
while dealing with a petition regarding section 497 (Joseph Shine v. Union of India) had
opined in its order the absence of gender equality in the criminal provision and stated that
the time has come for society to realise that a women is equal to a man in every field.
Hence, the present Bill, accordingly, seeks to amend section 497 of the Indian Penal
Code and the Section 198 of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
V . VIJAYASAI REDDY

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
497. Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who is and whom he knows or has
reason to believe to be the wife of another man, without the consent or connivance of that
man, such sexual intercourse not mounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of the offence of
adultery, and shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. In such case the wife shall not be punishable
as an abettor.
* * * * *
Adultery.

5
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
198. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XX of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved
by the offence:
Provided that—
(a) where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a
lunatic, or is from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who,
accordingly to the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in
public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his or
her behalf:
(b) where such person is the husband and he is serving in any of the Armed
Forces of the Union  under conditions which are certified by his Commanding Officer
as precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to enable him to make a complaint
in person, some other person authorised by the husband in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (4) may make a complaint on his behalf;
(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under section 494 or
section 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is the wife, complaint may be made on
her behalf by her father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter or by her father’s or
mother’s brother of sister, or, with the leave of the Court, by any other person related
to her by blood, marriage or adoption.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), no person other than the husband of the
woman shall be deemed to be aggrieved by and offence punishable under section 497 or
section 498 of the said Code:
Provided that in the absence of the husband, some person who had care of the woman
on his behalf at the time when such offence was committed may, with the leave of the Court,
make a complaint on his behalf.
* * * * *
Prosecution
for offences
against
marriage.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
.
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1455RS(S3)—06-08-2018.