Bill No. XXVI-F of 2021
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJYA SABHA ON 30TH JULY, 2021
LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2021)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 07 AUGUST, 2021
ACT NO. 22 OF 2021

1
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Coconut Development Board Act,  1979.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Coconut Development Board (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 3 of the Coconut Development Board Act, 1979 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), for clause ( b), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
'(b) "Chairman" means the non-executive Chairman of the Board appointed
under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 4) of section 4;
(ba) "Chief Executive Officer" means the Chief Executive Officer of the
Board appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 7;'.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 3.
5 of 1979.
Bill No. XXVI-F of  2021

2
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 4),—
(A) for clause ( a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) a non-executive Chairman, to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(aa) the Chief Executive Officer, to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(ab) the Joint Secretary to the Government of India, in-charge of
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture, ex officio ;";
(B) in clause ( f), for sub-clause ( ii), the following sub-clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(ii) Consumer Affairs;";
(C) for clauses ( g), ( h) and ( i), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(g) four members to be appointed by the Central Government one
each to represent the Governments of the States of Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu, being States where coconut is grown on
a large scale;
(h) four members to be appointed by the Central Government by
rotation in the alphabetical order to represent the States of Assam, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha, Telengana,
Tripura, West Bengal and the Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar
Islands, Lakshadweep and Puducherry;
(i) six members to be appointed by the Central Government, two to
represent the coconut growers of the State of Kerala and one each to
represent the coconut growers of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu;".
4. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"5. The Chairman and members of the Board shall receive such allowances
as may be fixed by the Central Government.".
5. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the Board, not below
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to be appointed by
the Central Government.
(1A) The Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties as may be prescribed.
(1B) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of
service of, the Chief Executive Officer shall be such as may be prescribed.";
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the word "Chairman", the words "Chief Executive
Officer" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section ( 4), after the words "the Chairman", the words "or the
Chief Executive Officer" shall be inserted;
Substitution of
new section
for section 5.
Amendment
of section 4.
Allowances
payable to
Chairman and
members.
Amendment
of section 7.

3
(d) in sub-section ( 5), for the words "The Chief Coconut Development
Officer", the words "The Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Coconut Development
Officer" shall be substituted;
(e) in sub-section ( 7), for the words "the Chairman", the words "the Chief
Executive Officer" shall be substituted.
6. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2),—
(A) in clause ( b), for the words "in India", the words "within or outside
India" shall be substituted;
(B) in clause ( i), the words "on a large scale" shall be omitted.
7. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (d), the following
clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
"(d) the powers to be exercised and the duties to be performed by the Chief
Executive Officer under sub-section ( 1A) of section 7;
(da) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service
of, the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section ( 1B) of section 7;".
————
Amendment of
section 10.
Amendment of
section 19.

A
BILL
further to amend the Coconut Development Board Act, 1979.
————
(As Passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—741LS(S3)—24-08-2021.