AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026 
Bill No. XXVII of 2026 
T HE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY 
 EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026 
A 
B ILL 
f urther to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
 Education Act, 2009. 
      BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education (Amendment) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and  
commencement. 

2 
 
Amendment 
of section 23. 
 2. In section 23 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act,  
2009 (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act),  
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the words “minimum qualifications”,  
the words “subject to the provisions of sub-section s ( 4), ( 5) and ( 6)” 
shall be inserted; 
(b)  in sub-section (2), the second proviso shall be omitted; and 
 (c) after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“( 4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or  in any  
rule, notification, direction or guideline made the reunder, no 
teacher who was appointed to a school prior to the commencement 
of this Act in accordance with the recruitment rule s, qualifications  
and procedures then in force, shall be required to acquire  any  
additional qualification, as notified  before the c ommencement of   
the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Educat ion  
(Amendment) Act, 2026 or  as may be prescribed ther eafter, as a 
condition for continuance in service, promotion, se niority or 
terminal benefits. 
(5) The requirement of passing any Test or such other  
additional qualifications as may be prescribed unde r this Act shall  
apply prospectively and only to appointments made a fter the 
commencement of this Act or after such prospective date as may be 
notified by the appropriate Government. 
(6) No teacher appointed or in position prior to the 
commencement of this Act or the date notified by th e appropriate 
Government under sub-section ( 5) above shall be subjected to 
compulsory retirement, termination, denial of promo tion or any  
other adverse service consequence solely on the gro und of failure 
to pass or non-acquisition of any Test or such othe r additional 
qualifications, respectively, as may be prescribed under this Act. 
(7) The appropriate Government shall prescribe guidel ines 
for professional upgradation, training and capacity  building of  
teachers appointed or in position prior to the commencement of this 
Act, without linking such measures to service secur ity or 
promotional eligibility.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
35 of 2009. 
Insertion of 
new section 
23A. 
 
Protection of 
service 
conditions of 
pre-existing 
teachers . 
 3. After section 23 of the principal Act, the followin g section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“23A.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or  in any 
rule, notification, direction or guideline made the re under , the service 
conditions, promotional avenues and retirement bene fits of teachers 
appointed or in position prior to the commencement of this Act shall not 
be altered to their disadvantage by the introductio n of any new 
qualification requirement. 
(2) Any qualification prescribed after the commenceme nt of this 
Act or after such date as may be notified by the ap propriate Government, 
shall be deemed to operate prospectively. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall have overrid ing effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith con tained in any other 
law for the time being in force.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
Amendment 
of section 38. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), after clause ( l), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
“( la ) framing of guidelines for professional upgradatio n, training 
and capacity building of teachers appointed or in p osition prior to the 
commencement of this Act, under sub-section ( 7) of section 23;”; 
 
50  

3 
5 
5. After section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“39A.The appropriate Government may, for the purpose of giving 
effect to the provisions of this Act, issue such directions, clarifications 
or guidelines as may be necessary, to protect teachers appointed or in 
position prior to the commencement of this Act from any adverse 
service consequences.”. 
Insertion of 
n
ew section 
39A. 
Power to issue 
protective 
directions. 

4 
 
 
 
  
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS   
  The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Educat ion Act, 2009 (Act 
No. 35 of 2009) [hereinafter referred to as ‘RTE Ac t’] was enacted to give effect 
to Article 21A of the Constitution and to secure th e fundamental right of every 
child to free and compulsory elementary education o f equitable quality. Section 
23 of the RTE Act empowers the prescription of mini mum qualifications for 
teachers, on the basis of which the Teacher Eligibi lity Test (TET) has been 
prescribed as a qualification criteria for appointment as a teacher. 
While the goal of enhancing teacher quality is nece ssary, recent judicial 
interpretation has resulted in the retrospective ap plication of TET requirement to 
teachers who were appointed prior to the commenceme nt of the RTE Act in 
accordance with recruitment rules, qualifications a nd procedures validly in force 
at the time of their appointment. The issue has ass umed urgency following the 
Supreme Court judgment dated 01.09.2025 in ‘Anjuman Ishaat-e-Taleem Trust vs  
State of Maharashtra & Others’. By interpreting Sec tion 23 of RTE Act, Apex 
Court held that TET constitutes a mandatory minimum  qualification not only for 
fresh recruitments but also for teachers recruited prior to the Act. Supreme Court 
directed that in-service teachers having more than five years of remaining service 
must qualify TET within two years of the judgment, i.e., before 01.09.2027, 
failing which they will face compulsory retirement.  Teachers with less than five 
years of remaining service were granted limited rel ief, but remain ineligible for 
promotions without TET qualification.  
Such retrospective application has generated widesp read concern among 
teachers as many of these teachers have rendered de cades of dedicated service 
and have substantially contributed to the expansion  and consolidation of 
elementary education, particularly in rural, remote  and socially disadvantaged 
areas. They form the backbone of elementary educati on and any disadvantage to 
them for want of TET qualification would not only u ndermine legitimate service 
expectations and principles of natural justice, but  also risk destabilising the 
continuity and institutional stability of the education system in the country. 
The Constitution envisages that legislative policy must operate with 
fairness, reasonableness and proportionality. The d octrine of legitimate 
expectation, the principle against arbitrary retros pective penal consequences, and 
the need to balance quality reform with institution al stability require a calibrated 
and prospective approach in the implementation of qualification norms. 
The proposed Bill seeks to clarify that the require ment of passing the 
Teacher Eligibility Test or such other additional q ualification criteria under the 
RTE Act shall operate prospectively and shall apply  only to appointments made 
after the commencement of the Act or after such not ified date as may be 
prescribed. The amendments further seek to provide statutory protection to 
teachers appointed prior to the commencement of the  Act by safeguarding their 
continuance in service, promotional avenues and ret irement benefits, while 
simultaneously enabling structured professional upg radation and training without 
linking such measures to punitive consequences. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to harmonise the objecti ve of improving 
educational standards with the equally important co nstitutional mandate of 
fairness, equity and protection of vested service r ights, thereby ensuring both 
quality education for children, and dignity and security for in-service teachers. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the said objectives.  
JOHN BRITTAS. 
 
  

5 
A NNEXURE 
E XTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND 
COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009 
(Act No. 35 of 2009) 
 * *  * *  * 
23. (1)  Any person possessing such minimum qualifications, as laid down by
an academic authority, authorised by the Central Government, by
notification, shall be eligible for appointment as a teacher.
(2) Where a State does not have adequate institutions offering courses or
training in teacher education, or teachers possessing minimum
qualifications as laid down under sub-section ( 1) are not available in
sufficient numbers, the Central Government may, if it deems necessary, by
notification, relax the minimum qualifications required for appointment as
a teacher, for such period, not exceeding five years, as may be specified in
that notification:
Provided that a teacher who, at the commencement of this Act, does not 
possess minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-section ( 1), shall 
acquire such minimum qualifications within a period of five years: 
Provided further that every teacher appointed or in position as on the 31st 
March, 2015, who does not possess minimum qualifications as laid down 
under sub-section ( 1), shall acquire such minimum qualifications within a 
period of four years from the date of commencement of the Right of 
Children to Free and Compulsory Education (Amendment) Act, 2017 (24 
of 2017). 
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of
service of, teachers shall be such as may be prescribed.
Qualifications 
for appointment 
and terms and 
conditions of 
service of 
teachers. 
*  *  * *  * 
38. ( 1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
Power of 
a
ppropriate 
Government to 
make rules. 
*  *  * *  *
(l) the salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of
service of teacher, under sub-section (3) of section 23;
* *  * * *

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education Act, 2009. 
____________ 
(Dr. John Brittas, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—173—16.03.2026.