1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment), Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 51A of the Constitution, for clause (e), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of tolerance and common brotherhood
amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional
diversities; to renounce any kind of discrimination, violence and practices derogatory
to the dignity of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other
Backward Classes and minorities and women.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XXVII of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Amendment of
Article 51A.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
"Fraternity" is the most vital constitutional value that binds unity and equality, and is
an inherent part of the Indian Constitution. While the Preamble sets out fraternity as a
guiding principle of the Constitution,  the fundamental duties translate it into a responsibility
of each and every citizen of the country. Article 51A(e) of the Constitution talks about the
promotion of harmony and brotherhood amongst all people in the country. However, with
changing times, the scope of fraternity in the Indian Constitution needs to be expanded.
Be it geographical, linguistic, social, cultural, or religious, diversity exists in every
corner of the country. India's diversity which has always been recognised as it's most unique
and powerful characteristic, is being exploited as a tool of oppression, discrimination and
communalism in the country. In the present scenario, it is our duty to revisit and rejuvenate
the discourse on fraternity through the channels of the Constitution.
The differences created by caste, religion, language, and gender cannot be mitigated
solely by the State or legal instruments. The collective efforts of all citizens are required to
uproot discrimination and intolerance in the country. Unlike fundamental rights, the
responsibility of upholding fundamental duties vests with the citizens of India. Therefore,
fundamental duties are the most appropriate constitutional tool to achieve the objective.
The protection and socio-economic upliftment of marginalised communities are stated
as objectives of the Indian Constitution, thus the principles of non-discrimination and
tolerance should be reflected and endorsed as fundamental duties of every Indian citizen to
ensure that these values remain uncontested.
The Bill seeks to achieve above-mentioned objective.
MANOJ KUMAR JHA
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
* * * * * * *
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the
people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
* * * * * * *
Fundamental
Duties.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)-071-12. 12.2023.