THE PREVENTION OF ACID ATTACKS AND REHABILITATION OF
ACID ATTACK VICTIMS BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of acid attacks by regulation of sale, supply and use of acid or
other measures and rehabilitation of women victims of acid attacks and matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Acid Attacks and Rehabilitation of Acid
Attack Victims Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXVI of 2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE  4TH  AUGUST, 2017

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "acid" means any substance which has acidic or corrosive character or
burning nature, that is capable of causing bodily injury leading to scars or disfigurement
or temporary or permanent disability;
(b) "acid attack victim" means a woman on whom acid has been poured or
sprinkled with the intention of causing bodily injury or disfigurement and who, as a
consequence of such act, has suffered any bodily injury or disfigurement effected by
chemical action of the acid.
(c) "appropriate Government",—
(i) in relation to a Union territory, means the Central Government; and
(ii) in relation to a State, means the Government of that State.
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
R
EGULATION OF SALE, SUPPLY AND USE OF ACID
3. (1) No person shall engaged the business or trade of production, import, storage,
sale or delivery or transport of acid of any intensity unless he obtains the license issued by
an appropriate authoirty in such manner as may be prescribed to carry on such business or
trade.
(2) Every such person engaged in the business or trade of acid shall maintain appropriate
records regarding the quantity of acid and its concentration and chemical composition.
(3) No person shall sell or otherwise deliver to a person an acid of higher concentration
than the prescribed degree for the intended use by such person.
(4) No person shall sell or otherwise deliver acid to a person without keeping a record
of his identity, the quantity of acid and the purpose for which the acid is to be used.
4. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette specify the
kinds and degrees of concentration of acid to be used for different purposes.
(2) The use of acid of greater then the prescribed concentration for any purpose shall
be prohibited.
CHAPTER III
R
EHABILITATION OF ACID ATTACK VICTIMS
5. Where an acid attack has caused such substantial bodily harm or disfigurement to
the victim, as may be prescribed, such victim shall be deemed to be person with disability for
the purposes of availing benefits under various schemes, including employment under the
Central Government, any State Government, any local body, autonomous bodies under any
Government or any public sector undertakings.
6. Where an acid attack victim has suffered such bodily harm or disfigurement in an
acid attack that it is likely to impair her chances of obtaining gainful employment or carry on
any gainful occupation, the appropriate Government shall pay a monthly allowance to such
victim and the amount of such allowance shall not be less than four times the amount of old
age pension payable at the place where the victim ordinarily resides.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
7. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall be
punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine extending
to five lakh rupees or with both.
Definitions.
Regulation of
production,
sell etc. of
acid.
Classification
of acid
concentration
for different
purposes.
Acid attack
victims to be
treated as
persons with
disability in
certain cases.
Allowance to
acid attack
victims.
Offences and
penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
8. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860  (hereinafter referred to as the code) in section 326 A
for the words, "and with fine", the words "and with fine which shall not be less than
ten lakh rupees" should be substituted.
9. In the Code, in section 326 B, for the words "seven years and shall  also be liable to
fine", the words "ten years, and shell also be liable to fine which shall not be less than three
lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
CHAPTER V
A
MENDMENT OF THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
10. In section 326B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 for the words "which may extend to
seven years", the words "which may extend to ten years" shall be substituted.
CHAPTER VI
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
11. In section 357C, of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as
the code of criminal Procedure)  the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely,—
"Explanation. For the purposes of this section, any reconstructive procedures
and surgeries required shall be treated as medical treatment."
12. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, under the heading
"I.- OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE", in the entry relating to section 326B,
in column 3, for the words and number "which may extend to 7 years and with fine", the
words and number "Which may extend to 10 years and shall also  be liable to fine which shall
not be less than three lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
Removing the difficulty.
14. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
15. (1) The central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only is such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case  may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Amendment
of section
326A.
Amendment
of section
326B.
Amendment
of section
326B of the
Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
Amendment
of section
357C.
Amendment
of the First
Schedule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45 of 1860.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
National polemics has directed people's attention time and again to the question
whether India is a place safe enough for women to live. Despite an avowed superior position
culturally assigned to women and a plethora of laws for the protection of women, the fate
of women by and large remains unaltered, as a study corroborates that four in ten women
face some kind of violence or harrassment before the age of 19 years. What is even more
perturbing is that there are certain forms of violence against women which emanate from
the medieval mindset of subjugation of women and continue till this day. One manifestation
of this mindset is incidents of acid attacks on women.
Though acid attack is a crime which can be committed against any man or women, it
has a specific gender dimension in India. Most of the reported acid attacks have been
committed on women, particularly young women for spurning suitors, for rejecting proposals
of marriage. The attacker cannot bear the fact that he has been rejected and seeks to
destroy the body of the women who has dared to stand up to him. It is not surprising that
the incidence of acid attacks is deeper in States with patriarchal leanings.
Until 2013, there was no clear mechanism to ascertain the number of cases involving
acid attacks since the Indian Penal Code did not recognise it as a separate offence. The
offence of acid attack was tried under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and
only estimates of figures of such attacks were available. The Criminal Law (Amendment)
Act, 2013 inserted new sections 326A and 326B in the Indian Penal Code and made specific
offences of hurt by use of acid.
Though cases of acid attacks on women have been witnessed for decades, the need
to address the legislative framework underlying the offence of acid attack was emphasised
by the Supreme Court in Laxmi vs. Union of India. In this case, the court issued directions
inter alia regarding compensation to acid attack victims, effective regulation of sale of
acid,  and free treatment of victims. Some of these guidelines have been incorporated in law.
Still, there is little clarity on issues such as penal provisions against dealers making
unregulated sales of acid, adequacy of the amount of compensation of victims, their status
as persons with disabilities, etc.
In order to facilitate rehabilitation of acid attack victims and to prevent unregulated
sale of acid, the Bill proposes to make the following provisions:—
(i) to provide for classification of acid on the basis of its intensity and
concentration and to prevent sale of acid of higher concentration for day-to-day
purposes;
(ii) to provide that acid shall not be sold without verifying identity of the buyer
and the purpose of its use;
(iii) to provide that proper records of stock, sales, etc. of acid shall be maintained
by dealers;
(iv) to make unregulated sale of acid an offence punishable with six months
imprisonment and fine;
(v) to provide that acid attack victims shall be treated as persons with disabilities
for the purposes of availing benefits under various schemes of the Governments,
including employment under the Central Government, State Governments or bodies
thereunder;
(vi) to increase the maximum quantum of punishment for acid attack under
section 326B of the Indian Penal Code to imprisonment for ten years;
4

5
(vii) to stipulate the minimum amount of compensation for acid attack victims as
ten lakh in cases of grievous hurt and three lakh in other cases or such higher amount
as may be specified;
(viii) to provide monthly allowance to certain victims of acid attacks; and
(ix) to provide that any reconstructive cosmetic surgeries shall be treated as
medical treatment in case of acid attack victims.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NARAY AN LAL PANCHARIYA

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 provides for entitlement of employment to the victims of acid attack.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to provide a monthly allowance to certain victims of acid
attacks. Expenditure on this count shall be borne by the Central Government insofar as such
cases relate to the Union Territories. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give an estimate of
recurring or non-recurring expenditure involved since it would depend upon the number of
eligible acid attack victims.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by notification in the
Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The matters in respect of
which rules may be made or notification issued in accordance with the aforesaid provisions
of the Bill are matters of procedure and details and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is therefore of a normal character.
7

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
*** *** *** ***
326A. *** *** ***
326B. Whoever throws or attempts to throw acid on any person or attempts to
administer acid to any person, or attempts to use any other means, with the intention of
causing permanent or partial damage or deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement or
disability of grievous hurt to that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
*** *** *** ***
E
XTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
*** *** *** ***
357C. All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central Government, the State
Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immediately, provide the first-aid or
medical treatment, free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered under section 326A,
376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code, and shall immediately
inform the police of such incident.
*** *** *** ***
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
C
LASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES
*** *** *** ***
I. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
Section Offence Punishment Cognizable Bailable or By what
or Non- Non-bailable court
cognizable triable
12 3 4 5 6
*** *** *** ***
326B V oluntarily throwing Imprisonment for 5 years Cognizable Non- Court of
or attempting to but which may extend to 7 bailable Session.
throw acid. years and with fine.
8
V oluntarily
throwing or
attempting to
throw Acid.
Treatment of
victims.

GMGIPMRND—1765RS(S3)—04.08.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of acid attacks by regulation of sale, supply and use of acid or
other measures and rehabilitation of women victims of acid attacks and
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya, M.P.)