Bill No. XXVII-F of  2020
THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2020
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJY A SABHA ON 19TH SEPTEMBER, 2020
LOK SABHA ON 21ST  SEPTEMBER, 2020)
ASSENTED  TO
 ON 28TH SEP., 2020
ACT NO. 34 OF 2020

1
Bill No. XXVII-F of 2020
THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
 further to amend the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 22nd day of April, 2020.
2. In section 1 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in sub-section (2), the words, figures and letters  “except the territories which,
immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States” shall be omitted.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment of
section 1.
3 of 1897.

2
3. After section 1 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘1A. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “act of violence” includes any of the following acts committed by any person
against a healthcare service personnel serving during an epidemic, which causes or
may cause––
(i) harassment impacting the living or working conditions of such
healthcare service personnel and preventing him from discharging his duties;
(ii) harm, injury, hurt, intimidation or danger to the life of such healthcare
service personnel, either within the premises of a clinical establishment or
otherwise;
(iii) obstruction or hindrance to such healthcare service personnel in the
discharge of his duties, either within the premises of a clinical establishment or
otherwise; or
(iv) loss or damage to any property or documents in the custody of, or in
relation to, such healthcare service personnel;
(b) “healthcare service personnel” means a person who while carrying out his
duties in relation to epidemic related responsibilities, may come in direct contact with
affected patients and thereby is at the risk of being impacted by such disease, and
includes––
(i) any public and clinical healthcare provider such as doctor, nurse,
paramedical worker and community health worker;
(ii) any other person empowered under the Act to take measures to prevent
the outbreak of the disease or spread thereof; and
(iii) any person declared as such by the State Government, by notification
in the Official Gazette;
(c) “property” includes––
(i) a clinical establishment as defined in the Clinical Establishments
(Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010;
(ii) any facility identified for quarantine and isolation of patients during an
epidemic;
(iii) a mobile medical unit; and
(iv) any other property in which a healthcare service personnel has direct
interest in relation to the epidemic;
(d) the words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the
Indian Ports Act, 1908, the Aircraft Act, 1934 or the Land Ports Authority of India
Act, 2010, as the case may be, shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in that
Act.’.
4. In section 2A of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words “the
Central Government may take measures” and ending with the words “as may be necessary”,
the following shall be substituted, namely:––
“the Central Government may take such measures, as it deems fit and prescribe
regulations for the inspection of any bus or train or goods vehicle or ship or vessel or
aircraft leaving or arriving at any land port or port or aerodrome, as the case may be, in
the territories to which this Act extends and for such detention thereof, or of any
person intending to travel therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary.”.
Insertion of
new section
1A.
Definitions.
23 of 2010.
Amendment
of section 2A.
15 of 1908.
22 of 1934.
31 of 2010.

3
5. After section 2A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“2B. No person shall indulge in any act of violence against a healthcare service
personnel or cause any damage or loss to any property during an epidemic.”.
6. Section 3 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and
after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2) Whoever,––
(i) commits or abets the commission of an act of violence against a
healthcare service personnel; or
(ii) abets or causes damage or loss to any property,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
months, but which may extend to five years, and with fine, which shall not be less than
fifty thousand rupees, but which may extend to two lakh rupees.
(3) Whoever, while committing an act of violence against a healthcare service
personnel, causes grievous hurt as defined in section 320 of the Indian Penal Code to
such person, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than six months, but which may extend to seven years and with fine, which shall not be
less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to five lakh rupees.”.
7. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
‘3A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973,—
(i) an offence punishable under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3) of
section 3 shall be cognizable and non-bailable;
(ii) any case registered under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3) of
section 3 shall be investigated by a police officer not below the rank of Inspector;
(iii) investigation of a case under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3) of
section 3 shall be completed within a period of thirty days from the date of
registration of the First Information Report;
(iv) in every inquiry or trial of a case under sub-section ( 2) or
sub-section (3) of section 3, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as
possible, and in particular, when the examination of witnesses has once begun,
the same shall be continued from day to day until all the witnesses in attendance
have been examined, unless the Court finds the adjournment of the same beyond
the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded, and an endeavour
shall be made to ensure that the inquiry or trial is concluded within a period of
one year:
Provided that where the trial is not concluded within the said period, the Judge
shall record the reasons for not having done so:
Provided further that the said period may be extended by such further period, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, but not exceeding six months at a time.
Insertion of
new section
2B.
Prohibition of
violence
against health-
care service
personnel and
damage to
property.
Amendment
of section 3.
Insertion of
new sections
3A, 3B, 3C,
3D and 3E.
Cognizance,
investigation
and trial of
offences.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

4
3B. Where a person is prosecuted for committing an offence punishable under
sub-section (2) of section 3, such of fence may, with the permission of the Court, be
compounded by the person against whom such act of violence is committed.
3C. Where a person is prosecuted for committing an offence punishable under
sub-section (3) of section 3, the Court shall presume that such person has committed
such offence, unless the contrary is proved.
3D. (1) In any prosecution for an offence under sub-section ( 3) of section 3
which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the Court shall
presume the existence of such mental state, but it shall be a defence for the accused to
prove the fact that he had no such mental state with respect to the act charged as an
offence in that prosecution.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only when the
Court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence
is established by a preponderance of probability.
Explanation.—In this section, “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive,
knowledge of a fact and the belief in, or reason to believe, a fact.
3E.( 1) In addition to the punishment provided for an offence under
sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 3, the person so convicted shall also be
liable to pay, by way of compensation, such amount, as may be determined by the
Court for causing hurt or grievous hurt to any healthcare service personnel.
(2) Notwithstanding the composition of an offence under section 3B, in case of
damage to any property or loss caused, the compensation payable shall be twice the
amount of fair market value of the damaged property or the loss caused, as may be
determined by the Court.
(3) Upon failure to pay the compensation awarded under sub-sections ( 1) and
(2), such amount shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue under the Revenue
Recovery Act, 1890.’.
8. (1) The Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Epidemic
Diseases Act, 1897, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under the corresponding provisions of the said Act as amended by this Act.
————
Composition
of certain
offences.
Presumption
as to certain
offences.
Presumption
of culpable
mental state.
Compensation
for acts of
violence.
Repeal and
savings.
Ord. 5 of
2020.
3 of 1897.
1 of 1890.

A
BILL
further to amend the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897.
————
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
MGIPMRND—913LS(S3)—14-10-2020.