Bill No.  XXVIII  of  2013
THE HOMICIDE ON ROADS AND HIGHWAYS (PREVENTION
AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to prevent homicide on roads and highways due to rash, negligent and drunken driving
by providing deterrent punishment of life imprisonment to the accused and for
providing timely medical treatment to the victim, provision of well equipped
ambulances at conspicuous places on roads and highways, compensation
to the kin of the deceased and establishment of trauma centres and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Homicide on Roads and Highways (Prevention and
Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "Special Court" means Special Courts established for the trial of offences
under this Act under section 4;
Short  title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5
10
[AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH JULY, 2014]

2
(d) terms and phrases used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or the Motor Vehilces
Act, 1988 or the National Highways Act, 1956 shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in those Acts.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
Whoever,—
(a) commits homicide on a road or highway including national highway, as the
case may be, due to his rash or negligent or drunken driving, he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for life, which shall mean to remain in jail custody till the end of his
life and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(b) causes accident on a road or highway including national highway due to his
rash or negligent or drunken driving resulting in grivious hurt or permanent incapaci-
tation of the accident victim of such driving, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to ten years and also with fine
which may extend to seven lakh rupees;
(c) causes accident on a road or highway including national highway with another
vehicle or vehicles, as the case may be, due to his rash or negligent or drunken driving
thereby causes hurt or injuries to the accident victim or damages vehicles, he shall be
punishable for imprisonment which shall not be less than three years but may extend
to five years and also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees;
(d) drives a vehicle under intoxication on a road or highway including national
highway or overspeeds the vehicle therein which is likely to cause an accident the
vehicle being driven by such a person shall be impounded permanently and he shall
also be liable to fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees; and
(e) where a person committing an offence under clauses (a) to (d) under this Act
is a minor and it is proved that the vehicle driven by him was given or taken with the
consent of any of his parents or guardian, as the case may be, such parent or guardian
shall be deemed to be guilty of such offence and punished accordingly.
4. (1) The offences under this Act shall be tried by Special Courts.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court in the case of a State and the Chief Justice of India in other cases, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute such number of Special Courts as it  may
deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The set up of a Special Court constituted under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall
be such as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall,
(a) provide timely medical treatment to the victim and the accused, in case he is
wounded, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) make provisions of well equipped ambulances in such numbers as it may
deem necessary and expedient and station them at conspicuous places on the major
roads and highways including national highway so that the ambulance reaches the
place of accidents without loss of precious time;
(c) establish sufficient number of trauma centres near the periphery of roads
and highways including national highways with such facilities, as may be prescribed
to treat the accident victims;
(d) pay compensation of minimum of ten lakh rupees to the next kin of deceased
victim under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed; and
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
59 of 1988.
48 of 1956.
Penalty.
860. Special Courts
to try
offences.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

3
(e) remove the existing liquor shops of vendors from highways including
national highways and shall not give liquor licence to be set up near the highways in
any manner whatsoever.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
offences under this Act shall be congnizable and non bailable.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force no
court other than a High Court or the Supreme Court of India shall have the authority to grant
anticipatory bail to any person accused of committing an offence under this Act.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf provide funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this
Act.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non bailable.
Bar on
granting
anticipatory
bail.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
According to an official estimate more than nine thousand people on an average lose
their lives due to rash, negligent and drunken driving on national highways alone in the
Country and majority of these deaths are caused by drunken driving. Lakhs of people are
critically wounded leading to their permanent incapacitation and losing their limbs in these
accidents. Majority of the killed ones are innocent people, many of them are sole bread
earners of their families. These deaths leave behind agonies, miseries and dark future for the
members of the families and their children. Similarly, countless deaths are caused due to same
reasons on other highways and roads and more so in urban areas. Majority of these deaths
and serious wounds are caused by the negligence, rash or overspeeding and driving under
intoxication and such reckless drivers come from all classes of society. They may be rich or
in particular neo rich, middle class or coming from the poor sections of the society but one
thing is common in them and that is once they consume liquor or other intoxicants, many
innocent people are killed while they are driving on the roads and highways. Many a times
such drunkards are also killed in these accidents but their number is very few. There is a
feeling in our society that the existing law and law enforcing machinery ensures that rich are
not affected in any manner after causing the accidents. They generally plead the excuse that
brakes of their vehicle had failed and clearly hiding the fact that they were drunk while
driving. The existing laws are not enough deterrent for them. Under the Motor vehicles Act,
1988 a drunk driver can be fined two thousand rupees or can be jailed for maximum period of
six months. Under the Indian Penal Code to maximum jail term for negligent driving is six
months. It is very common that the drunk who has killed innocent people gets bail at the
Police Station itself and then he easily jumps the bail also.
Though there may be several reasons for the homicides committed on roads and
highways but the main reason is there is no fear of law. Hence, a deterrent law is the need of
the hour to reduce homicides on roads and highways. Along with this, there is need to
provide timely medical treatment, ambulance services, trauma centres for treatment of victims,
adequate compensation to the kins of those killed and several other provisions in the law
itself.
Hence this Bill.
DR. AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Special Courts to try offences.
Clause 5 provides for giving timely medical treatment to victims, well equipped ambulances,
sufficient number of trauma centres, provision of payment of compensation of minimum of
ten lakh rupees to the next of kin of the victim etc. Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central
Government to provide funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to quantify
the amount at this stage, but it is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees Eighty thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India for creating infrastructure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent homicide on roads and highways due to rash, negligent and drunken driving
by providing deterrent punishment of life imprisonment to the accused and for
providing timely medical treatment to the victim, provision of well equipped
ambulances at conspicuous places on roads and highways, compensation
to the kin of the deceased and establishment of trauma centres and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1077RS(S4)—11.07.2014.