THE MEDICAL TREATMENT OF TERMINALLY-ILL PATIENTS
(PROTECTION OF PATIENTS AND MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS)
BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of patients and medical practitioners from liability in the
context of withholding or withdrawing medical treatment including life support
systems from patients who are terminally-ill and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto
BE it enacted  in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Treatment of Terminally-ill Patients (Protection
of Patients and Medical Practitioners) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifications
in the official gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XXVII of 2016
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH AUGUST, 2016

2
2. Unless, the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "advance medical directive" (also called living will) means a directive given
by a person that he or she, as the case may be, shall or shall not be given medical
treatment in future when he or she becomes terminally ill and becomes an incompetent
patient.
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government.
'best interests' include the best interests of a patient,—
(i) who is an incompetent patient, or
(ii) who is a competent patient but who has not taken an informed decision,
and are not limited to medical interests of the patient but include ethical, social,
moral, emotional and other welfare considerations."
(c) 'competent patient' means a patient who is not an incompetent patient.
(d) 'incompetent patient' means a patient who is a minor below the age of sixteen
years or person of unsound mind or a patient who is unable to,—
(i) understand the information relevant to an informed decision about the
medical treatment;
(ii) retain that information;
(iii) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making the
informed decision;
(iv) make an informed decision because of impairment of or a disturbance
in the functioning of his mind or brain; or
(v) communicate the informed decision, whether by speech, sign, language
or any other mode, as to medical treatment."
(e) 'informed decision' means the decision as to continuance or withholding or
withdrawing medical treatment taken by a patient who is competent and who is or has
been informed by the attending medical practitioner about:—
(i) the nature of the illness,
(ii) any alternative form of treatment that may be available,
(iii) the consequences of those forms of treatment, and
(iv) the consequences of remaining untreated.
(f) 'Medical Council of India' means the Medical Council of India constituted
under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
(g) 'medical practitioner' means a medical practitioner who possesses any
recognized medical qualification as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 and who is enrolled on a State Medical Register as defined
in clause (k) of that section.
(h) 'medical power-of-attorney' means a document of decisions in future as to
medical treatment which has to be given or not to be given to him if he becomes
terminally ill and becomes an incompetent patient.
(i) 'medical treatment' means treatment intended to sustain, restore or replace
vital functions which, when applied to a patient suffering from terminal illness, will
serve only to prolong the process of dying and includes,—
(i) life-sustaining treatment by way of surgical operation or the
administration of medicine or the carrying out of any other medical procedure;
and
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
102 of 1956.
102 of 1956.

3
(ii) use of mechanical or artificial means such as ventilation, artificial
nutrition and hydration and cardiopulmonary resuscitation; and
(iii) but does not include palliative care."
(j) 'minor' means a person who, under the provisions of an Indian Majority Act,
1875 is to be deemed not to have attained majority.
(k) 'palliative care' includes,—
(i) the provision of reasonable medical and nursing procedures for the
relief of physical pain, suffering, discomfort or emotional and psycho-social
suffering; and
(ii) the reasonable provision for food and water."
(1) 'patient' means a patient who is suffering from terminal illness.
(m) 'terminal illenss' means,—
(i) such illness, injury or degeneration of physical or mental conditoon
which is causing extreme pain and suffering to the patient and which, according
to reasonable medical opinion, will inevitably cause the untimely death of the
patient concerned, or
(ii) which has caused a persistent and irreversible vegetative condition
under which no meaningful existence of life is possible for the patient."
3.  (1) Every competent patient including minor aged above sixteen years shall
have a right to take an informed decision and to express the desire to the medical
practitioner attending on her or him:—
(i) for withholding or withdrawing of his medical treatment and to allow
nature to take its own course, or
(ii) for starting or continuing his medical treatment.
(2) When a patient referred to in sub-section (1) communicates an informed decision
to the medical practitioner, such decision shall be binding on the medical practitioner:
Provided that the medical practitioner is satisfied that the patient is a competent patient
and that the patient has taken an informed decision based upon a free exercise of his free will
and:
Provided further that in the case of minor above sixteen years of age, the consent has
also been given by the parents, or legal guardian or any next of friends.
(3) Before proceeding further to give effect to the decision of the competent patient,
the medical practitioner shall inform the patient, if conscious, or the spouse or parent or
major son or daughter of the patient or in their absence any relative or other person regularly
visiting the patient at the hospital about the informed decision of the competent patient and
his own opinion on that decision including the need or otherwise of withholding or
withdrawing treatment fromt he patient and shall desist from giving effect to the decision for
a period of three days following the intimation given to the said patient's relations.
4. (1) The medical practitioner attending on the patient shall maintain a record containing
personal details of the patient such as age and full address, the nature of illness and the
treatment being given and the names of spouse, parent or major son or daughter, the request
or decision, if any, communicated by the patient and his opinion whether it would be in the
best interest of the patient to withdraw or withhold the treatment.
(2) The patient, spouse, parent or major son or daughter of a patient shall be entitled to
receive a copy of the records maintained by the medical practitioner under this section and
the medical practitioner shall furnish such records upon request without delay.
Refusal of
medical
treatment by
a competent
patient.
Maintenance
of record of
Terminally-ill
patient.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
4 of 1875.

4
5. Notwithstanding that medical treatment has been withheld or withdrawn by the
medical practitioner in the case of a competent patient or an incompetent patient in accordance
with the foregoing provisions, palliative care shall be administered to such patients by the
medical practitioner attending on them.
6. Where a competent patient refuses medical treatment in circumstances mentioned in
section 3, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code 1860, such a patient
shall not be deemed guilty of any offence under the Code or under any other law for the time
being in force.
7. Where a medical practitioner or any other person acting under the direction of
medical practitioner withholds or withdraws medical treatment in respect of a competent
patient on the basis of the desire expressed by the patient which on the assessment of a
medical practitioner is in his best interest, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, such action of the medical practitioner or those acting
under his direction and of the hospital concerned shall deemed to be lawful provided that the
medical practitioner has complied with the requirement of sections 3 and 5 and followed the
guidelines laid down by the Medical Council of India in this regard under section 12 of this
Act.
8. (1) The appropriate Government in consultations with The Director-General of Health
Services and the Director of Medical Services (or officer holding equivalent post) in each
State, as the case may be, shall prepare a penal of medical experts for every state and union
territory for the purposes of this Act and more than one panel may be notified to serve the
needs of different areas.
(2) The panels referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall include medical experts with an
experience of at least fifteen years in various branches such as medicine, surgery critical care
medicine or any other specialty as prescribed by Central Government.
(3)  The panels prepared under sub-section ( 1) shall be published in the respective
websites of the said authorities specified in sub-section ( 1) from time to time and such
modifications shall also be published in the website, as the case may be.
9.  (1) Any parent, spouse, any near relative, next friend, legal guardian of patient, the
medical practitioner or para-medical staff generally attending on the patient obtaining the
leave of court, may apply to the High Court having territorial jurisdiction for granting
permission for withholding or withdrawing medical treatment of an incompetent patient or a
competent patient who is incompetent to take informed decision.
Explanation.—'High Court' in this section and section 11 means the High Court within
whose territorial jurisdiction the treatment is being given or is proposed or proposed to be
withheld or withdrawn.
(2) Such application shall be treated as original petition and the Chief Justice of High
Court shall assign the same to a Division Bench without any loss of time and the same shall
be disposed of by the High Court within thirty days:
Provided that a letter addressed to the Registrar-General or Judicial Registrar of the
High Court by any of the above mentioned persons and containing therein all the material
particulars seeking the permission under sub-section ( 1) shall be placed before the Chief
Justice without delay and the letter shall be treated as original petition.
(3) The Division Bench of the High Court may, if deemed necessary, appoint an amicus
curiae to assist the Court and where a patient it unrepresented, direct legal aid to be provided
to such patient.
(4) The High Court shall obtain the expert medical opinion of three medical practitioners
drawn from the panel prepared under section 8 and any other expert medical practitioner if,
considered necessary and issue appropriate directions for the payment to be made towards
the remuneration of the experts:
Palliative care
for terminally
ill patients.
Protection of
competent
patients.
Protection of
medical
practitioners.
Panel of
medical
experts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Permission
for with
holding/
withdrawing
medical
treatment
from High
Court.
45 of 1860

5
Provided that as far as practicable, one doctor each on the panel shall be a neurosurgeon,
a psychologist and a physician.
(5) The expert panel shall follow the guidelines laid down by the Medical Council of
India with regard to withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment to competent or
incompetent patients suffering from terminal illness under section 12 of this Act.
(6) The High Court shall, having due regard to the report of panel of experts and the
wishes of close relations, namely, spouse, parents, major children or in their absence such
other persons whom the High Court deems fit to put on notice and on consideration of the
best interests of the patient, pass orders granting or refusing permission or granting permission
subject to any conditions.
(7) The parent, spouse, any near relative, next friend, legal guardian of patient who
consents to, and the medical practitioner or the hospital management or staff who in accordance
with the order of High Court, witholds or withdraw medical treatment to the patient concerned
shall, notwithstanding any other law in force, be absolved of any criminal or civil liability
with regard to the action taken in accordance with the order or High Court.
10. (1) It shall be open to the party applying for the order of High Court as prescribed
in section 9 to withdraw the application anytime before the final decision of the High Court
is delivered:
Provided that such party shall submit an application to this effect highlighting the
reasons and new facts, if any, and the High Court may accept or reject the application of
withdrawal.
(2) Parent, spouse, any near relative, next friend, legal guardian of patient, the medical
practitioner generally attending on the patient obtaining the leave of the court, may contest
the application submitted under section 9 and petition the High Court not to entertain the
application or reject the application filed under Section 9, anytime before the final order of the
High Court is delivered:
Provided that such party shall submit an application to this effect highlighting the
reasons and all relevant facts and the High Court may accept or reject the application:
Provided further that where the High Court accepts this application, the party applying
for the order of the High Court under section 9 and the party contesting the application shall
be permitted to tender all the relevant evidence and the High Court shall finally dispose of
the application along with contesting application within thirty days from the date on which
contesting application was received.
(3) The party applying for order of High Court under section 9 shall submit a compliance
report to the High Court within thirty days from the date on which the order of the High Court
was delivered:
Provided that if, the party fails to comply with the decision of the High Court or if, new
facts emerge, such party may apply to the High Court citing the reasons for such non-
compliance and the High Court may pass such orders as deemed appropriate.
11. The Division Bench of the High Court may, whenever a petition under section 9 is
filed, direct that the identity of the patient and of his or her parents or spouse, the identity of
the medical practitioner and hospitals, the identity of the medical experts referred to in
section 4, or of other experts or witnesses consulted by the Court or who have given evidence
in the Court, shall, during the pendency of the petition, and after its disposal, be kept
confidential and shall be referred only by the English alphabets.
12.  (1)  Consistent with the provisions of this Act, the Medical Council of India may
prepare and issue guidelines, from time to time, for the guidance of medical practitioners in
the matter of withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment to competent or incompetent
patients suffering from terminal illness.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Medical
Council of
India to frame
guidelines.
Confidentiality.
Withdrawing
or contesting
the
application.

6
(2) The Medical Council of India may review and modify the guidelines from time to
time.
(3) The guidelines and modifications thereto, if any, shall be published on the website
and a press release may be issued to that effect.
13. Every advance medical directive (also called living will) or medical Power-of-
Attorney executed by a person shall be taken into consideration in matter of withholding or
withdrawing of medical treatment but it shall not be binding on any medical practitioner.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules for
carrying out at the purposes of this Act.
Advance
medical
directives and
medical power
of attorney.
Power to
make rules.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Following the landmark judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Aruna Ramchandra
Shaunbag vs. Union of India, Law Commission of India in its 241st Report in August, 2012
advocated for legalising passive euthanasia. Passive Euthanasia, also called as negative
euthanasia involves withholding of medical treatment or life support system for continuance
of life. As opposed to active euthanasia which requires doing something to end a life and
which is a crime in India, passive euthanasia involves not doing something which would
have preserved a patient's life. These decisions are taken on humanitarian grounds in the
best interest of the patient allowing a patient to die a natural death thereby upholding their
dignity in death.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court legalised passive euthanasia in the above mentioned
judgment and in its wisdom appointed the High Court as parens patriae in such cases where
a terminally ill patient is unable to give his/her consent and the parents, spouse, relative,
friend or medical practitioner attending on him/her applies to the court for withdrawing the
treatment. The Bill provides for detailed procedures which can be followed in this regard
providing adequate safeguards for the patient and excludes criminal liability of their relatives
and medical practitioners who withhold the treatment following the order of the court.
Passive euthanasia today is legalised in many countries and India is no exception. Our
Constitution acknowledges the right to life of every person which includes in it the right to
live this life with dignity. Legalising passive euthanasia will permit terminally ill patients to
live their final days in dignity where any kind of intrusive medical treatment with its attendant
side effects is only likely to prolong death and not avert it altogether.
Hence this Bill.
HUSAIN DALWAI
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
8

GMGIPMRND—2244RS(S3)—05.08.2016.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of patients and medical practitioners from liability in the
context of withholding or withdrawing medical treatment including life support
systems from patients who are terminally-ill and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, M.P .)