THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In article 51A of the Constitution for clause (d), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(d) to defend and serve the country throughout the life, unconditionally and
selflessly;"
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 51A.
Bill  No.  XXVI of  2008
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution defines not only Fundamental Rights of citizens but also their duties.
As per of clause (d) of article 51A citizens are called upon to defend the country and
are expected to serve the country when called upon.
Considering our progress after independence, we have not come up to our own
expectations in spite of the kind and extent of gifts of nature.
At the root cause of this phenomenon, according to all sections of analysis is the
unfortunate situation that baring exceptions, people appear to serve public cause either with
an eye on personal/sectarian  gains or only if certain conditions are fulfilled. It May have
been taken for granted that all citizens would always serve the country with unconditional
devotion but this, not being exactly so, is necessary to remind ourselves to serve
unconditionally and selflessly and throughout our life, whether called upon or not.
Intense love and sense of duty towards the motherland should inspire us to serve
without expecting anything in return and of course unconditionally and so the words, ‘render
national service when called upon to do so’ is being substituted with words, ‘serve the
country throughout the life unconditionally and selflessly’.
Hence this Bill.
SHREEGOPAL VYAS
2

ANNEXURE
***
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A, Fundamental duties—It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions the National
Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) To cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for
freedom.
(c) To uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.
(d) To defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) To promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all  the people
of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities, to renounce
practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) To value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) To protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and
wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures.
(h) To develop the scientific tamper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) To safeguard public property and to abjure violence.
(j) To strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so
that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement.
3

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shreegopal Vyas, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4752RS(S5)—29-12-2008.