AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON 
26TH JULY 2024
Bill No. XXVIII of 2024 
THE TRADITIONAL HANDLOOM SILK WEAVERS 
(PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the protection of traditional handloom silk weavers in the 
country particularly in Bhagalpur in Bihar and for welfare measures 
including life insurance coverage, healthcare educational 
 facilities to the children of such weavers and 
 for matters connected therewith or  
incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:– 
 
5 
 
10 
 1. 
 2. 
(1) This Act may be called the Traditional Handloom Silk Weavers
(Protection and Welfare) Act, 2024.
(2) It s
hall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
In t
his Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— 
(a) "Council" means the National Traditional Handloom Silk
Weavers Welfare Council constituted under section 4;
(b) "
Fund" means the Traditional Handloom Silk Weavers Welfare
Fund constituted under section 6;
Short title and 
commencement. 
De
finitions. 

2 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d
) "traditional handloom silk weavers" means any person who for at
least two generations is engaged in the weaving of handloom sil k
a
nd whose only source of income is the money he/she earns from
weaving and selling such silk products. 5 
National 
Policy for the 
welfare of 
traditional 
handloom silk 
weavers. 
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year
from the commencement of this Act, formulate, in consultation with the
Governments of the States having substantial population of traditional
handloom silk weavers, a National Policy for the welfare of traditional
handloom silk weavers and their families and for the protection of  their
rights and interests.
Explanation. - For the purposes of this section and sections 4 and 6, the
Central Government shall prescribe the percentage of households of
traditional handloom silk weavers  to the total households in a State for
determination of the States having substantial population of such weavers.
 
10 
 
15 
Constitution 
of the 
National 
Traditional 
Handloom 
Silk Weavers 
Welfare 
Council.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification
in Official Gazette, constitute a Council to be known as the National
Traditional Handloom Silk Weavers Welfare Council for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(2
) The Council shall consist of—
(a
) a Chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional
experience in the handloom weaving sector, to be appointed by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) a Vice Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central
Government with such qualification and in such manner as may
be prescribed;
(
c) five Members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from the
House of the People and two shall be from the Council of States, to be
nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
(d) three members to represent the traditional handloom silk
weavers across the country to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) four members to represent the Union Ministries of Textiles,
Finance, Planning and Labour and Employment, to be appointed by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(f) four members to be nominated by the Government of the States
having substantial population of traditional handloom weavers on
rotation basis in alphabetical order.
(3) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual success ion and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and
dispose of property both movable and immovable and to contract and
shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
 
20 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
4
0 

3 
 
5 
 
10 
(4) The term of office and other conditions of service  of the Chairperson,
Vice Chairperson and members of the Council and the procedure to be
followed in the discharge of the functions of the Council shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of the service of the Cha irperson and non-official members
of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed.
(
6) T
he headquarter of the Council shall be at Bhagalpur in the State
of Bihar.
(
7) T
he Council may establish its offices at such other places, as it may
deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(
8) T
he Council shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers
and members of staff and on such terms and conditions of service as
may be prescribed.
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
5. (1) The Council shall, subject to guidelines issued by the Central
Government in this regard, in coordination with the State
Governments concerned, take steps for the overall welfare of
traditional handloom silk  weavers  including, removal of poverty and
indebtedness, raising the standard of living and ensuring easy
availability of raw materials and markets for the sale of the  handloom
s
ilk products.
(2
) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the
Council shall,—
(a
) implement the National Policy  for the traditional handloom silk
weavers formulated under section 3;
(b) maintain records of traditional handloom silk weavers in a ll
villages and   districts throughout the country;
(c) provide tools and techniques for weaving to the traditional
handloom silk weavers;
(d) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to tr aditional
handloom silk weavers cooperatives;
(e) organize exhibitions, melas  and such other activities to
promote traditional handloom silk products  in different parts o f
t
he country;
(f) make suitable arrangements for the purchase of traditional
handloom silk products by Government agencies;
(g) encourage export of traditional handloom silk products; and
(h) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the
Central Government from time to time.
Functions of the 
Council. 
40 6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish  a Fund to be known as the Traditional Handloo m
Silk Weavers Welfare Fund with a corpus of rupees two thousa nd
crore and thereafter shall contribute to the Fund from time to  time
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf
Establishment 
of the 
Traditional 
Handloom Silk 
Weavers 
Welfare Fund. 

4 
along with the Governments of the States, having substantial 
population of traditional handloom silk weavers, in such ratio as may 
be prescribed. 
(2) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be
received by way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwis e
from individuals, body corporates, financial institutions, firms a nd
partnerships.
(3
) The Fund shall be administered by a Board of Trustees, whic h
s
hall be constituted by the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(4
) The Fund shall be utilized for providing:—
(a
) interest free loans to traditional handloom silk weavers for the
purchase of raw materials, looms, tools etc;
(b) ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved
families of traditional handloom silk weavers who die in any
accident related to weaving;
(
c) life insurance cover to traditional handloom silk weavers and
their families;
(d
) healthcare facilities to traditional handloom silk weavers and
their dependent family members;
(
e) financial assistance to traditional handloom silk weave rs fo r
t
he repair of looms and tools;
(f) unemployment allowance during illness or financial crisis
during lean periods;
(g) e
ducational facilities and vocational training to the wards of
traditional handloom silk weavers; and
(
h) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
2
0 
2
5 
Central 
Government 
to provide 
Funds. 
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide to the Council such sums as
may be considered necessary for the efficient functioning of the
Council.
 
30 
Annual 
Report
8. (1) The Council shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities
during the previous year and submit it to the Central Government.
(2
) The Central Government shall cause the repor t submitted to it under
sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament.
 
35 
. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
 
40 
. 

5 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of the commencement of this Act. 
(2
) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
5 10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters
dealt within this Act.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
rules. 

6 
    STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India is the second largest silk producer and the largest consumer in the world. 
The demand of silk goods , particularly silk sarees, is so high that India needs to 
import large quantity of raw silk to meet the domestic demand . The major silk -
producing states in the country are Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, and 
West Bengal. The country’s sericulture industry employs around 9.2 million people 
in rural and semi -urban areas (as per year 2022-23) for raw silk cultivation , 
production of silk goods and marketing activities. The industry is one of the largest 
foreign exchange earners in the country with exports to more than 30 countries in the 
world. The sericulture activities in India are spread across 52,360 villages. 
2. A s far as woven silk products are concerned, there are two major categories:
hand-woven silk products and power loom silk product s. Handloom products ar e
woven by hand on simple machine loom and power loom sarees by machine,
powered with the electric motor. Handloom is a dying skill, rapidly being replaced by
power loom as it produces fast and at cheaper rates.
3. The handloom silk industry run by traditional weavers is facing many challenges
in different ways including price fluctuation of raw silk, and competition from
synthetic fibers. The conditions of traditional silk weavers in the country are pathetic
and they are facing a lot of difficulties in keeping the heritage alive.
4. A  case in point is the weavers of Bhagalpur, Bihar, once called the Silk City of
Bihar.  Five years back, there used to be around two lakh weavers in Bhagalpur, but
now only 60,000 weavers are there and the business from  the place has also com
e
dow
n from Rs. 600 crore in 2015 to Rs. 150 crore at present. Bhagalpur silk is a
renowned product in the world and  has got the G overnment’s Geographical
Indication tag, in view of its quality and distinctiveness. Around 1000 weavers of the
place have GI certificates.  Bhagalpur Silk Sarees boast a rich heritage that dates back
to centuries. Crafted by skilled artisans using traditional techniques passed down
through generations, the sarees embody the cultural essence of the region.  The art of
w
eaving Bhagalpur Silk is deeply ingrained in the local community with weavers
meticulously creating each saree with passion and expertise.  Earlier, the core process
of extracting the filaments from cocoons to preparing yarn, used to take plac e i
n
Bhagalpur, but now the yarn is being procured from other cities like Surat,
Ahmedabad, Bengaluru and Kolkata, which sometimes gets mixed with silk imported
from China and Korea.  In view of the reducing demand of h andloom sarees and th e
rising cost of the yarn, the silk industry of Bhagalpur is dying.  The traditional
weavers who have worked for generations are leaving the city or are opting for some
other occupation for their livelihood as there is no business. These weavers need
incentives and subsidies, uninterrupted power supply, continuous work, and housing
facilities.
5. In the same way , there are millions of traditional h andloom silk weavers spread
across various parts of our country. On the one hand, silk export is increasing,
earning huge foreign exchange and on the other hand, the handloom silk weavers and
their families live in abject pov erty nearly hand to mouth. There are many problems
experienced by traditional handloom silk weavers, including limited facilities, and
extreme competition from power looms, fluctuating cost of raw material, etc.  For
most of the traditional handloom silk we avers, it is their family profession , which

7 
passes on from one generation to other and their entire families are involved in this 
profession. For them, weaving is the only source of their livelihood and prosperity. It  
is important to stand for these people  and value their art, tradition, time, skill and 
effort that goes into making these exquisite handloom sarees and other products. 
6. Since the poor handloom silk weavers are part and parcel of our society and ours
being a welfare State, it is necessary that the handloom silk weavers too are provided
with adequate insurance cover against accidents, healthcare, financial assistance in
case of need, educational, v ocational facilities for their children, etc.  Urgent remedial
m
easures have to be taken for the welfare and protection of traditional handloom silk
weavers. It has, therefore, been proposed through this Bill to establish the National
Traditional Handloom S ilk Weavers Welfare Council and also the Traditional
Handloom Silk W eavers Welfare Fund to improve the plight  of the traditional
handloom silk weavers and save them from starvation in various parts of our nation.
    Hence this Bill. 
A. D.
 SINGH

8 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
         Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Traditional Handloom Silk 
Weavers Welfare Council along with a secretariat with such number of officers and staff 
to aid the efficient functioning of the Council . Clause 5 provides for certain steps to be 
taken by the Council for ensuring the welfare of traditional handloom silk weavers. 
Clause 6 provides for the constitution of the Traditional Handloom Silk Weavers 
Welfare Fund. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide Funds to the 
Council.  
      
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is estimated that a sum of R upees five hundred crore is likely to be  involved 
as recurring expenditure per annum. 
      
A non- recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be 
incurred. 

9 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make provisions through 
an order to remove any difficulties likely to arise in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Bill, if enacted. Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  
As the orders and  rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
 
______________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the protection of traditional handloom silk weavers in the country 
 particularly in Bhagalpur in Bihar and for welfare measures including  
life insurance coverage, healthcare, educational facilities to the  
children of such weavers and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
______________ 
  (Shri A. D. Singh, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)- 157-31.07.2024 