1
THE  SPECIAL  FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  TO  THE  STATE  OF
UTTAR  PRADESH  BILL,  2011
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Uttar Pradesh for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
sections of people and for the development, exploitation and proper utilization of
its resources.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of
Uttar Pradesh Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Uttar Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of people and for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the
resources in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Special
Financial
assistance to
the State of
Uttar
Pradesh.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 19TH AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. XXVIII  of  2011
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Uttar Pradesh is the most populous State in the country. Geographically,
it is the second largest State in the country. The State of Uttar Pradesh is socially,
educationally, industrially and economically backward in terms of the capital and resources.
Although, the State Government is making efforts in addressing the problem of poverty,
hunger, unemployment and illiteracy from their own resources but due to the scare resources
of the State, the holistic development of the State especially the Bundelkhand region,
Chitrakoot, Banda and Poorvanchal regions, etc. could not be achieved. These problems
can only be overcome by the joint efforts of the State Government, Central Government and
the people of the region. Measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of weaker
sections in the region and initiating new development schemes are also required to be
undertaken in an expeditious and time-bound manner.
The present State Government is doing its level best to bring progress and prosperity
in the Bundelkhand, eastern and other parts of the State through various poverty alleviation
schemes and welfare measures but all this will require Central assistance. It is, therefore,
necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial assistance to the
State of Uttar Pradesh for its all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections
and for the development and exploitation of its vast natural resources. Such a step of
providing financial assistance to this State would go a long way in building this nation more
and stronger.
Hence, this Bill
.
NARENDRA  KUMAR  KASHYAP
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may be due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Uttar Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes
of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India. The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Uttar Pradesh. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Uttar Pradesh as special financial
assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare
schemes to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of
India are identified, it is therefore not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure,
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
3

GMGIPMRND—1360RS(S3)—19-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Uttar Pradesh for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Schedule Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
sections of people and for the development, exploitation and proper utilization of its
resources.
————
(Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap, M. P.)