THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely—
"16A.  (1) Every citizen who has become eligible to cast his vote in an election to
Lok Sabha or  State Legislature shall have the right to gainful employment as per his
qualifications and calibre and in the event of  failure of the state to provide him gainful
employment, he shall be paid unemployment allowance till he is provided gainful
employment.
Insertion of
new article
16A.
Bill No. XXVIII of 2007
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Right to
gainful
employment
and
unemployment
allowance.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 27TH APRIL, 2007

2
 (2) For the purposes of clause (1), Parliament   may by law provide for,—
(a) different rates of unemployment allowances for the illiterates, primary
and middle passed, matriculates, senior secondary passed, graduates, post graduates,
technicians and professionally qualified and others and in particular for the physically
challenged citizens;
(b) unemployment insurance scheme and Fund to be established so as to pay
unemployment allowance therefrom and contributions to be made therein by different
agencies, corporates, institutions and individuals including the beneficiaries."

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our constitution has guaranteed us the right to life and liberty as one of the fundamental
rights. But without economic security this right is a mere farce. For economic security one
requires gainful employment which gives him food, shelter and other requirements of  life
necessary  which is called one's livelihood. Unfortunately, there is severe unemployment in
the Country. Crores of youth consisting of illiterates, semi literates and educated, are
unemployed. Employment exchanges are overflowing with the names of such unemployed
youths who are without any means of livelihood. They are a frustrated lot and are being lured
by anti-social and anti-national elements to indulge in crimes, violence and terrorism leading
to erosion of their ethical values. This problem has to be tackled by making the right to
gainful employment a fundamental right. Right to work mentioned as the Directive Principle
of  State policy can soon be enforced.
Hence, it is high time to make the right to gainful employment a fundamental right to
make it enforceable and provide unemployment allowance to the unemployed youths  in
case of failure by the State to provide gainful employment  to  such youth.
Hence this Bill.
ALKA  BALRAM  KSHATRIYA
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for right to gainful employment and also for unemployment
allowance to the citizens. The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of twenty thousand crore rupees may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya, M.P.)
MGIPMRND— 1776RS(S3)—27-04-2007.