1
THE PROTECTION OF FARMERS FAMILIES BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of the families of farmers by the State who have lost their lives
in accident of any nature, due to disease, natural death or by committing suicide by
extending welfare measures, financial assistance, etc. so as to enable the bereaved
families to bear the loss of their bread winners and live a respectable life and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Farmers Families Act, 2018.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
 (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government.
 ( b) "bereaved familiy" includes the dependent parents, the widow and
dependent children of the deceased farmer;
 (c) "children" means the sons and daughters below the age of twenty-five years
dependent on the deceased farmers;
 (d) "deceased farmer" means a farmer who has lost his life due to accident or
disease or natural death or by committing suicide;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XXVII of  2018
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019

2
 (e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
 (f) "widow" means a legally married wife of the deceased farmer.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a preiod of one year from the commencement
of this Act, formulate a National Policy for the welfare and rehabilitation of the bereaved
families of farmers who lose their lives due to accident of any nature including snake bites,
attack by wild animals, in a natural calamity, inhaling of poisonous toxins or pesticides etc. or
by committing suicide for whatever reasons including being debt ridden and for providing
protective measures as it may deem fit and necessary.
 (2) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the National Policy
referred to in sub-section (1).
4. The appropriate Government shall waive off the outstanding loans taken from any
Bank, financial institutions and private moneylender by the deceased farmers.
5. The Central Government shall provide such financial assistance to the bereaved
families of deceased farmers as may be prescribed:
Provided that the financial assistance shall be in addition to the waiving of  the loans
under section 4 of this Act.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall conduct skill development programmes for
the widows and children of deceased farmers to help them sustainable means of livelihood
by focussing on skill augmenting workshops either for handicrafts or for the revival of the
skill endemic to the area.
 (2) After the widows or children have acquired necessary skills under sub-section (1) the
appropriate Government shall provide interest free loan of such amount as may be prescribed to
the widows or children, as the case may be, as an initial investment needed for setting up of micro
or small scale industry, poultry or dairy farms, etc. for the purposes of this section.
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide the necessary
agricultural equipments and inputs for the initial sowing season to the bereaved families
who opt for farming as means of livelihood.
8. The appropriate Government shall open adequate number of schools in rural areas
to provide educational facilities to the children and also provide healthcare facilities to the
bereaved families and bear the expenditure for marriage of grown up daughter.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf provide requisite funds to the State Governments, from time to time, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The provisons of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
National
policy for the
protection of
the families
of farmers.
Loan waiver
of deceased
farmers.
Financial
assistance to
bereaved
families.
Skill
development
programmes
for widows
and children.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
agricultural
equipments
and inputs to
bereaved
families.
Education and
healthcare
facilities etc.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Farmer, the annadaata of the nation grow foodgrains, vegetables, fruits, milk, poultry
and non vegetarian food products for the second most populous nation of the globe. He
also produces raw material for various industries of the country thus plays a significant role
in the progress of the nation. However he is debt ridden, poor and lives hand to mouth and
remains exploited also. When he finds the debt, poverty and exploitation unbearable he
takes the extreme step of ending his life by committing suicide. Lakhs of farmers have so far
committed suicide in the country and unfortunately Maharashtra, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh,
etc. are leading States where farmers have committed suicide in large number and this is still
going on. News of farmers committing suicide comes almost on daily basis. Farmers also
lose their lives due to snake bites, attack by wild animals, in natural calamities and also
natural death. In most of the cases, the farmer is the sole bread winner of the family which
generally consist of aged parents, spouse and children. With the death of sole bread winner
the entire family becomes destitute and helpless. In addition to their miseries and sufferings
at the hands of cruel destiny, these families are haunted by banks and private moneylenders
for loan recoveries. Anti social elements exploit their miseries and lure their young, adolescent
girls for trafficking. Land sharks also become active to grab their land.
In a democratic and welfare State like ours, it is the duty of the Central and State
Governments to extend protective umbrella to the bereaved distressed families of deceased
farmers by providing financial assistance, waiving of loans, providing skill development,
granting interest free loans for setting up micro and small scale industries, by ensuring
education of the children, healthcare facilities to the aged parents and other family members
and arrange for marriage of grown up daughters.
Since the State can not bear the burden of huge financial expenditure, the Central
Government must provide adequate funds to the Government of the States for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The State Government in turn should also allocate the funds based
on the degree of agrarian crisis in different parts of the State. For instance, in the State of
Maharashtra, the regions of Marathwada and Vidharbha are the most affected due to large
scale suicides of farmers. Therefore, the State Government must allocate more funds to these
regions.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR DHOOT
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the loan waiver of deceased farmers. Clause 5 provides
for the financial assistance to bereaved families of deceased farmers. Clause 6 provides for
conducting skill development Programme and interest free loans for initial investment for
setting up of small scale industries for the widows and children of deceased farmer. Clause 7
provides for agricultural equipment and inputs to the bereaved families. Clause 8 provides
for opening of adequate number of schools, affordable healthcare facilities and arrangement
of marriage of daughter to the bereaved families. Clause 9 makes it obligatory for the Central
Government to provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. Though it is not possible to quantify the total expenditure which is likely to be
involved for implementing the provisions of this Bill, it is estimated that a sum of rupees one
lakh crore may be required as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one lakh crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only. This delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of the families of farmers by the State who have lost their lives
in accident of any nature, disease, natural death or by committing suicide by extending
welfare measures, financial assistance, etc. so as to enable the bereaved families to
bear the loss of their bread winners and live a respectable life and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—813RS(S3)—25-06-2019.