THE  PREVENTION  OF  TRAFFICKING  AND  ABUSE OF
 CHILDREN  BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of abuse of children in any form be it forcing them to work,
beg, or physical and sexual abuse, or trafficking of girl child for commercial purposes
by pushing or forcing her for prostitution after, procuring, luring or kidnapping and
making her available for hiring or for taking possession by her client for promiscuous
sexual acts by providing deterrent punishment including capital punishment for
trafficking and abuse of children  and for the rescue, rehabilitation and welfare of
such hapless children who have been forced to become  child sex workers by the
state and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Prevention of Trafficking and Abuse of Children
Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2009
Bill  No.  XXVI of  2009

2
(b) "child" means a boy or girl who is below the age of eighteen years;
(c) "commercialized trafficking"  includes forcing the girl child into prostitution
for earning money therefrom or using the girl child for any unlawful or immoral purpose
or procuring or supplying the girl child for such  purpose or hiring or obtaining
possession of the girl child for promiscuous sexual purposes;
(d) "orphan or street children" means those children with unknown parantage
and who may have been abandoned, vagabond and who subsist on collecting waste
paper,  plastic items, glass and metal waste from garbage dumps, streets and other
public places including the children who are neglected and destitute and work as
porter, vendor, shoe shiner, beggar, etc. generally languishing on pavements, hutments,
slums, railway platforms, bus stops and such other places and remain deprived and
exploited;
(e) "physical abuse" includes forcibly getting things done, treating roughly a
child or using violence against such a child to force him to work as domestic servant,
child labourer in any establishment or shop,  dhaba, tea-stall or such place, or beg,
steal or drug or hooch trafficking and other crimes or any violent act which may be
detrimental to the childhood of the victim child;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "sexual abuse" includes rape, sodomy and other unnatural sexual activities,
forcing the child to have sex or into prostitution for earning money or otherwise or
having sex with a child;
(h) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the
meaning respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
trafficking and abuse of children for commercial or any other purpose and in any manner
whatsoever is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever, contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever,—
(a) abets or induces, by whatever means including emotional or blackmailing of
any kind, a girl child into prostitution or any child to have unnatural sex with any
person including foreign tourist notwithstanding the family relation of such girl child
or other child, as the case may be, with the accused or under any prevailing custom
shall be punished with life imprisonment;
(b) pushes or forces through coercive or cruel means any child into prostitution
or for unnatural sex shall be punished with death;
(c) forces or indulges in commercialized trafficking of girl child or any child for
unnatural sex shall be punished with life imprisonment;
(d) lures, procures or kidnaps any child for trafficking or physical abuse shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but may
extend to life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(e) indulges in abuse, including physical and sexual abuse, of orphan or street
children in any manner whatsoever shall be punished with life imprisonment;
(f) owns or runs a brothel having girl child prostitute or other child for unnatural
sex, such owner or manager shall be punished with life imprisonment and also with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees;
Prohibition of
Trafficking
and abuse of
children.
F
O
Penalty.
45 of 1860
4 of 1956

3
(g) indulges in the immoral traffic or a girl child or makes available a girl child or
any child for any unlawful or immoral purpose shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than ten years but may extend to life imprisonment
and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupee.
(h) hires, procures or obtains possession of a girl child for promiscuous sexual
intercourse with her or of a boy for unnatural sex with him shall be punishable with life
imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupee.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
6. (1) The offences under this Act shall be tried by the Special Court or the Fast Track
Court, as the case may be, for expeditious trial of such offices.
(2) The trial of an offence committed under this Act shall be held in camera.
(3) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Special Courts and
Fast Track Courts as it may deem necessary for the purposes of sub-section (1) and for the
fast and quick disposal of cases under this Act.
7. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) take custody of every orphan or street child covered under this Act who is
homeless and without guardian and provide him board and lodging and other facilities
in the children home established for the purpose;
(b) ensure withdrawal of children covered under this Act from their profession
of prostitution, rag picking, begging, petty crimes, or any such profession as may be
prescribed;
(c) provide free educational facilities, vocational training and facilities for
growth and development to the rescued children;
(d) take such other welfare and rehabilitation measures as may be deemed
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
Offences to be
tried by Special
Courts.
Rehabilitation
and other
provisions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Children are the future citizens of every nation and as such they need to be brought up
in a good atmosphere by providing all the necessities of life along with good education and
training.  Love and affection is essential for them. But, unfortunately, all the children in our
country are not so fortunate to get the love and care in abundance because of their abuse
from their tender age. Thousands of minor and adolescent girls and boys go missing from
various parts of the country every year and a few fortunate ones are restored to their parents.
Most of these children are either kidnapped or lured by the touts and middlemen of organized
gangs of criminals and pimps and then are forced into prostitution, begging and other crimes.
Girl child trafficking, as it mints money is going on in a very large scale in the country in the
name of adventure tourism, particularly in the places of tourist destinations. In this dirty
game of money minting, the pimps, organized gangs, touts, underworld dons, brothel keepers,
hoteliers, tour operators and others are involved in supplying and making available the girls
and boys to their clients. In many cases, even the guardians and near and dear ones do not
hesitate in forcing the children into prostitution either for prevailing customs or for the greed
of money. In order to run the trafficking business, children are procured through kidnapping,
luring on the pretext of getting employment for ensuring a comfortable and decent life,
procuring from unsuspecting poverty stricken parents from tribal and other areas. Adolescent
girls are even brought from neighboring countries mainly for the purpose of trafficking.
Pimps become active when areas are struck by natural calamities to lure the poor children into
their net. Unfortunately, adventure tourism is gaining momentum in the globe including our
country.  Of course, we cannot blame all the tourists for this, but few affluent ones do indulge
in sex tourism and spend lot of money and locals are there to help them. This blatant abuse
and trafficking of children has put the lives of unfortunate children in constant danger of
deadly AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases and has snatched away their childhood.
All this requires to be handled effectively through deterrent punishment.
Hence this Bill.
JAYANTHI NATARAJAN
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for certain rehabilitation and other welfare measures.
Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide funds for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. Though it is not possible to quantify the actual expenditure at this juncture but it is
estimated that a sum of rupee ten thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.
A sum of rupee five thousand crore may also be involved as non recurring expenditure.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of abuse of children in any form be it forcing them to work, beg,
or physical and sexual abuse, or trafficking of girl child for commercial purposes by
pushing or forcing her for prostitution after, procuring, luring or kidnapping and  making
her available for hiring or for taking possession by her client for promiscuous sexual
acts by providing deterrent punishment including capital punishment for trafficking
and abuse of children  and for the rescue, rehabilitation and welfare of such hapless
children who have been forced to become  child sex workers by the state and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5133RS(S-5)—4-12-2009.