1
THE HOMELESS PA VEMENT DWELLERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the homeless citizens living on the pavements of
roads, under the bridges, flyovers, bus stops, railway yards, in parks or under the
open sky in any public place in the Metropolitan cities and other urban areas, to be
undertaken by the State and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Homeless Pavement Dwellers (Welfare) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "pavement dweller" includes the persons living on the pavement of roads or
footpaths, under the bridges, flyovers, bus stops, railway stations or yards, in parks or
under the open sky in any public place in the metros  and urban areas;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH NOVEMBER, 2014
Bill No. XXVII of 2014
Definitions.5
10

2
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Governments of the States
and Union Territory Administrations, as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, formulate a national welfare policy for the poor homeless pavement
dwellers for being uniformally implemented  across the country by the appropriate Governments.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the welfare
policy referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) recognition of right to live on pavements of the dwellers so that they are not
chased out by the Police and civic authorities till alternative shelter is made available
to them;
(b) humanitarian approach towards their homelessness and acute poverty by
the authorities of different Government agencies;
(c) construction of sufficient numbers of night shelters or Rain Baseras with
basic facilities at conspicuous places;
(d) provision of necessary healthcare with free check ups including diagnostic
ones and medicines through mobile dispensaries;
(e) provision of public taps for potable water;
(f) facility of mobile toilets or of Sulabh toilets wherever possible with bathing
facility;
(g) facility of bed sheet and Durry once a year on per person basis;
(h) facility of blanket and woolens for each person during winter season;
(i) free food for the dwellers twice a day;
(j) free distribution of mosquito nets to save them from malaria, dengue and
other vector borne diseases;
(k) free education to the children of dwellers with provision of free books,
stationery and other educational materials dresses, shoes, etc. with hostel facilities
in deserving cases and vocational training and career counseling for the growth of
such children;
(l) necessary assistance in cash, kind, advice for self employment of the dwellers;
(m) withdrawal from begging and other crimes and reforming them in a time
bound manner;
(n) such other measures as may be deemed necessary for the purposes of this
Act.
(3) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the welfare measures
prescribed under this Act in letter and spirit and in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction,  not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expendient for the removal of the difficulty and
the Government of a State shall be guided by such directions and instructions on questions
of policy as may be given to it by the Central Government.
6. The provisions of this Act and of rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matter dealt with
in this Act.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
National
Welfare policy
for pavement
dwellers.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Due to population explosion in the Country the problem of homelessness has become
quite acute and has become more so in the urban areas.  This problem is multiplied when the
people from rural areas migrate to urban areas in search of green pastures and pursue their
dreams of better life. But having a roof over their heads remains a distant dream for most of
them. After the hard work of the day, they chose some pavements to sleep during the night
under the open sky. Mumbai is one such Metropolitan city, the financial hub of the nation,
which attracts the people from across the country to try their luck in Bollywood or elsewhere
and for most of them pavements of Mumbai provide sleeping space. At present millions of
people live and subsist on the pavements or footpaths of Mumbai struggling for basic
amenities of two square meals and healthcare by various means. Similar is the case of other
Metropolitans and other urban areas of the rest of the Country. These poverty stricken
pavement dwellers face the vagaries of nature particularly during the rainy and winter seasons.
They have no other options but to live in inhuman conditions falling victims of diseases and
many a time lose their lives. This winter alone hundreds of such pavement dwellers lost their
lives due to severe cold in Delhi and other urban areas of north India.
Ours is a welfare State and it is the duty of the State to protect its citizens who are poor,
homeless and end up on the pavements. The State must implement Welfare measures for
such citizens of the nation.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR  DHOOT

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the national welfare policy for pavement dwellers
which include several amenities for such dwellers. Clause 4 makes it obligatory for the
Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The
Bill if, enacted will  involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a sum of rupees fifty thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees ten thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the homeless citizens living on the pavements of
roads, under the bridges, flyovers, bus stops, railway yards, in parks or under the open
sky in any public place in the Metropolitan cities and other urban areas, to be undertaken
by the State and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3068RS(S3)—28.11.2014.