THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
A
BILL
further to amend the Arms Act, 1959.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Arms (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Arms Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the  principal Act), in sub-section (1)
of section 2, after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1) "woman" means unmarried, widowed and financially independent women".
3. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
Bill No. XXX of 2021
Amendment
of Section 2.
Short title and
commencement.
5
54 of 1959.
Amendment
of Section 13.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD  DECEMBER, 2021

2
(i) in clause (a) of sub-section (3), after sub-clause (ii), the following shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(iii) by a citizen of India, being a woman, as defined under section 2 of
this Act, in respect of a smooth bore gun having a barrel of not less than twenty
inches in length to be used for protection:
Provided that such a citizen, being a woman, shall be granted a license
under this Act only after obtaining a weapon training or weapon safety course
certified by the National Rifle Association of India or the respective State Rifle
Association".
(ii) After sub-section (3), the following shall be inserted, namely:—
''3(4) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish Weapon Handling Centres in every district which shall be
under the control of the respective office of the Superintendent of Police or an
officer of process of obtaining licenses under this section in rural areas, in
such manner as may be specified.''
4. In section 15 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) A licence under sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of section 13 shall, unless
revoked earlier, continue in force for a period of one year from the date on which it is
granted".
5. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1B), after clause (d), the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(e) being the husband or a family member of a woman holding license under
section 13 of this Act, acquires, has in his possession or carries any firearm or ammunition
belonging to such woman; or"
6. In section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (1), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(la) the procedure to ease grant of license under section 13 to women for the
purposes of self-protection, by,—
(i) revising the form and particulars of application for the grant or renewal
of a licence and where the application is for the renewal of a licence, the time
within which it shall be made;
(ii) revising the form in which and the conditions subject to which any
licence may be granted or refused, renewed, varied, suspended or revoked;
(iii) easing the process of paying the fees in respect of any application for
the grant or renewal of a licence and in respect of any licence granted or renewed
and the manner for paying the same;
(lb) the establishment of Weapon Handling Centres in each district for obtaining
licenses in rural areas."
.
Amendment
of Section 15.
Amendment
of Section 25.
Amendment
of Section 44.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The safety and protection of women has always been a concern in India. After the
horrendous incident of gang rape that occurred in 2012 in the National Capital of Delhi,
several changes were brought through the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013. This
legislation introduced much needed reforms to strengthen the criminal justice system, in
order to protect rights of women. The Justice Verma Committee which recommended such
reforms, also highlighted in it's Model Bill of Rights that, every woman is entitled to respect
for her life and the integrity and security of her person. It stated that the right to dignity is
inherent to every human being and that the State shall ensure to every woman protection
from all forms of violence, whether the violence takes place in private or public. More recently,
the brutal gang rape and murder of a young doctor in Hyderabad, whose job compelled her
to travel alone through lonely routes, is a glaring cause that makes amendment to the Arms
Act, 1959 in favour of a woman for self defence a necessity.
This Bill seeks to protect the rights of women, especially those whose job or other
circumstances compel them to commute alone, by bringing in special provisions to the Arms
Act, 1959. According to a report by the National Crime Records Bureau, the reported cases
Crimes against Women increased by 7.3% in 2019. This Bill strives to empower and protect
women by relaxing provisions governing the grant of license, which is required in order for
acquisition and possession of firearms. This Bill will ensure prevention of mishaps and
maintenance of public order, by incorporating provisions that mandate regular training. It is
the need of the hour, to ease women's access to firearms for the purpose of self defense.
Hence this Bill.
DR. FAUZIA  KHAN
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of Weapon Handling Centres in every
district. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two
hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MGIPMRND—1339RS(S3)—07.12.2021.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Arms Act , 1959.
————
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P .)