Bill No. XXX _of 1995
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION BILL, 1995
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic arbitration, international

commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards as also to define

the law relating to conciliation and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

WHEREAS the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) Preamble,
has adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration in
1985;

AND WHEREAS the Gencral Assembly of the United Nations has recommended that


= |

2

all countries give duc consideration to the said Model Law, in view of the desirability
of uniformity of the law of arbitral procedures and the specific needs of international
commercial arbitration practice;

AND WHEREAS the UNCITRAL has adopted the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules in
1980;

AND WHEREAS the General Assembly of the United Nations has recommended the use
of the said Rules in cases where a dispute arises in the context of intemational
commercial relations and Parties seck an amicable settlement of that dispute by
Tecourse 10 conciliation;

AND WHEREAS the said Model Law and Rules make significant contribution to the
establishment of a unified legal framework for the fair and efficient settlement of
disputes arising in international commercial relations;

AND WHEREAS it is expedient to make law respecting arbitration and conciliation,
taking into account the aforesaid Model Law and Rules;

Bi it cnacted by Parliament in the Fotty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1995,
(2 ॥ extends to the whole of india:

Provided that Parts I, वा and IV shall extend to the State of Jammu and Kashmir
only in so far as they relate to international commercial arbitration or, as the case may

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

PART 1
ARBITRATION
CHAPTER 1
General provisions
2. (४) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, —
1 feeneation” means any arbitration whether or not administered by permanent

(९) “arbitration agreement” means an agreement refetred to in section 7;
(०) “arbitral award" includes an interim award;

5

35


Ez

3

(व) “arbitral tribunal” means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators;

(०) “Court” means the principal Civi] Court of original jurisdiction in a district,
and includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction,
having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject matter of the
arbitration if the same bad been the subject matter of a suit, but does not inchade any
civil court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small
Causes;

(0) “international commercial arbitration” means an arbitration relating to disputes

considered

arising out of lega! relationships, whether contractual or not,
commercial under the law in force in India and where at least one of the parties is—

(0 an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any country
other than India; or

(४) a body corporate which is theorporated in any country other than India; or

(iit) 4 company of an association or a body of individuals whose central
Management and control is exercised in any country other than India; or

(iv) the Government of a foreign country;

(9) “legal representative” means a person who in law represents the estate of 8
deceased person, and includes any person who intermeddics with the estate of the
deceased, and, where a party acts in a representative character, the person on whom
the estate devolves on the death of the party so acting;

(A) “party” means @ party to an arbitration agreement.
(2) This Part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in India.

(A) This Part shall not affect any other law for the time being in force by virtue of
which certain disputes may not be submitted to arbitration.

(4) This Part except sub-section (/) of section 40, sections 41 and 43 shall apply to
every arbitration any other enactment for the time being in force, as if the
arbitration were pursuant to an arbitration agreement and as if that other enactment were
an arbitration agreement, except in so far as the provisions of this Part are inconsistent
with that other enactment or with any rules made thereunder.

(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), and save in so far as is otherwise
provided by any law for the time being in force or in any agreement in force between
India and any other country or countries, this Part shall spply to all arbitrations and to
all proceedings relating thereto.

(6) Where this Part, except section 28, leaves the parties free to determine a certain
issue, that freedom shall include the right of the partics to authorise any person
including an institution, to determine that issue.

(7) An arbitral award made under this Part shall be considered as a domestic award,

(8) Where this Part—

(@) refers to the fact that the parties have agreed or that they may agree, or

(0) in any other way refers to an agreement of the parties,

Scope.

of

refer-



that agreement shall include any arbitration rules referred to in that agreement.

(9) Where this Part, other than clause (a) of section 25 or clause (a) of sub-section
(2) of section 32, refers to a claim, it shall also spply to # counterclaim, and where it
refers to a defence, it shall also apply to a defence to that counterclaim.

Receipt of 3. (7) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, — 3

written

communica- (व) any written communication is deemed to have been received if it is delivered

tions, to the addressee personally or at his place of business, habitual residence or mailing
address, and

(6) if none of the places referred to in clause (@) can be found after making
reasonable inquiry, a writtcn communication is deemed to have been reccived if it is 10
sent to the addressees last known place of business, habitual resideace or mailing
address by registered letter or by any other means which provides record of the
attempt to deliver it,

(2) The communication is deemed to have been received on the day it is so delivered.

(3) This section docs not apply to written communications in respect of proceedings 15

Waiver of 4. A party who knows that—
object. (०) any provision of this Part from which the partics may derogate, or
(0) any requirement under the arbitration agreement,

Extent of

to facilitate the conduct of the arbitral proceedings, the parties, or the
arbitral tribunal with the consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative assistance
suitable institution or person.

HEE
| |

CHAPTER Il 30
Arbitration agreement
Arbitration 7. (2) In this Part, “arbitration agreement” means an agreement by the partics to
agreement. submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise
‘between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not.

(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract 35
or in the form of a separate agreement.

(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in—

lili


15

=

(a) document signed by the parties;

(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of telecommunication
which provide a record of the agreement; or

(© an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which the existence of the
agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other.

(5) The reference in a contract t@ a document containing an arbitration clause
constitutes an arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and the reference is such
as to make that arbitration clause part of the contract,

8. (7) A judicial authority before which an action is brought in a matter which is the
subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if 4 party so applics not later than when
submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute, refer the parties to

(2) The application referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be entertained unless it is
accompanied by the original arbitration agreement ot a duly certified copy thereof.

(3) Notwithstanding that an application has becn made under sub-section (/) and that
the issue is pending before the judicial authority, an arbitration may be commenced or
continued and an arbitral award made.

9. A party may, before or during arbitral proceedings or at any time after
making of the arbitral award but before it becomes dectee of a Court, apply to a
for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following matters
Court shall have the same power of making orders as it has for the purpose of,
relation to, any proceedings before it, namely:—

(@ the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the
matter of the arbitration agreement;

F

i
it IP

है.
fr

|

(9) securing the amount in dixpute in the arbitration;

(०) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the
subject-maticr of the dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question may arise
therein and authorising for any of the aforesaid purposes any person to entcr upon
any land or building in the possession of any party, or authorising any samples to be
taken or any observation to be madc, or experiment to be tried, which may be
necessary or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or evidence;

(०) interim injunction of the appointment of a receiver,

(©) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the Court to be just
convenient.

CHAPTER If
Composition of arbitral tribunal

10. (7) The parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators, provided that
such number shall not be an even number,

(2) Failing the determination referred to in sub-section (/), the arbitral tribunal shall
consist of a sole arbitrator.

Te

there



lh

कक
ment of
arbitrations.

11, (7) A person of any nationality may be an arbitrator, unless otherwise agreed by
the parties,

(2) Subject to sub-section (6), the parties are free to agree on a procedure for
appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators.

(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in an arbitration with three
arbitrators, cach purty shall appoint ove arbitrator, and the two appointed arbitrators shall
appoint the third arbitrator who shall act as the presiding arbitrator.

(4) If the appointment procedure in sub-section (3) applies and—

(a) @ party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days from the receipt of «
fequest to do so from the other party; or

(9) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third arbitrator within thirty
days from the date of their appointment,

the appointment shall be made, upon request of a party, by the Chief Justice or any
person or institution designated by him.

(5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-scetion (2), in an arbitration with a sole
arbitrator, if the parties fail to agree on the arbitrator within thirty days from reccipt of
a request by one party from the other party to so agree the appointment shall be made,
upon request of a party, by the Chief Justice or any person or institution designated by
him.

(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the partics,—
(a) « party fails to act as required under that procedure; or

(#) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement
expected of them under that procedute; or

(¢) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function catrusted to
him or it under that procedure,

2 party may request the Chicf Justice ar any person or institution designated by him to
tuke the necessary measure, unless the agrecment on the appointment procedure provides
other means for securing the appointment.

(7) A decision on a matter entrusted by sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-
section (6) to the Chief Justice or the person or institution designated by him is final,

(8) The Chief Justice or the person or institution designated by him, in appointing
arbitrator, shall have due regard to— ad S i

se eee rege OF: the eatin Uy ७७ nipcegnt oC MS plate:

(5) other considerations as are fo secure the appointment of an independent
and impartial arbitrator. wd 7”

(%) Ip the case of appointment of sole or thitd arbitrator in an international
commercial arbitration, the Chief Justice of India or the person or institution designated
by him may appoint an arbitrator of a nationality other than the nationalities of the

10

35



10

=

2s

35

a Ce:
parties where the parties belong to different nationalities,

(70) The Chicf Justice may make such scheme as he may decm appropriate for
dealing with matters entrusted by sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6)
to him.

(11) Where more than one request has been made under sub-section (4) or sub-
section (5) or sulysection (6) to the Chief Justices of different High Courts or their
designates, the Chief Justice or his designate t9 whom the request has been first made
under the relevant sub-section shall alone be competent to decide on the request.

(12) (@) Where the matters referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (10)
atise in an international commercial arbitration, the refetene to “Chief Justice” in those
sub-seetions shall be construed as a reference to the “Chief Justice of India”.

(b) Where the matters referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (10) arise
in any other arbitration, the Chief Justice of the High Court within whose local limits
the principal Civil Court referred to in clause (¢} of sub-section (/) of section 2 is
situate and, where the High Court itself is the Court referred to in that clause, the Chief
Justice of that High Court

12. (7) When ५ person is approached in connection with his possible appointment
an arbitrator, shall disclose in writing any circumstances likely to give rise to
justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality,

(2) An arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and throughout the arbitral
shall, without delay, disclase to the parties in writing any circumstances
referred to in sub-section (1) unless they have already been informed of them by him.

(3) An arbitrator may be challenged only if—

(a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts ax to his independence
or impartiality, or

(8) be does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties.

(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, or in whose
only for reasons of which he becomes awure after the appointment
has been made.

13. (/) Subject to sub-section (4), the parties are free 10 agree on a procedure for
challenging an arbitrator.

(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-scction (/), a party who intends to

an arbitrator shall, within fifteen days after becoming aware of the constitution

of the arbitral tribunal or after becoming aware of any circumstances referred to in sub-

section (3) of section 12, send a written statement of the reasons for the challenge to
the arbitral wibunal.

(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub-section (2) withdraws from his office
or the other party agrees to the challenge, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the
challenge.

(4) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or under the
procedure under sub-section (2) is not successful, the arbitral tribunal shall continue the
arbitral proceedings abd make an arbitral award.

Grounds for
challenge.

procedure.



Hf

e
B

Termination
of mandate
and substi-

li

jurisdiction,

(©) Where an arbitral award is set aside on an application made under sub-section (5),
fg OM muy decide as to whether the arbitrator who is challenged is entitled 10 any
foes.

14. (1) The mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate if—

(ay he becomes de jure or de facto unable to perform his functions or for other
reasons fails to act without undue delay; and

(0) he withdraws from his office or the pattics agree to the termination of his
mandate.

(2) If ५ controversy remains concerning any of the grounds referred to in cliuse (a)
of sub-section (J), a party may, otherwise agreed by the parties, apply to the
Court to decide on the termination of the mandate.

(3) If, under this scction or sub-scetion (3) of section 13, an arbitrator withdraws

from his office or a party agrees to the termitition of the mandate of an arbitrator, i
shall not imply acceptance of the validity of any ground referred to in this section’ or

15. (1) In addition tw the circumstances referred to in section 13 of section 14, the
mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate—

(@) where be withdraws from office for any reason; or

(6) by or pursuant to agreement of the parties.

(2) Where the mandate of an arbitrator terminates, & substitute arbitrator shall be
appointed according to the rules that were applicable to the appointment of the erbitatce
being replaced.

(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where an arbitrator is replaced tinder sub-
section (2), any hearings previously held may be repeated at the discretion of the
tribunal.

(@ Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, an order or ruling of the arbitral tribunal
made prior to the replacement of an arbitrator under this section shall not be invalid
solely because there has been change in the composition of the arbitral uibanal,

CHAPTER IV
Jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals
16. (1) The arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, incl juding
Gbicctions with respect to the existence or Validity of the arbitration agreement’ and fer
purpose, —

(2) 20 arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall te treated as an
sercement independent of the other terms of the contract; and

(6) « decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not
entail ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause,

5

10

15



=

15

3 of 1908,
1 of 1872. 25

35

(2) A plea that the arbitral tribunal docs not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later
than the submission of the statement of defence; however, a party shall not be precluded
from raising such a plea merely because that he has appointed, or participated in the
appointment of, an arbitrator.

(4) The arbitral tribunal may, in cither of the cases referted to in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3), admit a later plea if it considers the delay justified.

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) and, where the arbitral tribunal takes a decision rejecting the plea, continue
with the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award.

(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make an application for setting
aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34.

17. (1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal may, at the
request of a party, order « party to take any interim measure of protection as the
arbitral tribunal may consider necessary in respect of the subject-matier of the dispute.

(2) The arbitral tribunal may require a party to provide sppropriate security in
connection with a measure ordered under sub-section (1).

CHAPTER V
Conduct of arbitral proceedings
18. The partics shall be treated with equality and each party shall be given a full
opportunity to present his case.

19. (1) The arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
or the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

(2) Subject to this Part, the parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed
by the arbitral tribunal in conducting its proceedings,

@ any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), the arbitral tribunal may,
subject to this Part, conduct the proceedings in the manner it considers

(4) The power of the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (3) includes the power to
determine the admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight of any evidence.

20, (J) The parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration.

(2) Pailing any agreement referred to in sub-section (/), the place of arbitration shall
be determined by the arbitral tribunal having regard to the circumstances of the case,
including the convenience of the parties.

(3) Notwithstanding sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), the arbitral tribunal may, unless
otherwise agreed by the parties, mect at any place it considers appropriate for
consultation among its members, for hearing witnesses, experts or the parties, or for
inspection of documents, goods or other property.



Cammence-
ment of
arbitral
proceedings.

Language,

Statements
of claim
and defence,

Default of
™ party.

10

21. Unless otherwhse agreed by the parties, the arbitral proceedings in respect of =
Particular dispute commence on the date on which a request for that dispute to
referred to arbitration is reecived by the respondent.

22. (/) The parties are free to agree upon the language of Innguages to be used in
the arbitral proceedings.

(2) Pailing any agreement referred to in sub-section (J), the arbitral tribunal shall
determine the language or languages to be used in the arbitral proceedings.

(3) The agreement or determination, unless otherwise specified, shall apply to any
written statement by 4 party, any hearing and any arbitral award, decision or other
communication by the arbitral tribunal.

(4) The arbitral tribunal may order that any documentary evidence shall be

accompanied by a translation into the kuiguage of languages agreed upon by the parties
or determined by the arbitral tribursal.

23. (1) Within the period of time agreed upon by the parties or determined by the
arbitral tribunal, the claimant shall state the facts supporting his claim, the points at
issue and the relief or remedy sought, and the respondent shall state his defence in
respeet of these purticulurs, unless the parties have otherwise agreed as to the required
elements of those statements.

(2) The partics may sobmit with their sttements all documents they consider to be
televant or may add a reference to the documents or other evidence they will submit,

(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, cither party may amend or supplement bis
claim or defence during the course of the arbitri proceedings, unless the arbitral
tribunal considers it inappropriate to allow the amendment or supplement having regard
te the delay in making it.

24, (1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall decide
whether to hold oral hearings for the presentation of evidence or for oral argument, or
whether the proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of documents and other
materials:

Provided that the arbitral tribunal shall bold oral hearings, al an appropriate stage of
the proceedings, on a request by a party, unless the parties have agreed that no oral
heuting ehall be held.

(2) The parties shall be given sufficient advance notice of any bearing and of any
meeting of the arbitral tribunal for the purposes of inspection of documents, goods or
other property.

(3) All statements, documents or other information supplied to, or applications made
to the arbitral tribunal by one party shall be communicated to the other party, and any
expert report ot evidentiary document an which the arbitral tribunal may rely in making
its decisken shall be communicated to the parties.

25. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where, without showing sufficient
eattse, —

(@) the claimant fails to communicate his statement of claim in accordance with
sub-section (/) of section 23, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the proceedings;

5

15

20

25

30

35


E

15

35

i

(6) the respondent fails to communicate his statement of defence in accordance
with sub-section (/) of section 23, the arbitral tribunal shall continue the proceedings
without treating that failure in itself as an admission of the allegations by the
claimant;

(2) # party fails to appear at an oral hearing or to produce documentary evidence,
the arbitral tribunal may continue the proceedings and make the srbitral award on the
evidence before it.

26. (1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal may—

(a) appoint one of more experts to report to it on specific issues to be determined
by the arbitral tribunal, and

(8) require a party to give the expert any relevant information or to produce, ot
to provide access to, xny relevant documents, goods or other property for his
inspection.

[

him
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the expert shall, on the request of a party,
fo that party for examination all documents, goods or other property in
the possession of the expert with which he was provided in order to prepare his report.

27. (1) The arbitral tribunal, or a party with the approval of the arbitral tribunal, may
apply to the Court for assistance in taking evidence.

(2) The application shall specify —
(a) the names and addresses of the parties and the arbitrators;
(0) the general nature of the claim and the relief sought;

(०) the evidence to be obtained, in particular,—

(0 the name and address of any person to be heard as witness or expert
witness and a statement of the subject-matter of the testimony required;

(i) the description of any document to be produced or property to be
inspected.

(3) The Court may, within its competence and according to its rules on
See that the evidence be provided directly to the
arbitral tribunal.

(4) The Court may, while making an order under sub-section (3), issue the same
Processes to witnesses as ii may issue in suits tried before it.

(5) Persons failing to attend in accordance with such process, or making any other
default, or refusing to give their evidence, or guilty of any contempt to the arbitral
tribunal during the conduct of ‘arbitral proceedings, shall be subject to the like

disadvantages, penalties and punishments by order of the Court on the representation of

Expert
appointment
by arbitral
tribunal,

ili



F appli
cable to
substance of
dispute.

Settlement,

12

the arbitral tribunal as they would incur for the like offences in suits tied before the
Court,

(©) In this section the expression "Processes" includes summonses and commissions
for the examination of witnesses and summonses to produce documents.

CHAPTER VI
Making of arbitral award and termination of proceedings
28. (1) Where the place of arbitration is situate in India,—

(a) in an arbitration other than an intemational commercial arbitration, the arbitral
tribunal shall decide the dispute submitted to arbitration in accordance with the
substantive Law for the time being in force in India;

(®) in international commercial arbitration, —

(ऐ the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the rules
law designated by the parties 35 applicable to the substance of the dispute;

(ii}any designation by the parties of the law or legal system of a given
country shall be construed, unless otherwise expressed, as directly referring to the
substantive law of that country and not to its conflict of laws rules;

2

(ui) failing any designation of the law under clause (०) by the parties,
arbitral tribunal shall apply the rules of law it considers to be appropriate giv:
all the circumstances surrounding the dispute,

ae

(2) The arbitral tribunal shall decide ex aeguo et bono or as amiable compositeur

only if the parties have expressly authorised it to do so.

(3) In all casex~he arbitral tribunal shall decide in accordance with the terms of the
contract and shall take into account the usages of the trade applicable to the transaction.

29. (1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, in arbitral proceedings with more than
one arbitrator, any decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made by a majority of all its
members.

(2) Notwithstanding sub-section (/), if authorised by the parties or all the members of
the urbitral tribunal, questions of procedure may be devided by the presiding arbitrator.

34. (1) ॥ is not incompatible with an arbitration agreement for an arbitral tribunal to
cueourage scttlement of the dispute and, with the agreement of the partics, the arbitral
tribunal muy use mediation, conciliation or other procedures at any time during the
arbitral proceedings to encourage settlement.

(2) If, during arbitral proceedings, the parties settle the dispute, the arbitral tribunal
shall terminate the proceedings and, if requested by the parties and not objected to by
the arbitral tribunal, record the settlement in the form of an arbitral award on agreed
terms.

(3) An arbitral award on agreed terms shal! be made in accordance with section 31
and shall state that it is an arbitral award.

(# An arbitral award on agreed terms shall have the same status and effect as any
other arbitral award on the substance of the dispute.

10

15

95


=

10

15

35

3

31. (2) An arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the
members of the arbitral tribunal.

(2) For the purposex of sub-section (1), in arbitral proceedings with more than one
arbitrator, the signatutes of the majority of all the members of the arbitral tribunal shall
be sufficient so long as the reason for any omitted signature is stated.

(3) The arbitral award shgl statc the reasons upon which it is based, unlese—

(@) the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given, or
(8) the award is an arbitral award on agreed terms under section 30,

(4) The arbitral award shall state its date und the place of arbitration as determined
tn accordance with section 20 and the award shall be decmed to have been made at that

place.

(5) After the arbitral award is made, a-signed copy shall be delivered to each party:

(© The arbitral tribunat may, at any time during the arbitral proceedings, make an
interim arbitral award on any matter with respect to which it may make a final arbitral
award.

(7) (@) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in 90. far as an arbitral
award is for the payment of money, the arbitral tibunal may include in the sum for
Which the award is made interest, at such rate as it deems reasonable, on the or
any part of the moncy, for the whole or any part of the period between the date or
which the cause of action ase and the date on which the award is made.

(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall, unless: the award otherwise

carry interest at the rate of eightcen per centum pet annum from the date of the
award to the date of payment.

(8) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, —

(6) the costs of an arbitration shall be fixed by the arbitral tribunal;
(8) the arbitral tribunal shall specify —
(0 the party entitled to costs,
(ii) the party who shall pay the costs,
(iii) the amount of costs or method of determining that amount, and
(iv) the manner in which the costs shall be paid,

Explanation—For the purpose of clause (@), “costs” means reasonable costs
relating to—

(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and witnesses,
(id legal fees and expenses,
(ii) any administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration, and

Form and
contents of
arbitral
award.



“

(tv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral proceedings
and the arbitral award.

Termination 32. (1) The arbitral proceedings siuil be terminated by the final arbitral award or by

of procee~
dings.

an otder of the esbitral tribunal under sub-section (2).

(2) The arbitral tribunal shall issue an onder for the termination of the arbitral
Proceedings where—

(०) the claimant withdraws his claitn, unless the respondent objects to the order
and the arbitral tribunal recognises a legitimate interest on his part in obtaining a
final settlement of the dispute,

(७) the partics agree on the termination of the proceedings, or

(c) the arbitral tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings has for any
other reason became unnecessary or impossible,

(3) Subject to section 33 and sub-section (4) of section 34, the mandate of the arbitral
tribunal shall terminate with the tcrmination of the arbitral proceedings.

33. (1) Within thirty days from the receipt of the arbitral award, unless another
period of time has been agreed upon by the parties -

(०) ० party, with notice to the other party, may request the rbitral tribunal to
correct any computation errors, any clerical or typographical errors or any other errors
of « similar nature occurring in the award;

10

is


EB
CHAPTER VII
Recourse against arbitral award

34, (1) Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award may bo made only by
Seek Fe HEE: i ERR Evens 39: SSRN Wie, ७७७७७७७
section (

|

ड़
I

(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the Court only if—
(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that—
(@ a party was under some incapacity, or

(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the nw
10 have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon,
being in force; or

under
(iii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the
appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise
to present his case; or

15 (iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not contemplated by
within the terms of the submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions
matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration:

Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be
seputated from those not so submitted, only that part of the arbitral award which
20 contains decisions on matters not submitted to arbitration may be set aside; or

t
at

(¥) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in
accordance with the agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in
conflict with a provision of this Part from which the partics cannot derogate, or,
failing such agreement, was not in accordance with this Part; or

25 (0) the Court finds that—

(0) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration
under the liw for the time being in force, or

(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of India,

Explanation.—Without prejudice to the generality of sub-clause (i), it is
30 declared, for the avoidance of any doubt, that an award is in conflict with the
policy of India if the of the award wes induced or affected by fraud or

fF


= of
arbitral
awards,

Enforee-
ment

Appealable
onders.

16

appropriate and it is so requested by a purty, adjourn the proceedings for a period of
time determined by it in order to give the arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume the
arbitral proceedings or to take such other action as in the opinion of arbitral tribunal
will eliminate the grounds for setting aside the arbitral award.
CHAPTER Vill
Finality and enforcement of arbitral awards

35, Subject to this Part an arbitral award shall be final and binding on the parties and

persons claitning under them respectively.

36. Where the time for making an application to set aside the arbitral award under
section 34 has expired, or such application having been made, it has been refused, the
award shall be enforced in the same manner as if it were a decree of the Court.

CHAPTER IX
Appeals

37. (1) An appeal shall Tie from the following orders (and from no others) to the
Court authorised by law to hear appeals from otiginal decrees of the Court passing the
order, namely: —

(a) granting o refusing to grant an interim measure under section 95
(8) setting aside or refusing 40 set aside an arbitral award under section 34.

(2) An appeal shall also lic from an order granting or refusing to grant an interin
measure under section 17 t a Court.

(3) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but
nothing in this section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme
‘Court.

CHAPTER X
Miscellaneous

38, (7) The arbitral tribunal may fix the amount of the deposit or supplementary
deposit, as the cnse may be, as an advance for the costs referred to in sub-section (8)
of section 31, which it expects will be incurred in respect of the clains submitted to it

Provided that where, apart from the claim, 3 countet-claim bas been subtnitted to. the
arbitral tribunal, it may fix separate amount of deposit for the claim and counter-claim.

(2) The depasit referred 10 in sub-section (1) shall be payable in equal shares by the
pidties:

Provided that where one party fails 10 pay his share of the deposit, the other party
may pay that share;

Provided further that where the other party also docs not pay the aforesaid share in
respect of the claim or the counter-claim, the arbitral tribunal may suspend or terminate
the arbitral proceedings in respect of such claim or counter-claim, as the case may be.

10

15

35


10

25

35

(3) Upon termination of the arbitral proceedi the arbitral tribunal shall render an
accounting to the ‘of the deposits received and shall return uny unexperided
balance to the party

jon (2) and to any provision to the
arbitral tribunal shall have # lien on the

(2) If in any case an arbitral tribunal refuses to deliver its award except on payment
of the costs demanded by it, the Court may, on 4n application in this behalf, order that
Ht deliver the arbitral award to the applicant on payment into
Court by the applicant of the costs demanded, and shall, after such inquiry, if any, as
fit, further order that out of the money so paid into Court there shall be paid
of costs such sum as the Court may consider reasonable

any, shall be refunded to the applicant,

if
(3) An application under sub-section (2) may be made by any party unless the fees
demanded have been fixed by written agreement between him and the arbitral tribunal,
and the arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any such

(4 The Court may make such orders as it thinks fit respecting the costs of the
arbitration where any question arises respecting such costs and the arbitral award
conlains no sufficient provision concerning them.

40. (1) An arbitration agreement shall not be discharged by the death of any party
thereto either as respects the deceased or as respects any other party, but shall in such
event be enforceable by or against the legal representative of the deceased.

(2) The mandate of an atbitrator shall not be terminated by the death of any party by
whom he was appointed.

(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any law by virtue of which
any right of action is extinguished by the death of a person.

41. (2) Where it is provided by « term in a contract to which an insolvent is a party
that any dispute arising thereout or in connection therewith shall be sulynitted to
arbitration, the said term shall, if the receiver adopts the contract, be enforceable by or
against him so far as it relates to any such dispute.

(2) Where 4 person who has been adjudged an insolvent had, before the
commencement of the insolvency proceedings, become a party to an arbitration
agreement, and any matter to which the agreement applies is required to be determined
in connection with, or for the purposes of, the insolvency proceedings, then, if the case
is one to which sub-section (/) docs not apply, any other party ot the receiver may
apply to the judicial authority having jurisdiction in the insolvency proceedings for an
order directing that the matter in question sbull be submitted to arbitration in accordance
with the arbitration agreement, and the judicial authority may, if it is of opinion that,
having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the maticr ought to be determined by
arbitration, make an order accordingly.

(3) In this section the expression “receiver” includes an Official Assignee.

beer agro
the time being in force, where with respect to un arbitration agreement any spplication
under this Part has been made in « Court, that Court alone shall have jurisdiction over

Lien on

award and
deposits as

to costs.

Arbitration
agreement
not to be
discharged
by death of

party
thereto,

in case of
insolvency.

Jurisdie~
tion.



2
the arbitral proceedings shall be made in that Court and in no other Court.

Limitations, _ 43. (7) The Limitation Act, 1963, shall apply to arbitrations as it applica to 36 of 1०७.
in

(2) For the purposes of this section and the Limitation Act, 1963, an arbitration shall 5 36 of 1
be deemed to have commenced on the date referred in section 21.

proceedings ४ fixed by the and
व was wich he arent spi, th Cot, 1७६ oon td 3 10

1963, for the commencement 34 of 190,
submitted.

ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN AWARDS
CHAPTER 1 20
New York Convention Awards

Definition, 44. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “foreign award” means an
arbitral award on differences between persons arising out of legal relationships, whether
contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in force in India, made on
or after the 11th day of October, 1960— 25

(क) in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration to which the
Convention set forth in the First Schedule applies, and

(6) im one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that
teelprocal provisions have becn made may, by notification in the Official Gazcte,
declare to be territories to which the said Convention applies.


a

36 of 1965.

% of 1963.

tof 1908

10

15

25

19

47, (1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time
of the application, produce before the court—

(a) the original award or a copy thereof, duly authenticated in the manner required
by the law of the country in which it was made;

(0) ४८ original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified copy thereof; and
(c) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the award is a foreign award.

(2) If the award of agreement to be produced under sub-section (/) is in a foreign
language, the party seeking to enforce the award shall produce a translation into English
certified as correct by a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party
belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as may be sufficient according to
the Jaw in force in India.

Explanation,.—tn this section and all the following sections of this Chapter, “Court”
means the principal Civil Court of origins! jurisdiction in a district, and includes the
High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction over
the subject-matter of the award if the same had been the subject matter of a suit, bat
does not include any civil court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any
Court of Small Causes.

48. (/) Enforcement of a foreign award may be refused, at the mquest of the party
against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the court proof that—

{a) partics to the agreement referred to in section 44 were, under the law
applicable to them, under some incapacity, or the said agreement is not valid under
the law to which the partics have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under
the of the country where the award was made; or

the against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of
the appointment of the arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise
unable to present his case; or

(c) the award deals with ७ difference not contemplated by of not falling within the
terms of the submission to. arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the
scope of the submission to arbitration:

Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be sepatated
from those not so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on
matters submitied to arbitration may be enforced; or

(व) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in
accordance with the agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement, was not in
accordance with the law of the country where the arbitration took place; or

(©) the award bas not yet become binding on the patties, or has been sct aside or
suspended by a competent authority of the country in which, or under the law of
which, that award was made.

(2) Enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the Court finds that—

(०) the subject-matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration
under the law of India; or

(8) the enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of India,

Evidence.

|


ES
of foreign
awards.

Appealable
onders,

Saving.

Interpre
tation.

20

Explanation.—Without prejudice to the gencrality of clause (b), it is hereby declared,
for the avoidance of any doubt, that an award is in conflict with the public policy of
India if the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption.

(3) if an application for the setting aside or suspension of the award has been made
fo a competent authority referred to in clause (९) of sub-section (/) the Court may, if
it considers it proper, adjoum the decision on the enforcement of the award and may
also, on the application of the party claiming enforcement of the award. order the other
party to give suitable security.

49. Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is enforceable under this
Chapter, the award shall be deemed to be a decree of that Court.

50, (7) ७ appeal shall lic from the order refusing to—
(a)refer the partics to arbitration under section 45;
(Byenforce a foreign award under section 48,

to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order,

(2) No second appeal shall lic from an order passed in appeal under this section, bot
nothing in this scotion shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme
Court,

$1. Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights-which any person would have
had of enforcing in India of any award or of availing himself in India of any award if
this Chapter had not been enacted.

$2. Chupiter Hl of this Part shall not apply in relation to foreign awards to which this
Chapter applies.

CHAPTER I
7] Geneva Convention Awards

53. In this Chapter “forcign award” means an arbitral award on differences relating to
matters considered as commercial under the Jaw in force in India made after the 28th
day of July, 1924,—

(a) in pursuance of an agreement for arbitration to which the Protocol set forth in
the Sccand Schedule applies, and

(d) between persons of whom one is subject to the jurisdiction of some one of
such Powers as the Centml Goverment, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions
have been made, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be partics to
the Convention set forth in the Third Schedule, and of whom the other is subject to
the jurisdiction of some other of the Powers aforesaid, and

(©) im one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that

reciprocal provisions have been made, may, by like notification, declare to be
territories to which the said Convention applies,

and for the purposes of this Chapter an award shall not be deemed to be final if any
proceedings for the purpose of contesting the validity of the award are pending in the

उ5


3 of 1908.

10

1s

35

2
country in which it was made.

54, Notwithstanding anything contained in Part I or in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, a judicial authority, on being scized of » dispute regarding a contract made
between persons & whom section 53 applies and including an arbitration agrecment,
whether referring to present of future differences, which is valid under that section and
capable of being carried into effect, shall refer the parties on the application of cither
of them or any person claiming through or under him to the decision of the arbitrators
and such reference shall not prejudice the competence of the judicial authority in case
the agreement or the arbitration cannot pmeced or becomes inoperative.

55. Any foreign award which would be enforceable under this Chapter shall be treated
as binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and may
accordingly be relied on by amy of thase persons by way of defence, set off or
otherwise in any legal proceedings in India and any references in this Chaptcr to
enforcing a forcign award shall be construcd as including references (o relying on an
award.

56. (7) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time
of application produce before the Court—

(a) the original award ot a copy thereof duly authenticated im the manner required
by the law of the country in which it was made;

(byevidence proving that the award has become final; and

(0) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the conditions mentioned in
elauses (a) sind (८) of sub-section (1) of section 57 are satisfied.

(2) Where any docutnent requiring 10 be produced under sub-section (J) is in a
foreign language, the party secking to enforce the award shall produce a translation into
English certified us correct by a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which
that party belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as may be sufficient
according to the law in force in India.

Explanation.—in this section and all the following sections of this Chapter, “Court”
means the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and includes the
High Count in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, baving jurisdiction over
the subject matter of the award if the same had been the subject-matter of 4 suit, but
does not include any civil court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any
Court of Small Causes.

57. (1)In order that a foreign award may be enforceable under this Chapter, it shall
be necessary that --

(@) the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which
is valid under the law applicable thereto;

(0) the subject-matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under
‘the law of India;

(©) the award has been made by the arbitral tribunal provided for in the
submission to arbitration or constituted in the manner sgreed upon by the parties and
in conformity with the law governing the arbitration procedure;

(७) the award has become final in the country in which it has becn mado, in the
sense that it will not be considered as such if it is open to opposition or appeal or

Power of
judicial
authority
fo refer

partics to

Foreign
awards
when

binding.

Byidence.

Conditions
for

of foreign



22

if it is proved that any proceedings for the purpose of contesting the validity of the
award are pending;

{¢) the enforcement of the award is not contrary to the public policy of the law
of India.

Explanation.—Without prejudice to the generality of clause (¢), it is hereby declared,
for she avoidance of any doubt, that an award is in conflict with the public policy of
India if the making of the awant was induced or affected by fraud or corruption,

(2) Even if the conditions laid down in sub-section (7) are fulfilled, enforcement of
the award shall be refused if the Court is satisfied that—

(@)the award has been amulled in the country in which it was made:

(2) the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of
the arbitration in sufficient time to enable him to present his case; or
that, being under a legal incapacity, he was not properly represented;

(3) If the party against whom the award his been made proves that under the law
foveming the arbitration procedure there ix ground, other than the grounds referred ta
im clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (7) and clauses (6) and
entitling him to contest the validity of the award, the Court may, if
refuse enforcement of the award ot adjourn the consideration thereof, giving such
@ reasonable time within which to have the award annulled by the competent tribsnal

Enforcement 58. Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is cnforccable under this
of foreign Chapter, the uward shall be deemed to be a decree of the Court.
awards,
Appealable 59. (1) An appeal shall lic from the order refusing —
orders,

(०)1० refer the parties to arbitration under section 54; and

(2) enforce « forcign award under section 57,

to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order.

(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, tit
othing in this section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme
Court.

Saving. $0. Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have
had of enforci in India of any award or of availing. himse! If in India of any award if
this Chapter had not been enacted,

15


E

23
PART पा
CONCILIATION

61. (1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force and unless
the parties have otherwise agreed, this Part shall apply to conciliation of disputes arising
out of legal relationship, whether contractual or not and to all proceedings relating
thereto.

(2) This Part shall not apply where by virtue of any law for the time being in force
certain disputes may not be submitted 10 conciliation.

62. (/)The party initiating conciliation shall send to the other party a written
invitation to conciliate under this Part, briefly identifying the subject of the dispute.

(2) Conciliation proceedings shall commence when the other party accepts in writing
the invitation to comciliate.

(3) If the other party rejects the invitation, there will be no conciliation proceedings.

(4) If the party initiating conciliation does not receive a reply within thirty days from
the date on which he sends the invitation, or within such other period of time as
specified in the invitation, he may elect to teat this as a rejection of the invitation to
conciliate and if he so elects, he shall inform in writing the other party accordingly.

63. (J) There shall be one conciliator unless the partics agree that there shall be two
of three conciliators.

(2) Where there is more than one conciliator, they ought, 2s a general rule, 10 act
jointly.

64. (1)Subject to sub-section (2),—

(०) in conciliation proceedings with one conciliator, the parties may agree on the
name of a sole conciliator;

(0) in conciliation proceedings with two conciliators, each party may appoint one
conciliator;

(©) in conciliation proceedings with three conciliators, cach party may appoint one
conciliator and the parties may agree on the name of the third concilistor who shall
act as the presiding comciliator,

(2) Parties may enlist the assistance of a suitable institution or person in connection
with the appointment of conciliators, and in particular,—

(@) a party may request such an institution of person to recommend the names of
suitable individuals to act as conciliator; or

(6) the partics may agree that the appointment of one or more concilistors be
made directly by such an institution or person:

Provided that in recommending ot appointing individuals to act as conciliator, the
institution.or person shall have regard to such considcrations as are likely to secure the
appointment of an independent and impartial conciliator and, with respect to a sole or
third conciliator, shall take into account the advisability of appointing a conciliator of a
nationality other than the nationalities of the parties.

Application
and scope,

Number of

a



Submission
of state-
mnents to
concilistor.

4

65.(/) The conciliator, upon his appointment, may request each party to submit to
hits brief written statement describing the gencral nature of the dispute and the points
at issue. Each party shall send a copy of such statement to the other party.

(2) The conciliatot may request cach Party to submit to him a further written
Statement of his position and the facts and grounds in support thereof, supplemented by
any. documents and other evidence that such party deems appropriate. The party shall
send a copy of such statement, documents and other evidence 10 the other party.

8) At any stage of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may request a party
to submit 10 him such additional information as he deems appropriate.

Explanarion.—In this section and all the following sections of this: Part, the term
“conciliator” applics to a sole eonciliator, two or three conciliators as the case may be,

66. The conciliaior is not bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ot the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872.

67. (1)The: conciliator shall assist the parties in an independent and impartial miunner
in their attempt 10 reach an amicable settlement of their dispute.

(2) The conciliator shall be guided by principles of objectivity, fairness and justice,
siving consideration to, among other things, the rights and obligations of the parties, the
usages of the trade concemed and the circumstances surrounding the dispute, including
any previous business practices between the parties,

(3) The conciliator may conduct the conciliation proceedings in such «manner as he
considers appropriate, taking into account the circumstances of the case, the wishes the
Partics muy express, including any request by a party that the coneiliator hear oral
Statements, and the need for a speedy settlement of the dispute,

(७) The conciliator may, at any stage of the concitiation proceedings, ‘make proposals
for a settlement of the dispute. Such proposals need not be in writing and need not be
accompanied by statement of the reasons therefor.

68. In onder to facilitate the conduct of the conciliation proceedings, the parties, or
the concitiator with the consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative asvistgnce
by & suitable instituffon or person.

69. (2) The conciliator may invite the parties to mect him or may communicate with
them orally or in writing. He may meet or communicate with the patties together or

(2) Unless the partics have agreed upon the place where mectings with the conciliator
are to be held, such place shall be determined by the contcilintor, after consultation with
the partics, having regard to the circumstances of the conciliation proceedings.

70. When the concilistor receives factual information conceming the dispute fiom a
Party, he shall disclose the substance of that information to the other purty i otder that
the other party may have the opportunity to present any explanation which he considers

Provided thet when a party gives any information to the concilistor subject 1o 4
| oe disclose

the concitiator shall not that

10

5 of 190
1 of 187

35


=

5 of 1908
1 of 1872

15

30

35

35

information to the other party,

वर. The parties shall in good faith co-operate with the conciliator and, in particular,
shall endeavour to comply with requests by the conciliator to submit written materials,
provide evidence and attend meetings.

72. Each party may, on his own initiative or at the inyitation of the concilintor,
submit to the conciliator suggestions for the settlement of the dispute,

73. (1)When it appears to the concilintor that there exist clements of a scttlement
Which may be acceptable to the parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible
settlement and submit them to the partics for their observations, After receiving the
observations of the parties, the conciliator may reformulate the terms of a possible
settlement in the light of such observations.

(2) If the parties reach agreement on a settlement of the dispute, they may draw up
and sign a written sctticment agreement. If requested by the parties, the conciliator
may draw up, or assist the partics in drawing up, the scttlement agreement.

(3) When the parties sign the settlement agrecment, it shall be final and binding on
the parties atid persons claiming under them respectively.

(4) The conciliator sha!) authenticate the settlement agreetnent and furnish ४ copy
thereof to each of the parties.

74. The settlement agreement shall have the sume status and effect as if
arbitral award on agreed terms on the substance of the dispute rendered by an arbitral
tribunal under section 30.

75. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the concifiator and the parties shall keep confidential all matters relating to the
conciliation proceedings. Confidentiality shall extend.also to the settlement agreement,
except where its disclosure is necessary for purposes of implementation and
enforcement.

76. The conciliation proceedings shall be terminated—

(०) by the signing of the settlement agreement by the parties, on the date of the
agreement; or

(b) by a written declaration of the conciliator, after consultation with the parties,
to the effect that further efforts at conciliation are no longer justified, on the date of
the declaration; or

(ले by = written declaration of the parties addressed. to the concillator to the effect
that the conciliation proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration; or

(d) by a written declaration of a party to the other party and the conciliator, if
appointed, to the effect thal the conciliation proceedings are terminated, on the date
of the declaration.



| Remi

Resort to 77. The parties shall not initiate, during the conciliation proceedings, any arbitral or
arbitral or Judicial proceedings in respect of a dispute that is the subject matter of the conciliation
jodicial Proceedings except that a party may initiate arbitral or judicial proocedings where. in his
Proceedings. opinion, such proceedings are necessary for preserving his rights

Costs. 78. (J)Upou tennination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall fix the $
costs of the conciliation and give written notice thereof to the partics.

(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), “costs” means reasonable costs relating 10--

(the fee and expenses of the conciliaior and witnesses requested by the
concilistor with the consent of the parties;

(0) any expert advice requested by the concitintor with the consent of the patties; 10

(C) any assistance provided pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 64
and scetion 68;

(2) say other expenses incurred in conncetion with the conciliation proceedings
and the settlement agreement.

G) The costs shall be bome equally by the parties unless the settlement agreement 15
provides for a different apportionment. All other expenses incurred by a party shall be

Deposits. 79. (1) The concilistor may direct each party to deposit an equal amount as an
tivance for the: costs referred 10 in sub-section (2) of section 78 which he expects will
be incurred. 20

(2) During the course of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may direct
supplementary in am equal amount from cach party.

tics thn day Scents under sub sections (1) and (2) ate ४०९ pald io fall by beth
parties within thirty conciliator may suspend the proceedings or may make a
written declaration of termination of the proceedings to the parties, effective on the dae 25
of that "

(0 Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall render an
शिया to the partics of the deposits received and shall return any unoxpended
parties.

balance to the
Role of 80. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties,— 30
conciliator
in other Oe comes arg trv 68 सका Of as @ Or counsel
Proceedings. of a party in any arbitral or judici Proceeding in respect of a dispute that is the
subject of the conciliation proceedings;
{0) the concilistor shall not be presented by the parties as-a witness in any arbitral
or Proceedings. 35

Peron बट whet or em pote viene i ial or jodi
bility Proceedings, whether or not such proceeilin, relate to the dispute that the subject of
| heaped the concilintion proceedings, — .

proceedings, (@) views expressed ot suggestions made by the other ४ im respect of a
Possible settlement of the dispute; = 40


|

6 of 1937.
¥ of 1980, 30
45 of 1961.

27

(#) admissions made by the other party in the course of the conciliation
proceedings;

(०) propesals made by the conciliator,

(d) the fact that the other party had indicated his willingness to accept a proposal
for settlement made by the conciliator.

PART IV

SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS

@

82, The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act as to all proceedin;
the Court under this Act.

cf
Hi

I

H
ie



=_==

28
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 44)
CONVENTION ON THE RECOGNITION AND ENFORCEMENT OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS

ARTICLE 1

2. The term “arbitral awards” shall include not only awards made by arbitrators 10

which may arise between them in respect of defined legal relationship, whether
contractual or not, concerning a subject-matter capable of settlement by arbitration.

2, पाए "agreement in writing” shall include an arbittal clause 1५ ॥ contract or 25
उपज agrecment, signed by the parties or contained in an exchange जी oe

telegrams.
3. The court of a Contracting State, when scized of an action in a matter in respect
of which the parties have made an agreement within the ‘of this article, shall,

35

hl ARTICLE iv

il 1. गढ़ के the recognition and enforcement mentioned in the preceding article, the 40
५. ॥ हे (22007 for recognition and enforcement shall, at the time of the "जी
supply; —



15

35

29
(a) the duly authenticated original award or a duly certified copy thereof;
(5) the originil agreement referred to in article Ul or a duly certified copy thereof,

2. If the said award or agreement is not made in an official language of the country
in which the award is relied upon, the party applying for recognition and enforcement
of the award shall produce a translation of these documents into such language. The
translation shall be certified by an official or sworm translator or by a diplomatic or
consular agent.

ARTICLE V

1. Recognition and enforcement of the award may be refused, at the request of the
party against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the competent authority
where the recognition and enforcement is sought, proof that—

(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in article I] were, under the law

applicable to them, under some incapacity, or the said agreement is not valid under
the liw to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under
the law of the country where the award was made; or

(8) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of
the appointment of the arbitrator or of the arbitration proceedings or was otherwise
unable to present his case; or

(© the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the
terms of the submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the
scope of the submission to arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on matters
submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not so submitted, that part of the
award which contains decisions on matters submitted to arbitration may be recognised
and enforced; or

(6) the composition of the arbitral suthority or the arbitral procedure was not in
accordance with the agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement, was not in
accordance with the law of the country where the arbitration took place; or

(८) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or
suspended by a competent authority of the country in which, or under the law of
which, thit award was made.

2. Recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the
competent authority in the country where recognition and enforcement is sought finds
that—

(०) the subject-matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration
under the law of that country; or

(8) the recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public
policy of that country.


E

ARTICLE Vil

be relied upon.

2. The Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses of 1923 and the Geneva Convention
on the Execution of Foreign Arbitral Awards of 1927 shall cease to have effect between
Comtmcting States on their becoming bound and to the extent that they become bound
by this Convention.

ARTICLE VIII

1. This Convention shall be open until 3ist December, 1958 for signature on behalf

Member of the United Nations and also on behalf of any other State which is

or hereafter becomes member of any specialised agehey of the United Nations, or which

is of hereaficr becomes a party to the Statute of the International Court of Justice, or

any other State to which an invitation has becn addressed by the General Asscmbly of
the United Nations.

2. This Convention shall be ratified and the instrument of ratification shall be
deposited with the Seeretery-Gencral of the United Nations.

ARTICLE 1X

1. This Convention shall be open for accession to all States referred to in article
vu.

2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the
Sceretary-General of the United Nations,

ARTICLE X

1. Any State may, at the time of signature, ratification or accession, declare that this
Convention shall extend to all or any of the territories for the international relations of
which it is responsible, Such a declaration shall take effect when the Convention enter
into force for the State concemed.

2. Al any time thereafter any such extension shall be made by notification addressed
to ‘the ‘Secretary-General of the United Nations and shall take effect as from the
nineticth day after the day of receipt by the Secretary-Gencral of the United Nations of
this notification, or as from the date of entry into force of the Convention for the State
concemed, whichever is the later.

3, With respect to those territories to which this Convention is not extended at the
time of signature, ratification ot accession, cach State concemed shall consider the
Possibility of taking the necessary steps in order to extend the application of this
Convention to such territories, subject, where necessary for constitutional reasons, to the
consent of the Governments of such tertitorics.

20

35


2

15

20

31
ARTICLE XI
In the case of o federal or non-unitary State, the following provisions shall apply:—

(a) with respect of those articles of this Convention that come within the
legisiative jurisdiction of the federal authority, the obligations of the federal
Government shall to this extent be the same as those of Contracting States which are
not federal States;

(0) with respect to these articles of this Convention that come within the
legislative jurisdiction of constituent States or provinces which are not, under the
constitutional system of the federation, bound to take legislative action, the federal
Government shall bring such articles with ॥ favourable recommendation to the notice
of the appropriate authorities of constituent States or provinces at the carliest possible

i

(c) a federal State Party to chis Convention shall, at the nmquest of any other
Contracting State transmitted through the Sceretary-General of the United Nations,
supply a statement of the law and prictice of the federation and its constituent units
in regard to any particular provision of this Convention, showing the extent to which
effect has been given to that provision by legislative or other action.

ARTICLE Xil

2. For cach State ratifying or acceding to this Convention after the deposit of the
third instrument of ratification or accession, this Convention shall cater into farce on the
nineticth day after deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification or accession.

ARTICLE Xill

1. Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by a written notification (0
the Sccretary-Gencral of the United Nations, Denunciation shall take effect one year

हि
3
g
E |
हर
z

ARTICLE XIV

A Contracting State shall not be entitled to avail itself of the present Convention
against other Contracting States except to the extent that it is itself bound to apply the


|

32
ARTICLE XV

The Secretury-General of the United Nations shall notify the States contemplated in
article VIII of the following;—

(@) signatures and rutifications in accordance with article VII;
(0) accessions in accordance with article EX; 5
(० deelarations and notifications under articles 1, X and XI;

(4) the date upon which this Convention enters into force in accordance with
article XI;

(९) denunciations and notifications in accordance with article जा.
| i ARTICLE XVI 10

1. This Convention, af which the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish
texts shall be equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nations,

2. The Scerctary-General of the United Nations shall transmit a certified copy of this
Convention to the States contemplated in article XIU.

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 15
1 (See section 53)
PROTOCOL ON ARBITRATION CLAUSES

‘The undersigned, being duly authorised, declare that they accept, on behalf of the
countries which they represent, the following provisions: —

1, ich of the Contracting States recognises the validity of an agreement whether 20
telating to existing or future differences between parties subject respectively to the
jurisdiction of different Contracting States by which the parties to a contract agree to
submit to arbitration all or any differences that may arise in connection with such
arbitration लक {© commercial matters or to any other matter capable of wettheren,

arbitration, Whether or not the arbitration is to take place in a country te whan, 25

| jurisdiction none of the parties is subject,

Procedure, including the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, shall
Of the parties and by the law of the country in whose territory

States agree to facilitate all steps in the procedure which require to 35
their own lcrtitorics, in accordance with the provisions of their law



5

35

2 onan

33

3. Buch Contracting State undertakes to ensure the execution by its authorities and
in accordance with the provisions of its national laws cof arbitral awards made in its

4. The Tribunals of the Contracting Parties, on being seized of a dispute regarding
3 contract made between persons 10 whom Article 1 applics and including an Arbitration
Agrtecment whether referring to present or future differences which is valid in virtue of
the said article and capable of being carried into effect, shall refer the parties on the
application of either of them to the decision of the Arbitrators.

Such reference shall not prejudice the competence of the judicial tribunals in case the
agreement of the arbitration cannot proceed or becomes inoperative.

5, ‘The present Protocol, which shall remain open for signature by all States, shall be
ratified. The ratification shall be deposited as soon a possible with the Secretary-
General of the League of Nations, who shall notify such deposit to all the Signatory
States.

6. The present Protocol will come into force as soon ay two utifications have been
deposited, Thereafter it will take effect, in the case of cach Contracting State, ove
month after the notification by the Sccretary-General of the deposit of its ratification.

7. The present Protocol may be denounced by any Contracting State on giving one
year's notice. Denunciation shall be effected by a notification addressed ‘to the
Sceretary-General of the League, who will immediately transmit copies of such
notification to all the other Signatory States and inform them of the date on which it
was reecived. "The denunciation shall take cffeet one year after the date on which it
was notified to the Secretary-Genenal, and shall operate only in respect of the notifying
State,

8. ‘The Contracting States may declare that their acceptance of the present Protocol
does not include any of all of the undermentioned territories: that is to say, their
colonies, overseas possessions of territories, protectorates or the territories over which
they exercise a mandate.

‘The said States may subsequently adhere separaicly on behalf of any territory thos
excluded. ‘The Sectetary-Genetal of the League of Nations shall be informed as soon
as possible of such adhesions, He shall notify such adhesions to all Signatory States.
They will take effect one month after the notification by the Secretary-General to all
Signatory States.

The Contracting States may also denounce the Protocol separately on behalf of any
of the territories referred to above, Article 7 applies to such denunciation.

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(566 section 53)

CONVENTION OF THE EXECUTION OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS

Article 1.--(1) In the territories of any High Coptracting Party to which the present
Convention applies, an arbitral award made in persuance of an agreement, whether
relating to existing or future differences (hereinafter called "a submission to arbitration")
covered by the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses opended at Geneva on September 24th,



Ez Convention applics and between Persons who are subject to the jurisdiction of
one of the High Contracting Parties.

(2) To obtain such meognition of enforcement, it shall, further, be hecessary;—

(0 {hat the award bas been made in pursuance of ७ submission to arbitration
which is valid under the law applicable thereto;

(4) that the subject-matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration
tinder the law of the country in which the award is sought to be relied oper

{<) at the award has been made by the Arbitral Tribunal provided for in the
jn sion to arbitration or constituted in the manncr agreed upon by the 1
in conformity with the law governing the arbitration Procedure;

# 8222 ६ cassation (in the countries where such formas of procelure वा. eit

vary aces that any proceedings for the purpose of contcsting the validity of ik”
award are pending;

(6) Sethe Tecognition or enforcement of the award is not contrary to the public
PoUey oF to the principles of the law of the country in which it sought to teens
upon.

i 12 20 46 PITY against whom itis sought to use the award wis ot given notice
that berms ation proceedings insufficient time to enable him to prescat bs ems oe
thet, being under a legal incapacity, he was not properly represeaedh,

Se the teem and does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling
wana, ० terms of the submission ७ arbitration or that It conten, eon ne
matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration,

ae coven Barty बा whom the award has been made proves that, under
refed गा 8 the arbitration procedure, there is «ground, thet thes Un oyna
{> ih एव 12 im 40५९ 160) and (0, and Article 200) and (०), ening hit ns हा
| Validity of the award in ७ Court of Law, the

=

20

35


5

30

35

35

Article 4.—The party relying upon an award or claiming its enforcement must supply,
in particular: —

1 (/) the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated, according to the
requirements of the law of the country in which it was made;

(2) documentary of other evidence to prove that the award bas become final, in
the sense defined in Article 1 (d), in the country in which it was made;

(3) when necessary, documentary or other evidence to prove that the conditions
37 ll tal 1, paragraph (1) und paragraph (2) (a) and (०), have been

A translation of the award and of the other documents mentioned in this Article into
the official language of the country where the uwurd is sought to be relied upon may
be demanded. Such translations must be certified correet by a diplomatic or consular
agent of the country 10 which the party who secks to rely upon the award belongs or
by a swom translator of the country where the awand is sought to be relied upon.

Article $.—'The provisions of the above Articles shall not deprive any interested party
of the right of availing himself of an arbitral award in the manner and to the extent
allowed by the law or the treafies of the country where such award is sought to be
relied upon.

Article 6.—The present Convention applies only to arbitral awards made after the
coming into force of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses opened at Geneva on
September 24th, 1923.

Article 7,—The present Convention, which will remain open to the signature of all
the signatories of the Protocol of 1923 on Arbitration Clauses, shall be ratified.

it may be ratified only on behalf of those Members of the League of Nations and
Non-Member States on whose behalf the Protocol of 1923 shall have been ratified.

Ratification shall be deposited as soon ax possible with the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations, who will notify such deposit to all the signatories.

Article 8.—The present Convention shall come into force three mouths after it shall
have been ratified on behalf of two High Contracting Parties. Thereafter, it shall take
effect, in the case of cach High Contracting Party, three months after the deposit of the
tatification om Its behalf with the Seeretary-General of the League of Nations.

Article 9,—The present Convention may be denounced on behalf of any Member of
the League or Non-Member State, Denuncistion shall be notified in writing to the
Sceretary-General of the League of Nations, who will immediately send a copy thereof,
certified to be in confurmity with the notifications, to all the other Contracting Parties,
at the same time informing them of the date on which he received it,

The denunciation shall come into force only in respect of the High Contracting Party
which shall have notified it and one year after such notification shall haye reached the
Scerctary-General of the League of Nations.

The denunciation of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses shall entail, ipso facto, the
detuneciation of the present Convention.


si

36
Article 10.—The present Convention does not apply to the colonics, Protectoraics or
territories under suzerainty or mandate of any High Contracting Party unless they am
specially mentioned.

‘The application of this Convention to one or more of such colonies, protectorates

Of territories to which the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses opened at Gencva on 5

September 24th, 1923, applies, can be effected at any time by means of a declaration
addressed to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations by one of the High

Such declaration shall take effect three months after the deposit thereof.
The High Contracting Parties can at any time denounce the Convention for all or any

of the Colonics, Protectorates or territories referred to above. Article 9 hereof applied
to such denunciation,

Article 11.—A certified copy of the present Convention shall be transmitted by the
Sceretary-General ofthe League of Nations to every Member of the League of Nations
and to every Non-Member State which signs the same.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The law on atbitration in India is at present substantially contained in three enactments, namely, the
=
snd Enforcement) Act, 1961. It is widely felt that the 1940 Act, which contains the general law of arbitration,
fas become outdated. The Law Commission of India, several representative bodies of wade and industry and
experts in the field of arbitration have proposed amendments to this Act to make it more responsive to

requirements, It is also recognised that our cconcmic reforms may not become fully effective if

aibitretion, worldwide
seitlement of disputes. There is, however, no general law on the subject in India.

2. The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) adopted in 1985 the Model
Law on International Commercial Arbitration. The General Assembly of the United Nations has recommended
‘hat all countries give due consideration to the said Model Law, in view of the desirability of uniformity of the
Jew of arbitral procedures and the specific needs of international commercial arbitration practice, The UNCITRAL
also adopted in 1980 a set of Conciliation Rules. The General Assembly of the Untied Nations has recommended
the use of these Rules in cases where the disputes arise in the context of international commercial relations and
the parties seck amicable settlement of their disputes by recourse to conciliation: “An important feature of the
said UNCITRAL Model Law and Rules is that they have harmonised concepts.on arbitration and conciliation of
different legal systems of the world and thus contain provisions which are designed for universal application.

3. Though the said UNCITRAL Model Law and Rules are intended to deal with international commercial
arbitration and conciliation, they could, with appropriate modifications, serve as a model for legislation on
domestic arbitration and conciliation. The present Bill sceks to consolidate and amend the law relating to
domestic arbitration, international commercial arbitration, enforcement of foreign arbitral awards and to define the
law relating to conciliation, taking into account the 5४4 UNCITRAL Mode! Law and Rules,

4. The main objectives of the Bill are as under: —

(6). ४७ comprebensively cover international commercial arbitration and conciliation as also domestic
arbitration and conciliation;

(ii) to make provision for an arbitral procedure which is fair, efficient and capable of meeting the
needs of the specific arbitration;

Gil) ७ provide that the arbitral tribunal gives reasons for its arbitral awand;
(iv) to ensure that the arbitral tribunal remains within the limits of its jurisdiction;
(v) to minimise the supervisory role of courts in the arbitral process;

(vi) to permit an arbitral tribunal to use mediation, conciliation or other procedures during the arbitral
proceedings to encourage settlement of disputes;

(vil) to provide that every final arbitral award is enforced in the same manner as if it were a decree
the court;

(viii) to provide that 3 settlement agreement reached by the parties as a result of conciliation
proceedings will have the sume status and effect as an arbitral award on agreed terms on the substance of
the dispute rendered by an arbitral tribunal; and

(ix) to provide that, for purposes of enforcement of forcign awards, every arbitral award made in a
country to which one of the two international Conventions relating to forcign arbitral awards to which India
is a party applies, will be treated as a foreign award.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

ae 5 eae Deum;
The &tk May, 1995. प्र. ९. BHARDWAJ,



[3 on Clauses
Clause 1 provides for the short title, extent and commencement.
Clause 2 defines the various words and expressions used in Part 1 of the Bill.
Clause 3 deals with the procedure for delivery and receipt of communication by the parties.

Clause 4. sets oat the cireumstances under which the right of a party to object to arbitration shal
deemed to have been waived,

Clause 5 lays down the extent of judicial intervention in arbitral proceedings.

Clause 6 provides that the parties, or the arbitral tribunal with the consent of the parties, may atrangy
administrative assistance by a suitable institution or person for facilitating the conduct of arbitral proceedir

Clause 7 lays down the requirements of an arbitration agreement.
Clause है provides for the power of judicial authorities to refer matters to arbitration.

Clause 9 empower parties to apply to Court for interim measures of protection before or during ari
proceedings.

Clause 10 provides that the parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators failing which the art
tribunal will consist of a sole arbitrator.

Clause 11. provides for the procedure for appointment of arbitrators.

Clause 12 provides for the grounds for challenge of an sppointed arbitrator.

Clause 13 deals with the procedure for the challenge of arbitrator.

Clause 14 provides for termination of the mandate of an arbitrator under certain circumstances,
Clause 15 provides for termination of mandate and substitution of arbitrators.

Clause 16 empowers the arbitral tribunal to give ruling on its own jurisdiction.

Clause 17 empowers the arbitral tribunal to order a party to take interim messures of protection
request being made to it.

Clause 18 provides that the partics to the arbitration shall be treated with equality and each party
be given full opportunity fo present his case.

Clause 19 provides for determination of niles of procedure for conduct of arbitral proceedings. V
the arbitral tribunal is not bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
partics are given freedom to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral tribunal in conductin
proceedings.

Clause 20 deals with the question of detcrnining the place of arbitration, While the parties are |
freedom to agree on the place of arbitration, where they fail to agree, the place of arbitration will be detern
by the arbitral wibunal having regard to the citcumstances of the case, including the convenience of the pa

Clause 21 deals with the date of commencement of arbitral proceedings.

Clause 22 deals with the language to be used in arbitral proceedings. While the parties have freedo
agtee upon the language or languages to be used in arbitral proceedings, if they fail to do so, the arbitral tril
will determine the language or languages to be used in the arbitral proceedings.

Clause 23 provides for filing of statement of claims and defence by the parties within the period of
agreed upon by the parties theniselves or determined by the arbitral tribunal.

38


39
Clause 24 provides for bearings and writicn proceedings before the arbitral tribunal.
Clause 25 deals with the consequences of default of # party during arbitral proceedings.
Clause 26 provides for appointment of experts by arbitral tribunal.

shall be | Clause 27 provides for assistance by Courts in wking evidence.
Clause 28 deals with the rules applicable to the substance of the dispute in domestic and international
asbitrations.
ange for |

edin, Clause 29 provides for decisiov-making by arbitrators and provides that unless the parties have otherwise
Es agreed, in all arbitral proceedings with more than one arbitrator, decision-making by arbitral wibunal shall be
by a majority of all its members.

Clause 30 provides for settlement of disputes during arbitral proceedings by using mediation, conciliation,
ole.

seen Clause 31. 08% down the requirements of the form and contents of arbitral award.
Glause 32 lays down the conditions and procedure for termination of arbiiral proceedings,

Clause 33 empowers the arbitral tribunal to make correetions in or give interpretations of awards and for
making additional awards under certain conditions.

Clause 34 deals with applications for setting aside an arbitral award.

Clause 35 provides that an arbitral award shall be final and binding on the parties and persons claiming
under them subject to the provisions of Part 1.

Clause 36 provides that where the time for making an application to set aside an arbitral award has
expired, or where such application has been refused by Court, the award shall be enforced as if it were a decreo
of the Court.

Clause 37 provides that an appeal shall lic from certain orders. No second appeal will lie from an order
$%&&% passed in an uppeal, However, the right to appeal to the Supreme Court is not affected.
Clause 38 deals with deposits to be made by the parties in relation to arbitral proceedings. ‘The arbitral
any stall tribunal is empowered to fix the amount of deposit or supplementary deposits as an advance for the costs of
arbitration.

Clause 39 provides for the arbitral tribunal's lien on the award for any unpaid costs of arbitration.

& Whik
one Clause 40 provides that an arbitration agreement shall not be discharged by the death of any party.
Clause 41 provides for cases of insolvency.
ib ir Clause 42 lays down that only the Couurt in which an application with respect 10 an arbitration agreement
prpinpr has been made will have jurisdiction over subsequent proceedings arising out of that agreement.
Clause 43 provides that the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to arbitrations as it applies
to proceedings in Court.
8 | Clause 44° defines “foreign award” for purposes of Chapter 1 of Part Il.
DC aaa makes it mandatory for any judicial authority when seized of an action in a matter in respect
Ailes of which an arbitration agreement subsists to refer parties to arbitration.

Clause 46 provides that a foreign award which is enforceable under Chapter 1 of Part वी shall be binding
for all purposes.



—

=

Clause 47 provides for evidence to be produced before the Court by 4 party secking to enforce a foreig:
arbitral award.

Clause 48 lays down the conditions that are required to be satisfied for enforcement of a foreign award

Clause 49 Provides that where the Court ix satisfied that the forcign award is enforceable, the award shal
be deemed to be a decree of that Court,

Clause 50 provides for orders which are sppealable under Chapter 1 of Part प्र.

Clause 51. saves the rights of persons for enforcing uny uward in India which would have existed i
Chapter 1 of Patt 11 had not been enacted,

Clause 52. excludes applicability of Chapter I of Part IT in relation to foreign awards covered by Chapter
1 of Part 11.

Clause $3 detines “forcign award” for Purposes of Chapter वा of Part Il

Clause 54. makes it mandatory for any judicial authority when scixed of a dispute regarding « contract
made between parties to whom clause $3 applies, to refer the partics to arbitration.

Clause 55. provides that a foreign award which is enforceable under Chapter II of Part I shall be binding
for all purposes,

Clause 56 provides for evidence to be produced before a Court by a patty seeking to enforce a forcign
arbitral award.

Clause 57 lays down the conditions that are required to be satisfied for enforcement of a foreign award.

Clause 58 provides that where the Court is satisfied that the forcign award is enforceable, the award shall
be deemed to be a deerpe of that Court.

Clause 59 Provides for onders which are sppealable under Chapter If of Purt ता.

Clause 60 saves the rights of persons for enforcing any award in India which would have existed if Chapter
I of Part I had not been enacted,

Clause 61 deals with application and scope of Part i,

Clause 62 deaks with the commencement of conciliation proceedings.

Clause 63 provides for the number of conciliators to be appointed in the conciliation proceedings.

Clause 64 provides for the appointneat of concilistors.

Clause 65 deals with submission of statements to conciliator,

Clause 66 provides that the conciliator is not bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 in conciliation proceedings,

Clause 67 provides for the role of concilistors in wssisting the parties,

Clause 68 provides that either of the Parties or the conciliator with the consent of the parties can make
arrangement for any administrative assistance by suitable institution or person.

Clause 9 provides for communication between the conciliator and the parties.

Clause 70 Provides that the concilisior shall disclose the substance of information received from one party
to the other party.

Clause 71 Prods tat the arcs allt good fit comopene withthe consi and slo shall |


Ea

d if

dian

al
endeavour to comply with the requests of the conciliator to submit written materials, provide evidence,cte-

Clause 72 provides that cach party cither on his own or at the invitation of the conciliator, try to submit
to the conciliator suggestions for the settlement of the dispute.

Clause 73 provides for settlement agreement to be drawn up by the conciliator and the procedure therefor,

Clause 74 provides for status and effect of settlement agreement.

Clause 75 provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the conciliatot and the partics shall keep confidentiality of all matters relating to conciliation proceedings,

Clause 76, deals with termination of conciliation proceedings.

Clause Ji spear te pats to he moan pve SS crag cae hae och
proceedings respect of the dispute which is the subject matter of the conciliation, except in cases where such
proceedings ure necessary for preserving a party's rights.

Clause 78 provides for the costs of conciliation proceedings.
Clause 79 deals with deposits to be made by parties for the expenses incurred during conciliation
proceedings.

Clause 80 provides that both the parties and the conciliator shall undertake that the conciliator will not be
allowed to act either as an arbitrator or as a representative or axa counsel of a party in any arbitral or judicial
proceeding which is the subject matter of the conciliation.

Clause 81 deals with admissibility of evidence in other proceedings.

Clause 82 etnpowers the High Court to make rules consistent with the provisions of the Bill in relation to
all proceedings before it. ‘

Clause 83 empowers the Central Government to make provisions for removing any difficulty arising in
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 84 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill,

Clause 85 provides for repeal of the Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937, the Arbitration Ad,
1940 and the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961 and for the continued applicability of
the repealed enactments to proceedings commenced before such repeal unless otherwise agreed by the parties.

‘The First Schedule reproduces the provisions of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of

Arbitral Awards, 1958. "The Sccond Schedule reproduces the text of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses

concluded in 1934. The Third Schedule contains the provisions of the Convention on the Execution of Forcign
Arbitral Awards, 1937.



a

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clave Ht of the 1 empowers the Chief 1७10७ of High Comt te tnnke sitet) scheme nee fre may deen
appropriate for dealing with matters of appointincnt of arbitrators, Clause 82 of the Bill empowers the High
Coutt 10 make rules with regard to all proceedings before the court under the Bill. Clouse 84 empowers tho
Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill,

2. The matters In respect of which the rcheme or roles may be made, are matters of procedure and
administrative detail, The delegation of Iegisintive powers is, therefore, of ॥ normal charmeter.

42


E

RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

consolidate and atnend the Iaw relating to domestic arbitration, international
commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards as also to define

the law relating to conciliation and for matters connected thetewith or Incidental
thereto.

(Shri TLR, Bhardwaj, Minister of Stare in the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs)