RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973.

(Shri P. R. Kumaramangalam, Minister of Mines and Minerals and Power)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—317RS—19.04.2000.


ASS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXX of 2000

THE TRADE UNIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Trade Unions Act, 1926.
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. (1) This Act may be called the Trade Unions (Amendment) Act, 2000.

(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

16 of 1926. 2. In section 4 of the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in sub-section (1), the following provisos shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

“Provided that no Trade Union of workmen shall be registered unless at least
ten per cent. or one hundred of the workmen, whichever is less, engaged or employed
in the establishment or industry with which it is connected are the members of such
Trade Union on the date of making of application for registration:

Provided further that no Trade Union of workmen shall be registered unless it
has on the date of making application not less than seven persons as its members, who
are workmen engaged or employed in the establishment or industry with which it is
connected.”


2

Amendment of 3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), after clause (a), the following
section 5. clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(aa) in the case of a Trade Union of workmen, the names, occupations and
addresses of the place of work of the members of the Trade Union making the

application.” .
Amendment of 4. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
section 6.
6 (a) for clause (ee), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(ee) the payment of a minimum subscription by members of the Trade

Union which shall not be less than—
(i one runge per annum for rural workers;
(ii) threg rupees per annum for workers in other unorganised sectors;
and
(iii) twelve rupees per annum for workers in any other case.”;
(9) in clause (h), for the word “appointed”, the word “elected” shall be
substituted;
(c) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —

“(hh) the duration of period being not more than three years, for which
the members of the executive and other office-bearers of the Trade Union shall
be elected;”.

Insertion of new 5. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
section 9A. namely:—

Minimum re-

quirement about "QA. A registered Trade Union of workmen shall at all times continue to have

membership of not less than ten per cent. or one hundred of the workmen, whichever is less, subject

8 Trade Union. to a minimum of seven, engaged or employed in an establishment or industry with
which it is connected, as its members.”.
Amendment of 6. In section 10 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the following clause shall be

section 10. inserted, namely:—
"(c) if the Registrar is satisfied that a registered Trade Union of workmen ceases
to have the requisite number of members;”.
Amendment of 7. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (a), the following
section 11. clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) where the head office is situated in an area, falling within the jurisdiction
of a Labour Court or an Industrial Tribunal, to that Court or Tribunal, as the case may

be;”.
Substitution of 8. For section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
nw Section for namely:—
section 22,
Proportion of “22. (1) Not less than one-half of the total number of the office-bearers of

office-bearers every registered Trade Waion in an unorganised sector shall be persons actually engaged
tobe conested or employed in an industry with which the Trade Union is connected:
wih te indus Provided that the appropriate Government may, by special or general order,
है declare that the provisions of this section shall not apply te any Trade Union or class
of Trade Unions specified in the order.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “unorganised sector” means
any sector which the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), all office-bearers of a registered
Trade Union, except not more than one-third of the total number of the office-bearers
or five, whichever is less, shall be persons actually engaged or employed in the
=stablishment or industry with which the Trade Union is connected.


3

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, an employee who has re-
tired or has been retrenched shall not be construed as outsider for the purpose of
holding an office in a Trade Union.

(3) No member of the Council of Ministers or a person holding an office of
profit (not being an engagement or employment in an establishment or industry with
which the Trade Union is connected), in the Union or a State, shall be a member of
the executive or other office-bearer of a registered Trade Union.”.

9. In section 29 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(3) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub-section (/) of
section 22, and every regulation made by it under sub-section (/), shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the notifi-
cation or regulation, or both Houses agree that the notification or regulation should not be
made; the notification or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notifica-
tion or regulation.

(4) Every notification made by the State Government under sub-section (1) of sec-

tion 22 and every regulation made by it under sub-section (/) shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.”.

of section 29.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Trade Unions Act, 1926 provides for registration of Trade Unions of employers
and workmen. A Bill, namely, the Trade Unions and Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill,
1988 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha to amend, inter alia, the Trade Unions Act, 1926.
The said Bill was withdrawn in 1990 and a Bipartite Committee with a term of reference
“formulation of specific proposals for a new Industrial Relations Bill” comprising
representatives of employers’ organisations and Central Trade Unions was constituted under
the Chairmanship of Shri G. Ramanujam. The Committee submitted its report in October,
1990.

2. Based on the recommendations of the Ramanujam Committee and subsequent
deliberations held thereon, a Bill for amending the Trade Unions Act, 1926 was drawn up.
The Bill, at the introduction stage was agreed to be referred to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Labour and Welfare. The proposals were also-referred to the Bipartite
Committee set up by the Government for formulation of a Comprehensive Industrial Relations
Law with a view to soliciting detailed views of labour on the proposed amendments. The
workers’ group of the Bipartite Committee representing various Central Trade Union
Organisations submitted its recommendations to the Government.

3. The provisions of the present Bill with minor amendments are based upon the
recommendations made by the Trade Union Organisations. The thrust of the
recommendations is aimed at reducing multiplicity of the Trade Unions, promoting internal
democracy, rank and file leadership of Trade Unions and facilitating their orderly growth
and regulation.

4. The important provisions of the Bill are as under:—

(0 section 4 is being amended with a view to making an additional provision
that no Trade Union of workmen shall be registered unless at least ten per cent. or one
hundred, whichever is less, of workmen engaged or employed in the establishment or
industry with which it is connected, are on the date of filing the application for
registration, the members of such Trade Union and in no case a Union shall be registered
without a minimum strength of seven members;

(ii) section 6 of the Bill may be modified to incorporate the minimum rates of
subscription of membership for rural workers and workers in the unorganised sector;

(iii) section 9A has also been inserted to provide that a registered Trade Union
of workmen shall at all times continue to have not less than ten per cent. or one
hundred of the workmen, whichever is less, subject to a minimum of seven, engaged
oremployed in an establishment or industry with which it is concerned, as its members;

(iv) section 11 of the Trade Unions Act may be amended to provide for an
appeal before the Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court in case of non-registration/
restoration of registration;

(v) section 22 of the Act will be substituted, so that all office-bearers of a
registered Trade Union, except not more than one-third of the total number of office-
bearers or five, whichever is less, shall be persons actually engaged or employed in
the establishment or industry with which the Trade Union is connected. The employees
who have retired or have been retrenched shall not be construed as outsiders for the
purpose of holding an office in a Trade Union. In case of unorganised sector, however,
the present provision of section 22 of the Act would continue to be applicable.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Dewi;
The 11th April, 2000. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to specify a sector as an
unorganised sector, by notification, for the purposes of this Bill. Clause 9 of the Bill envisages
that every notification made by the Central Government or the State Government, as the
case may be, under clause 8 shall be laid as soon as_may be, after it is made before each
House of Parliament and before the State Legislature, concerned.

2. The matters in respect of which the notifications may be issued under the above
mentioned provision relate to administrative detail and procedure. The delegation of the
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


Mode of
fegistration.

Application
for registra-

Provision to be

the rules of a
Trade Union.

of registration.

to be con-
nected with the
industry.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE TRADE Unions Act, 1926
(16 oF 1926)

* * * * *

4. (1) Any seven or more members of a Trade Union may, by subscribing their names
to the rules of the Trade Union and by otherwise complying with the provisions of this Act
with respect to registration, apply for registration of the Trade Union under this Act.

* * * . * *
5. (1) Every application for registration of a Trade Union shall be made to the Regis-

trar, and shall be accompanied by a copy of the rules of the Trade Union and a statement of
the following particulars, namely:—

* * * * *
6. A Trade Union shall not be entitled to registration under this Act, unless the execu-

tive thereof is constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and the rules
thereof provide for the following matters, namely: —

* * * * *
(ee) the payment of a subscription by members of the Trade Union which shall
be not less than twenty-five naye paise per month per member;
* * * * *
(A) the manner in which the members of the executive and the other office-
bearers of the Trade Union shall be appointed and removed;

* * * * *

10. A certificate or registration of Trade Union may be withdrawn or cancelled by
the Registrar—

* * * * *

11. (7) Any person aggrieved by any refusal of the Registrar to register a Trade Union
or by the withdrawal or cancellation of a certificate of registration may, within such period
as may be prescribed, appeal,—

* * * * *

22. Not less than one-half of the total number of the office-bearers of every registered
Trade Union shall be persons actually engaged or employed in an industry with which the
Trade Union is connected:

Provided that the appropriate Government may, by special or general order, declare
that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any Trade Union or class of Trade
Unions specified in the order.

* * * * *