the Gazette of India,
set in ? Il - Section 1,
78: 2500 March, 1974 as Act Bill No. XXX-F of 1969

tne 2

=

ay

|ATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF
OLLUTION) BILL, 1974

(As PASSED BY THE Houses oF PARLIAMENT}


Blt No. XxX-F of 196,

THE WATER (PREVENTION an CONTROL =

POLLUTION) BIL,

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER I
Prewrmiary
1.-Short title, application and commencement,
2, Definitions. ;

CHAPTER It

Tue CENTRAL AND STATE BOARDS FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF WATER

POLLUTION
3. Constitution of Central Board.
4, Constitution of State Boards.
5. Terms and conditions of service of members,
6, Disqualifications.
4, Vacation of seats by members. !
8. Meetings of Board.

9. Constitution of committees. :

10, Temporary association of persons with Board for particular
purposes.

11. Vaeaney in Board not to invalidate zets or proceedings.

12. Member-seeretary and officers and other employees of Board.

CHAPTER I]
Jot Boaros
13. Constitution of Joint Boards.
14. Composition of Joint Boards.
15. Special provision relating to giving of ५७४७७
a
(i)


ay है।

CHAPTER IV
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF Boarpg

16. Functions of Central Board.
17, Functions of State Board.
18, Powers to give directions.
CHAPTER V

PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF WATER POLLUTIOy

19, Power of State Government to restrict the application

to certain areas. रे Of the be
20, Power to obtain information.

21. Power to take samples of effluents and procedure tp be f
in connection therewith. 10॥0५५३

22. Reports of the result of analysis on samples taken
tion 21. Mnder my

- 23. Power of entry and inspection.

24. Prohibition on use of stream or well for disposal of polluting
matter, ete,

25. Restrictions on new outlets and new discharges,

26, Provision regarding existing discharge of sewage or trate
effluent.

27. Refusal or withdrawal of consent by State Board.
28. Appeals.
29. Revision.
80. Power of State Board to carry out certain works.

31. Furnishing of information to State Board and other agencies 9
certain cases. ’

32, Emergency measures in case of pollution of stream oF well
33, Power of Board to make application to courts for एक
apprehended pollution of water in streams or wells.
CHAPTER VI

Fonps, Accounts AND AUDIT
34. Contributions by Central Government.
35, Contributions by State Government.
. 36. Fund of Ceptrel Board,


(iid
CLAUSES
97, -Fund of State Board,
38. Budget.
39. Annual report.
40, Accounts and audit,

CHAPTER VII

PENALTIES AND PROCEDUHE

41, Failure to comply with directions under sub-section (2) or sub-

section (3) of section 20 or orders issued under clause (c) af
sub-section (I) of section 32,

42. Penalty for certain acts.

43. Penalty for contravention of provisions of section 24,

44. Penalty for contravention of section 25 67 section 26.

45. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction.

46. Publication of names of offenders.

47. Offences by companies,

48. Offences by Government departments.

49, Cognizance of offences.

50. Members, officers and servants of Board to be public servants.
CHAPTER VII

MISCELLANEOUS

51. Central Water Laboratory.

52, State Water Laboratory. हे *+
53. Analysts, b ei
54. Reports of analysts, है es

55. Local authorities to assist.

56. Compulsory acquisition of land for the State Board,
57. Returns and reports.

58. Bar of jurisdiction.

59, Protection of action taken in good faith.

60, Overriding effect.

61. Power of Central Government to supersede the Central Board
and Joint Boards.

62. Power of State Government to supersede State Board,

63. Power of Central Government to make rules.
64. Power of State Government to make rules, १ \


Bill No. XXX-F of 1969
THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF
POLLUTION) BILL, 1974

(As PAssEp BY tHE Houses or PaRLiament)

A
BILL

‘

to provide for the prevention and control of water pollution and the main-
taining or restoring of wholesomeness of water, for the establish-
ment, with a view to carrying out the purposes aforesaid, of Boards
for the prevention and control of water pollution, for conferring on
and assigning to such Boards powers and functions Telating thereto
and for matters connected therewith.

Wuerzas it is expedient to provide for the prevention and control of
water pollution and the maintaining or restoring of wholesomeness of
water, for the establishment, with a view to carrying out the purposes
aforesaid, of Boards for the prevention and control of water pollution
and for conferring on and assigning to such Boards powers and functions
relating thereto;

Axp whereas Parliament has no power to make laws for the States
with respeet to any of the matters aforesaid except as provided in articles
249 and 250 of the Constitution;


Re

i

b

( clause (1) of article 252 of the «
gene i d by all the Houses of the Le si
Gujarat, Haryana, Himacha]

"जा,
8807७
Pradesh
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthae
ect that the matters aforesajq should

] to the eff
States by Parliament by law:

Ano WHEREAS 19
tution resolutions have OS कह,
{ the States of ASSN, taka
pment and Kashif, Karnal ™
Tripura and West Bey
be regulated insthose

Br it enacted by Parl
lic of India as follows:—

ament in the Twenty-fifth Year of the Repub.

CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Water (Prevention and Contro] of
Pollution) Act, 1974.

(2) It applies in the first instance to the whole of the States o¢
Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kash.
mir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tripura and West
Bengal and the Union territories; and it shall apply to such other State
which adopts this Act by resolution passed in that behalf under clause
(1) of article 252 of the Constitution .

(3) It shall come into force, at once in the States of Assam, Bihar,
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tripura and West Bengal and in
the Union territories, and in any other State which adopts this Act
under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution on the date of such
adoption and any reference in this Act to the commencement of this
Act shall, in relation to any State or Union territory, mean the date on
which this Act comes into force in such State or Union territory.

2 In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

(a) “Board” means the Central Board or a State Board;

(०) “Central Board” means the Central Bo:
ard for the Prevet
ticn and Control of Water Pollution constituted under section 3;

(०) ariel means a member of a Board and includes ‘he

(d) “occupier” in relation t va
० any factory or premises means
Person who has control over the affairs of the ci or the premise!

d affairs are entrusted i t
to a managing agen
ed to be the occupier of the factory of tM

९) * ” alter®”
ion : jon Such contamination of water or such
discharge of any seq! ० biological properties of water of %

or Sod कह or trade effluent or of any other a)
tance into water (whether directly of j है


3

as may, or is likely to, create a nuisance or rend

ful or injurious to public health or safety, or tS dotted ae

cial, industrial, agricultural or other legitimate uses, or to the lite

and health of animals or plants or of acquatic organisms: .
|]

() “prescribed” means prescribed by

y rules made under this Act
by the Central Government or, as the cas ;
aon € may be, the State Govern-

(g) “sewage effluent” means effluent from any sewe:
rn
or sewage disposal works and includes sullage han open “—

(0) “State Board” meang a State Board for the Preven
Control of Water Pollution constituted under section 4; ९४

(i) “State Government” in relation to a Union territory means

~~ Administrator thereof appointed under article 239 of the Consti-
tution;

(j) “stream” includes— ५
(i) river;

aad water course (whether flowing or for the time being

(iii) inland water (whether natural or artificial);
* (iv) sub-terranean waters; Th

(v) sea or tidal waters to such extent or, as the case may be,
to such point as the State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;

(k) “trade effluent” includes any liquid, gaseous or solid subs-
tance which is discharged from any premises used for carrying on
any trade or industry, other than domestic sewage.

CHAPTER II

Tue Cenraat anp State Boards ror PREVENTION AND ConTaoL or WaTER
PouLuTION

3. (1) The Central Government shall, with effect from such date
{being a date not later than six months of the commencement of this Act
in the States of Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan,
Tripura and West Bengal and in the Union territories) as it may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, constitute a Central Board
to be called the Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Water
Pollution to exercise the powers conferred on and perform the functions
assigned to that Board under this Act.

1६


|

4

(2) The Central Board s
namely:—

hall consist of the following Meee
et

time chairman, being a person having specia)
; mm ple experience in respect of matters relating to the .
and conservation of water resources or the prevention ang Pa
of water pollution or 8 एक having knowledge and experience
administering institutions dealing with the matters aforesaid, ok
nominated by the Central Government;

(0) five officials to be nominated by the Central Governmen; b
represent that Government;

(०) such number of persons, not exceeding five, to be nominated
by the Central Government, from amongst the members of the
State Boards, of whom not exceeding two shall be from those ye.
ferred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 4;

(d) three non-officials to be nominated by the Central Govern.
ment, to represent the interests of agriculture, fishery or industry
or trade or any other interest which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, ought to be represented;

(e) two persons to represent the companies or corporations
owned, controlled or managed by the Central Government, to be no
minated by that Government;

() a full-time member-secretary qualified in public health

engineering and ha administrati: ted
by the Central tienes t. ७४०७७/७४७०७छ७छछए:

(3) The Central Board shall be a bod rac
) ly corporate with the name jee
war tine perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject
४ का of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property
‘act, and may, by the aforesaid ame, sue or be sued.

() A State
Board shall Consist of the following members, namely’ ~


कि

‘ 5

a full-time chairman, being a
ied eervation of water resources or
water P'

cnister
poorer by the State Government;

| «9 oe
person having special know-

+ practical experience in respect of matters relating to the use

the prevention and control of

ollution or a person having knowledge and experience in
ing institutions dealing with the matters aforesaid, to be

(0) five officials to be nominated by the State Government to

represent that Government;

(c) five persons to be nominated by the State Government from
amongst the members of the local authorities functioning within the

State;

(d) three non-officials to be nominated by the State Government

to represent the interests of agriculture, fishery or industry
or trade or any other interest which, in the opinion of the State Gov-

ernment, ought to be represented;

(e) two persons to represent the companies or corporations own-
ed, controlled or managed by the State Government, to be nominated

by that Government;
(j) a full-time member-secretary

qualified in public health

ing and having administrative experience, to be appointed

by the State Government,
(3) Every State Board shall be a body

corporate with the name speci-

fied by the State Government in the notification under sub-section (1),
having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to
the provisions of this ‘Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and
to contract, and may, by the said name, sue or be sued.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no State Board
shall be constituted for 8 Union territory and in relation to a Union terri-

tory, the Central Board shall exercise the

powers and perform the func-

tions of a State Board for that Union territory:

Provided that in relation to any Union territory the Central Board
may delegate all or any of its powers and functions under this sub-sec-
tion to such person or body of persons as the Central Government may

specify.

5. (1) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act, a member of qin

a Board, other than a member-secretary,

shal] hold office for a term of sng

three years from the date of his nomination: eondi-

tions of

Provided that 8 member shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his service
term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office. of mem-

bers.

(2) The term of office of a member of a Board nominated under
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 3 or clause (b) of sub-section (2)

of section 4 shall come to an end as soon

‘fag he ceases to hold the office

under the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Gov-
“rnment, by virtue of which he was nominated.

(3) The Central Government or, a8 th
“Mment may, if it thinks fit, remove any
ae his term of office, after giving

ing couse against the same.

e case may be, the State Gov-
member of a Board before the
him a reasonable opportunity


Disquall.
fications,

6

he member-s
member of a Board, other than 11 secrete
हि: pes his office by writing under his hand addresseq.”* ™Y at

6) in the case of the chairman, to the Central Gover,
as ike ane may be, the State Government; and 2४

(0) in any other case, 10 the chairman of the Board;

and the seat of the chairman or such other member shall thereupon be.
come vacant.

(5) A member of a Board, other than the member-seeretary, shall be
deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without reason,
in the opinion of the Board, from three consecutive meetings of the
or where he is nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of Section
3 or under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 4, if he ceases to be »
member of the State Board, or as the case may be, of the local authority,

(6) A casual vacancy in a Board shall be filled by a fresh nomination
and the person nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the
remainder of the term for which the member in whose place he was
nominated.

(7) A member of a Board shall not be eligible for renomination for
more than two terms,

(8) The other terms and conditions of service of a member of a Board,
other than the chairman and member-secretary, shall be such as may
be prescribed.

(9). The other terms and conditions of service of the chairman shall be
such as may be prescribed,

6. (1) No person shall be a member of a Board, who—

(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged insolvent or. has
Suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with his creditors,
or

(0) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court, or

(०) is, or has been, convicted of an offence which, in the opinio?
of the Central Government or, as the case may be, of the State Gow
ernment, involves moral turpitude, or

(6) is, or at any time has been, convicted of an offence under
this Act, or

(९) has directly or indirectly by himself or by any partner, मा
share or interest in any firm or company carrying on the a
of manufacture, sale or hire of machinery, plant, equipment, aPP#
or fittings for the treatment of a sewage or trade effluents, OF कलर

(1) is a director or a secretary, manager or other salaried the
or employee of any company or firm having any contract wi th 8
Board, or with the Government constituting the Board, oF pach
local authority in the State, or with a company or corporation x of
Sontrolled or managed by the Government, for the carrying


7

sewerage schemes or for the installation of plants for the treatment
of sewage or trade effluents, or

(g) has so abused, in the opinion of the Central Government or
as the case may be, of the State Government, his position as a mem-

ber, as to render कांड continuance on the Board detrimental to the
interest of the general public,

(2) No order of removal shall be made by the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be, under this section unless the

member concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing
cause against the same.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (7)
of section 5, a member who has been removed under this section shall
not be eligible for renomination as a member.

7. If a member of a Board becomes subject to any of the disqualifi-

Vacation
cations specified in section 6, his seat shall become vacant, of seats by

members,
8. A Board shall meet at least once in every three months and Meetings

shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of busi- ९ Board.
ness at its meetings as may be prescribed:
Provided that if, in the opinion of the chairman, any business of an
urgent nature is to be transacted, he may convene a meeting of the Board
at such time as he thinks fit for the aforesaid purpose.

9. (1) A Board may constitute as many committees consisting-wholly Constitu-
of members or wholly of other persons or partly of members and partly tion of
of other persons, and for such purpose or purposes as it may think fit. hese

(2) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at such 2)
time and at such place, and shall observe such rules of procedure in re-
gard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed.

(3) The members of a committee (other than the members of the
Board) shall be paid such fees and allowances, for attending its meetings
and for attending to any other work of the Board as may be prescribed.

10, (1) A Board may associate with itself in such manner, and for ‘Tempo:
such purposes, as may be preseribed any person whose assistance or ad- rary asso-
vice it may desire to obtain in performing any of its functions under this ciation of
Act. parents

with
(2) A person associated with the Board under sub-section (1) for any Board for

purpose shall have 8 right to take part in the discussions of the Board re- particular
levant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting Purposes.
of the Board, and shall not be a member for any other purpose.

11, No act or proceeding of a Board or any committee thereof shall Vacancy
be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any va- in Board
caney in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or such com- not to

invalidate
mittee, as the case may be. rast
proceed.
ings.
12. (1) The terms and conditions of service of the member-secretary i
shall be such as may be prescribed. secret any
९ ‘h powers and perform -
ber-secretary shall exercise such po ४८:00
कि ed ks nae be prescribed or as may, from time to time, be dele- ota te
gated to him by the Board or its chairman. (०००

e Board.
7 ॥ rules as may be made by the Central Government
or, अह क See os be the State Government in this behalf, a Board may = +)


ry

8

nd employees 85 it considers necessary fi

appoint — posi of its functions and the rules so made oe ty
preston and allowances and other terms and conditions ee ३७७०
prin officers and employees. -

be prescribed
sect to such conditions as may + १ Boarg
९9 ay 9 i appoint any qualified person to be a Consulting may
from time d and pay him such salaries and allowances ang sbi
him to such other terms and conditions of service as it thinks fo"

CHAPTER ता
Jomut Boarps

13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, an agreement

may be entered into— 3
(a) by two or more Governments of contiguous States, op

(b) by the Central Government (in respect of one or
Union territories) and one or more Governments of States contiguoys
to such Union territory or Union territories,

to be in force for such period and to be subject to renewal for such fur.
ther period, if any, as may be specified in the agreement to provide for
the constitution of a Joint Board,— .
(i) in a case referred to in clause (a), for all the participating
States, and

(ii) in a case referred to in clause (b), for the participating
Union territory or Union territories and the State or States,

(2) An agreement under this section may—

(०) provide, in a case referred to in clause (a) of sub-section
(1), for the apportionment between the participating States and in
@ case referred to in clause (b) of that sub-section, for the apportion-
ments between the Central Government and the participating State
Government or State Governments, of the expenditure in connection
with the Joint Board;

(०) determine, in a case referred to in clause (a) of sub-section
(1), which of the participating State Governments and in 8 case re
ferred to in clause (b) of that sub-section, whether the Central Gov-
ernment or the participating State Government (if there are more
than one participating State, also which of the participating State
Governments) shall exercise and perform the several powers snd
functions of the State Government under this Act and the references
in this Act to the State Government shall be construed accordingly:

(०) provide, for consultation, in a case referred to in clause (०)
of sub-section (1), between the participating State Governments
in a case referred to in clause (b) of that sub-section, between the
ron अप and the participating State Government or Stat
vernments either generally or with refe ticular mat
ters arising under this Act; ee

(4) make such incidental and ancill age
n ary provisions, not
sistent with this Act, as ™may be deemed necessary or expedient bad

Biving effect to the agreement,


9

(3) An agreement under this section shall be publ
to in clause (2) of sub-section (1), in rp air alle the
garticipating States and in a case referred to in clause (b) of that sub-
section, in the Official Gazette of the participating Union territory or
Union territories and the participating State or States,

14. (1) A Joint Board constituted in pursuance of an a;

p greement en- Composi-
tered into under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of secti ist tit

3f the following members, namely:— ee ee a

(a) a full-time chairman, being a person having special know- Boards
ledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating te the
use and conservation of water resources or the prevention and con-
trol of water pollution or a person having knowledge and experience
in administering institutions dealing with the matters aforesaid, to
be nominated by the Central Government; ;

(b) two officials from each of the participating States to be no-
minated by the concerned participating State Government to repre-
sent that Government;

(c) one person to be nominated by each of the participating State
Governments from amongst the members of the local authorities
functioning within the State concerned;

(व) one non-official to be nominated by each of the participating
State Governments to represent the interests of agriculture, fishery or
industry or trade in the State concerned or any other interest
which, in the opinion of the participating State Government, is to be
represented;

(e) two persons to be nominated by the Central Government to
represent the companies or corporations owned, controlled or manag-
ed by the participating State Governments;

(f) a full-time member-secretary qualified in public health
engineering and having administrative experience, to be appointed
by the Central Government.

(2) A Joint Board constituted in pursuance of an agreement entered
into under clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 13 shall consist of the
following members, namely:—

(a) a full-time chairman, being a person having special know-
ledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to the
use and conservation of water resources or the prevention and control
of water pollution or a person having knowledge and experience in
administering institutions dealing with the matters aforesaid, to be
nominated by the Central Government;

(9) two officials to be nominated by the Central Government
from the participating Union territory or each of the participating
Union territories, as the case May be, and two officials to be nominat-
ed, from the participating State or each of the participating States,
as the case may be, by the concerned participating State Government;

(९) one person to be nominated by the Central Government from
amongst the members of the local authorities functioning within the
participating Union territory or each of the participating Union terri~
tories, as the case may be, and one person to be nominated, from
amongst the members of the local authorities functioning within the

h of the participating States, as the case

participating State or eac }
Tay be, by the concerned participating State Government;


Ht

Ips

Functions
of Central
Board,

1a

official to b2 nominated by the Cent Cog,

(४) की to be nominated by the Particinar nh
ment an nt or State Governments to represent the interests ®
pasa dahery or industry or trade 5 the Union territy ot ag

h of the Union territories or the State or in each of the Pe fy
अर case may be, or any other inierest which in the opini ons
Central Government or, as the case may be, of the State Govern, thy
is to be represented; en

ns to be nominated by the Centra} Goy,
कि. a cong nae or corporations owned, controlled omen i
by the Central Government and situate in the Participating rad
territory or territories and two persons to be nominated bY the
tral Government to represent the companies or corporations on
controlled or managed by the participating State Governments; है

(f) a full-time member-secretary qualified in public heatth
engineering and having administrative experience, to be appointed
by the Central Government.

(3) When a Joint’ Board is constituted in pursuance of an agreement
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13, the provisions of sub.
section (4) of section 4 shall cease to apply in relation to the Union ter.
ritory for which the Joint Board is constituted,

(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the provisions of sub.
section (3) of section 4 and sections 5 to 12 (inclusive) shall apply in
relation to the Joint Board and its member-secretary as they apply in re.
lation to a State Board and its member-secretary.

(5) Any reference in this Act to the State Board shall, unless the
context otherwise requires, be construed as including a Joint Board.

15. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act where any Joint
Board is constituted under section 13,—-

(a) the Government of the State for which the Joint Board 8
constituted shall be competent to give any direction under this Act
only in eases where such direction relates ta a matter within the
exclusive territorial jurisdiction of the State;

(0) the Central Government alone shall be competent to give
any direction under this Act where such direction relates to a mat
ter within the territorial jurisdiction of two or more States oF pe
taining to @ Union territory,

CHAPTER IV

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS or Boarps

ele (1) Subject to the Provisions of this Act, the main function of the

tral Board shall be to promote cleantin ms and wells in
ferent areas of the States. ess of strea

(2) In particular and
going function, the Centr,
ing functions, namely; — cerning

tty (2 stvise the Central Government on any matter ००

Prevention ang control of water pollution;

. s i List
Without prejudice to the generality of ell

al Board may perform all or any of th


१8 1 ,

(b) co-ordinate the activities of th
gus aan ps i State Boards and resolve

(c) provide technical assistance and

guidance to thi
Boards, carry out and sponsor investigations and suet an
jating to problems of water pollution and prevention, control pe
abatement of water pollution; : So

(d) plan and organise the training of
persons en
i ba gc programmes for the prevention, control rai हक 4
of water pollution on such terms and conditions as th tral
pct e Central Board
(e) organise through mass media a com i

fe prehensiv

regarding the prevention and control of water siti 30७8७

(f) collect, compile and publish technical and statisti
relating to water pollution and the messures devised Pose ta
prevention and contro] and prepare manuals, codes or guides relating
to treatment and disposal of sewage and trade effluents and dissemi-
nate information connected therewith;

(9) lay down, modify or annul, in consultation with the State
Government concerned, the standards for a stream or well:

Provided that different standards may be laid down for the same
stream or well or for different streams or wells, having regard to the
quality of water, flow characteristics of the stream or well and the
nature of the use of the water in such stream or well or streams or
wells;

(h) plan and cause to be executed a nation-wide programme for
the prevention, control or abatement of water pollution;

(0) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.

(3) The Board may establish or recognise a laboratory or laboratories
to enable the Board to perform its functions under this section efficiently,
including the analysis of samples of water from any stream or well or of
samples of any sewage or trade effluents.

17. (1) Subject to the provisions of this ‘Act, the functions of a State

Board shall be—
(a) to plan a comprehensive programme
control or abatement of pollution of streams
and to secure the execution thereof;

rmment on any matter concerning
water pollution;

for the prevention,
and wells in the State

(0) to advise the State Gove
the prevention, control or abatement of
inate information relating to water pol-

(०) to collect and dissemi
trol or abatement thereof;

lution and the prevention, ९००

(d) to encourage, conduct and partici
research relating to problems of water pol
control or abatement of water pollution;

(०) to collaborate with the Central Board in organising the
training of persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes relating

1826 RS—5,

pate in investigations and
ilution and prevention,

of State
Board.


12

ntion, control or abatement of water pollution gp,
to prevel ,

0 ty
ss education programmes relating thereto; कि orgy,
nise ma

wage or trade effluents, works ang
th Oe ones ed trade effluents and to review ay te
e or other data relating to plants set up for the 13%
ees works for the purification thereof and the system, = ‘i
of borer sewage or trade effluents or in connection with the an
of any consent as required by this Act;

i ul effluent standards
to lay down, modify or ann' for
किक and trade effluents and for the quality of receiving y, be
{not being water in an inter-State stream) resulting from the dis.
charge of effluents and to classify waters of the State;

(h) to evolve economical and reliable methods of trea
sewage and trade effluents, having regard to the peculiar conditions
of soils, climate and water resources of different regions ang more
especially the prevailing flow characteristics of water in streams and
wells which render it impossible to attain even the minimum degree
of dilution;

(i) to evolve methods of utilisation of sewage and suitable trade
effluents in agriculture;

(j) to evolve efficient methods of disposal of sewage and trade
effluents on land, as are necessary on account of the predominant
conditions of scant stream flows that do not provide for major part of
the year the minimum degree of dilution;

(k) to lay down standards of treatment of sewage and trade
effluents to be discharged into any particular stream taking into ac-
count the minimum fair weather dilution available in that stream and

the tolerance limits of pollution permissible in the water of the
stream, after the discharge of such effluents;

(0) to make, vary ar revoke any order—

(6) for the prevention, control or abatement of discharges
of waste into streams or wells;

(४) requiring any person concerned to construct new systems
for the disposal of sewage and trade effluents or to
alter or extend any such existing system or to adopt such reme

dial measures as are necessary to prevent, control or abate wattf
pollution;

(m) to lay down effluent standards to be com vith by Pe
plied w
piesRelaag causing discharge of sewage or sullage or both ze
rod — fog or annul effluent standards for the sewas*
(m) to advise the State

of any ind:
or well; lustry the carryin

Government with respect to the ns
8 on of which is likely to pollute 8

(0) to perf fi Y or &
may, from ne. es ba ch other functions as may be prescribed rd ४

me,
State Government be entrusted to it by the Cen


ie 13

3 d may establish or recogni 1
(2) The Boar है 87196 a laboratory or labo i
the Board to perform its functions under this section मारकर पु

including the analysis of samples of water from any stream or well or of
samples of any sewage or trade effluents,

18. In the performance of its functions under this Act—

(a) the Central Board shall be bound by such directions in
writing as the Central Government may give to it; and

(b) every Staté Board shall be bound by such directions in writ-
ing as the Central Board or the State Government may give to it:

Provided that where a direction given by the State Government is
inconsistent with the direction given by the Central Boafd, the matter
shall be referred to the Central Government for its decision,

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF WATER POLLUTION

19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the
State Government, after consultation with, or on the recommendation of,
the State Board, is of opinion that the provisions of this Act need not
apply to the entire State, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
restrict the application of this Act to such area or areas as may be
declared therein as water pollution, prevention and control area or areas
and thereupon the provisions of this Act shall apply only to such area
or areas.

(2) Each water pollution, prevention and control area may be declared
either by reference to a map or by reference to the line of any water-
shed or the boundary of any district or partly by one method and partly
by another.

(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette —

(a) alter any water pollution, prevention and control area whether
by way of extension or reduction; or

(b) define a new water pollution, prevention and control area in
which may be merged one or more water pollution, prevention and
control areas, or any part or parts thereof,

20, (1) For the purpose of enabling a State Board to perform the
functions conferred on it by or under this Act, the State Board or any
officer empowered by it in that behalf, may make surveys of any
area and gauge and keep records of the flow or volume’ and other charac-
teristics of any stream-or well in such area, and may take steps for the
measurement and recording of the rainfall in such area or any part there-
of and for the installation and maintenance for those purposes of gauges
or other apparatus and works connected therewith, and carry out stream
Surveys and may take such other steps as May be necessary in order to
obtain any information required for the purposes aforesaid. =

2 ve directions requiring any person who in
its मर Sa from any such stream or well in the area
in quantities which are substantial in relation to the flow or volume of

stream or well or is discharging sewage or trade effluent into any

Powers
to give
directions,

Power

of State
Govern.
ment to
restrict
the appli.
cation of
the Act to
certain
97९85.

Power to
obtain
informa-
tion.


Power
to take
samples

effluents
and pro-
cedure to
be follow-
ed in con
nection

with.

14 .
, to give such information as to the abs ca
genset a times and in such form as may be speciieg ० w
directions. so iat *
wi t prejudice to the provisions of sub-section पु
(9) mee me to preventing or controlling pollution ५ Fite

Board may, ‘ in charge of a
a rections requiring any person हट any ९४0) i
_aealnpeeger sired or trade is carried on, to furnish to it information

i tion of 5 tion
ing the construction, installation or opera’ uch esta: bi
St disposal system or of any extension or addition there,
in such establishment and such other particulars as may be Prescribeg

21, (1) A State Board or any officer empowered by it in this behat
shall have power to take for the purpose of analysis samples of eae
from any stream or well or samples of any sewage or trade effluent Which
is passing from any plant or vessel or from or over any place into हे
such stream or well.

(2) The result of any analysis of a sample of any sewage or trade
effluent taken under.sub-section (1) shall not be admissible in evidence in
any legal proceeding unless the provisions of sub-sections (3), (4) and
(5) are complied with.

(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5), when a
sample (composite or otherwise as may be warranted by the process
used) of any sewage or trade effluent is taken for analysis under sub-
section (1), the person taking the sample shall—

(a) serve on the person in charge of, or having control over, the
plant or vessel or in occupation of the place (which person is here-
inafter referred to as the occupier) or any agent of such occupier,
a notice, then and there in such form as may be prescribed of his
intention to have it so analysed;

(b) in the presence of the occupier or his agent, divide the
sample into two parts;
(c) cause each part to be placed in a container which shall be

marked and sealed and shall also be signed both by the person taking
the sample and the occupier or his agent;

(व) send one container forthwith, —

_ (@) in a case where such sample is taken from any are?
situated in a Union territory, to the laboratory established o
Tecognised by the Central Board under section 16; and

(i) in any other case, to the laborat lished
, ‘ory estab aed
nised by the State Board under section 17;
ue J the request of the occupier or his agent, send the
(0) in a case where su rf
n 8 ch sample is taken from शा
hee pet ic territory, to the laboratory establish! *
sub-section (1) of section 51; and

(४) in 7
fied under pe: Y other'ease, to the laboratory established ण sot

b-section (1) of section 52.


“ te 15

(4) When a sample of any sewage or trade effluent j

under sub-section (1) and the person taking the. pro pmo in
occupier or his agent, a notice under clause (a) of sub-section ७) 4
the occupier or his agent wilfully absents himself, then, the sam; ep
taken shall be placed in a container which shall be marked and pe
and shall also be signed by the person taking the sample and the same
shall be sent forthwith by such person for analysis to the laboratory re-
ferred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii), as the case may be, of
clause (९) of sub-section (3) and such person shall inform the Govern-
ment analyst appointed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the
case may be, of section 53, in writing about the wilful absence of the
occupier or his agent.

(5) When a sample of any sewage or trade effluent is

lysis under sub-section (1) and the person taking the pase
the occupier or his agent a notice under clause (a) of sub-section (3)
and the occupier or his agent who is present at the time of taking the
sample does not make a request for dividing the sample into two parts
as provided in clause (b) of sub-section (3), then, the sample so taken
shall be placed in a containerswhich shall be marked and sealed and
shall also be signed by the person taking the sample and the same shall
be sent forthwith by such person for analysis to the laboratory referred
to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii), as the case may be, of clause (व)
of sub-section (3).

22, (1) Where a sample of any sewage or trade effluent has been sent
for analysis to the laboratory established or recognised by the Central
Board or, as the case may be, the State Board, the concerned Board ana-
lyst appointed under sub-section (3) of section 53 shall analyse the sample
and submit a report in the prescribed form of the result of such analysis
in triplicate to the Central Board or the State Board, as the case may be,

(2) On receipt of the report under sub-section (1), one copy of the
report shall be sent by the Central Board or the State Board, as the case
may be, to the occupier or his agent referred to in section 21, another
copy shall be preserved for production before the court in case any legal
proceedings are taken against him and the other copy shall be kept by
the concerned Board.

(3) Where a sample has been sent for analysis under clause (e) of
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 21 to any laboratory men-
tioned therein, the Government analyst referred to in that sub-section
shall analyse the sample and submit a report in the prescribed form of
the result of the analysis in triplicate to the Central Board or, as the
case may be, the State Board which shall comply with the provisions of
sub-section (2).

(4) If there is any inconsistency or discrepancy between, or variation
in the results of, the analysis carried out by the laboratory established
or recognised by the Central Board or the State Board, as the case may
be, and that of the laboratory established or specified under section 51
or section 52, as the case may be, the report of the latter shall prevail.

the request
(5) Any cost incurred in getting any sample analysed at 3
of the तत्व or his agent shall be payable by such occupier or his
agent and in case of default the same shall be recoverable from him as
arrears of land revenue or of public demand.

Reports
of the
result of
analysis
on
samples
taken
under
section 21.


Power of
entry 9m
in:

Prohibi-
tion on
use of
stream
or well
for dis.
posal of
polluting
matter,
ete.

16

isi this section, an
to the provisions of ion, any person
28 (8 pangs this behalf shall have a right at any time ey
nn — assistance 38 he considers necessary, any place—
with 5
(a) for the purpose of performing any of the functions है
Board entrusted to him; the
(0) for the purpose of determining whether and ॥ 5, |
ch functions are to be performed or Whet "ee
rovisions of this ‘Act or the rules made thereunder o¢ any aty
pat direction oF authorisation served, made, given, oy |
under this Act is being or has been complied with; Prantey

(०) for the purpose of examining any plant, record,
document or any other material object or for conducting a Search oy
any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence 4 a
this Act or the rules made thereunder has been or is being or jg ae
to be committed and for seizingany such plant, record, register, don,
ment or other material object, if he has reason to believe that it “2५
furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable ate
this Act or the rules made thereunder:

manner, any SU

that the right to enter under this sub-section for - the
inspection of a well shall be exercised only at reasonable hours in a case
where such well is situated in any premises used for residential pur.
poses and the water thereof is used exclusively for domestic purposes.

Provided

(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or, in
relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the provisions of any cor-
responding law in force in that State, shall, so far as may be, apply to
any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or
seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 90
of the said Code, or, as the case may be, under the corresponding pro-
visions of the said law.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “place” includes
vessel, :

24. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section,—

(a) no person shall knowingly cause or permit any poisabous
noxious or polluting matter determined in accordance with such
standards as may be laid down by the State Board to enter (whether
directly or indirectly) into any stream or well; or

(b) no person shall knowingly cause or permit to enter into any
stream any other matter which may tend, either directly of ne
bination with similar matters, to impede the proper flow of the watt?
of the stream in a manner leading or likely to lead to a substantit!
aggravation of pollution due to other causes or of its consequences

(2) A person shall not be guilty of an offence under sub-sectio" ().

by reason only of having done or caused to he done any of the followin
acts, namely; — t

(a) constructing, improvin intaini ross of ही
J छ or maintaining in or 2९ ५.
the bank or bed of any stream any building, bridge, weit, 42 ee
dock, pier, drain or sewer or other permanent works which
@ right to construct, improve or maintain;
;


(0) depositing any materials on the bank or in the bed of ai
stream for the purpose of reclaiming land or for supporting pit
ing or protecting the bank or bed of such stream provided such
materials are not capable of polluting such stream;

(c) putting into any stream any sand or gravel or other natural

deposit which has flowed from or been deposited b
th
such stream; एण्ड y the current of

(8) causing or permitting, with the consent of the State Bo

ard,
the deposit accumulated in a well, pond or reservoir to enter into
any stream.

(3) The State Government may, after consultation with, or on the
recommendation of, the State Board, exempt, by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, any person from the operation of sub-section (1) subject to
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification and any
condition so specified may by a like notification be altered, varied or
amended.

25. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section no person shall,
without the previous consent of the State Board, bring into use any new
or altered outlet for the discharge of sewage or trade effluent into a
stream or well or begin to make any new discharge of sewage or trade
effluent into a stream or well. <

(2) An application for consent of the State Board under sub-section
(1) shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain particulars
regarding the proposed construction, installation or operation of the in-
dustrial or commercial establishment or of any treatment and disposal
system or of any extension or addition thereto and such other particulars
as may be prescribed. . =

(3) The State Board may make such inquiry as it may deem fit in
respect of the application for consent referred to in sub-section (1) and
in making any such inquiry shall follow such procedure as may be pres-
cribed,

(4) The State Board may grant its consent referred to in sub-section
(1), subject to such conditions as it may impose, being—

(a) in the case of a new or altered outlet, conditions as to the
point of discharge into the stream or well or the construction of the
outlet, or as to the use of that outlet or any other outlet for sewage
or trade effluent from the same land or premises; and

(b) in the case of a new discharge, conditions as to the nature
and composition, temperature, volume or rate of discharge of thé
effluent from the land or premises from which the new discharge is
to be made,

and any such conditions imposed shall be binding on any person using
the outlet, or discharging the effluent from the land or premises aforesaid.

(5) Where, without the consent of the State Board, a new or altered

ow i for the discharge of sewage or trade effluent
कि $Y age or trade effluent is

into a stream or well or a new discharge of sew!
made, the State Board may serve oD the person using the outlet or
making the discharge, as the case may be, a notice imposing any such
conditions as it might have imposed on an application for its consent in

respect to such outlet or discharge:

tions on
new out.
Jets and
new dis-
charges,


Provision
regarding
existing
discharge
of sewage
or trade
effluent,

Refusal
or with.
drawal of
consent
by State
Board.

18

hall maintain a register containing Suc

७ BS aap ne ०० tion ein
culars of the ००१८ ent from land oF premises in = Jurisdiction हे
or in relation to in force (other than the conditions to ६७ ,. ५
as are for the time js brought into use or a new discharge 18 77806)
register as relates to any outlet, or to any effluent 4,
so much of the shall be open to inspection at all reasonable
such land oF ied in, or affected by, the outlet, or in the tang (0
by any एशर case may be, or by any person authorised by hig, |६
eager vais the conditions so contained in such register sha} be

conclusive proof that the consent was granted subject to such cong,
tions.
(7) The consent referred to in sub-section (1) shall, unless given 4,

. be deemed to have been given unconditionally on the
ray papa four months of the making of an application in this

ofa
pa complete in all respects to the State Board,

(8) For the purposes of this section and sections 27 and 30,—

(a) the expression “new or altered outlet” means any outlet
which is wholly or partly constructed on or after the commencement
of this Act or which (whether so constructed or not) is substantially
altered after such commencement; ९

(७) the expression “new discharge” means a discharge which
is not, as respects the nature and composition, temperature, volume
and rate of discharge of the effluent substantially a continuation of
a discharge made within the preceding twelve months (whether by
the same or a different outlet), so however that a discharge which
is in other respects a continuation of previous discharge made as
aforesaid shall not be deemed to be a new discharge by reason of
any reduction of the temperature or volume or rate of discharge of
the effluent as compared with the previous discharge,

26. Where immediately before the commencement of this Act any
person was discharging any sewage or trade effluent into a stream or
well, the provisions of section 25 shall, so far as may be, apply in rela
tion to such person as they apply in relation to the person referred to
in that section subject to the modification that the application for consent
to be made under sub-section (2) of that section shall be made witbia
3 period of three months of the constitution of the State Board.

27. (1) A State Board shall not grant its consent to the bringing into
use of a new or altered outlet unless the outlet is so constructed as 10
comply with any conditions imposed by the Board to enable it to exe
cise its right to take samples of the effluent,

1 (2) A State Board may from time to time review any condition
yest nie section 25 (other than a condition to be satisfied aw
sins Tought into use or a new discharge is made), or under sectio®

may serve on the person using the outlet or making the dischars®

as the case may be, a notice, m ok
dog day such Gnas, aking any reasonable variation of of 7९९

sige pe Easels under section 25 or section 26 see a
in force until revoked under कपल ee ani


' 19

28, (1) Any person aggrieved by an order
under section 25, section 26 or section 27 pangs fers State Board
the date on which the order is communicated to him mie days from
to such authority (hereinafter referred to as the ap callate pF an appeal
the State Government may think fit to constitute: thority) as

Provided that the appellate authorit
८ 9 may entertain th
> penal ota said period of thirty days if such authosity aeons
t 3} ant wa: i
pagan ppe Ss prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal
(2) An appellate authority shall consist of three persons.

(3) The form and manner in which an a
ppeal ma:

sub-section (1), the fees payable for such appeal 6 नल:
be followed by the appellate authority shall be such as may be prescribed,

(4) On receipt of an appeal preferred under sub-section (1), the
appellate ig Risen after giving the appellant and the State Board
an opportunity of being hes: i
= ५ ig 10, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as

(5) If the appellate authority determines that any conditi

ti im-

posed, or the variation of any condition, as the ‘oe whee be, =a in
reasonable, then,— ,

(a) where the appeal is in respect of the unreasonableness of
any condition imposed, such authority may direct either that the
condition shall be treated as annulled or that there shall be substi-
tuted for it such condition as appears to it to be reasonable;

(b) where the appeal is in respect of the unreasonableness of
any variation of a condition, such authority may direct either that
the condition shall be treated as continuing in force unvaried or that
it shall be varied in such manner as appears to it to be reasonable,

29. (1) The State Government may at any time either of its own
motion or on an application made to it in this behalf, call for the records
of any case where an order has been made by the State Board under section
25, section 26 or section 27 for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the
legality or propriety of any such order and may pass such order in rela-
tion thereto as it may think fit:

Provided that the State Government shall not pass any order under
this sub-section without affording the State Board and the person who
may be affected by such order a reasonable opportunity of being heard

in the matter. दर
shall not revise any order made under sec-
27 where an appeal against that order lies
has not been preferred or where an appeal
ding before the appellate authority.

30, (1) Where under this Act any conditions have been imposed on
any person for bringing into use any new oF altered outlet for the dis-
charge of sewage or trade effluent into 8 stream or well or for making
any new discharge of sewage or trade effluent into a stream or well or on
any person who, immediately before the commencement of this Act, was

(2) The State Government
tion 25, section 26 or section
to the appellate authority, but
has been preferred such appeal is pen'

Appeals,

of State
Board to
carry out
certain
works.


ing of
tion to

and other
agencies
in certain
cases,

Ewer-
gency
measures
incase of
pollution
of stream
or well,

20

- in a strea
sewage or trade effluent MOF wel
दशक such person to execute any work in connect wg,
conditions k has not been executed within such re Ls

or!
with Replat the State Board may serve on the person te
pos notice requiring him within such time (not being less than ae

days) as may be specified in the notice to execute the wor, . ‘ity
Pei
the work हु
If the person concerned fails to execute as
फ 5 asa to in sub-section (1), then, after the expiration in
time specified in the said notice, the State Board may itself हज
cause to be executed such work, -

(3) All expenses incurred by the State Board for the execution Of the
aforesaid work, together with interest, at such rate as the State Govern
ment may, by order, fix, from the date when a demand for the क्र
is made until it is paid, may be recovered by that Board from the एच
concerned, as arrears of land revenue, or of public demand,

31, (1) If at any place where any industry or trade is being carrieg
on, due to accident or other unforeseen act or event, any poisonous, noxi.
ous or polluting matter is being discharged, or is likely to be discharged
into a stream or well and, as a result of such discharge, the water in such
stream or well is being polluted, or is likely to be polluted, then, the
person in charge of such place shall forthwith intimate the occurrence
of such accident, act or event to the State Board and to such other autho
rities or agefticies as may be prescribed.

(2) Where any local authority operates any sewerage system or sewage
works, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to such local autho
rity as they apply in relation to the person in charge of the place where
any industry or trade is being carried on. .

32. (1) Where it appears to the State Board that any poisonous, nox!-
ous or polluting matter is present in any stream or well or has entered
into that stream or well due to any accident or other unforeseen act oT
event, and if the Board is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient 00
take immediate action, it may for reasons to be recorded in writing
carry out such operations as it may consider necessary for all or sy of
the following purposes, that is to say,—

(०) removing that matter from the stream or well and disposing
it of in such manner as the Board considers appropriate;

(b) remedying or mitigati ite presente
in the stream or well: gating any pollution caused by its 9

() issuing orders immediatel :
perso: ५ ly restraining or prohibiting
ing Natio Sie te on discharging any 0 पट noxious or 7०४ दे
ir int stream गम शक
the stream or well, or well, or from making insanitary

the

Ky conatrnat conferred by sub-seetion (1) doés not include 7
Whith arp suerte works other than works of a temporary chi
on or before the completion of the operations:


2

33. (1) Where it is apprehended by a Board

re it tha
stream or well is likely to be polluted by reason of en tiene,
matter therein or of any likely dis ox agate,

posal of any matter therei
wise, the Board may make an application to a court, not State feet
of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first ८ ae isco
lass, दर

ing the person who is likely to cause such pollution from so causing.

in any

(2) On receipt of an application under sub-secti
make such order as it deems fit. sub-section (1) the court may

(3) Where under sub-section (2) the court makes an order restraining

any person from polluting the water in any sti के
that order— y stream or well, it may. in

(i) direct the person who is likely to cause or has

caused the
pollution of the water in the stream or well, to desist from taking
such action as is likely to cause pollution or, as the case may be,
to remove from such stream or well, such matter, and

(ii) authorise the Board, if the direction under clause (i) (being
a direction for the removal of any matter from such stream or well)
is not complied with by the person to whom such direction is issued,
to undertake the removal and disposal of the matter in such manner
as may be specified by the court.

(4) All expenses incurred by the Board in removing any matter in
pursuance of the authorisation under clause (ti) of sub-section (3) or in
the disposal of any such matter may be defrayed out of any money
obtained by the Board from such disposal and any balance outstanding
shall be recoverable from the person concerned as arrears of land revenue
or of public demand.

CHAPTER VI
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

34, The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, make in each financial year such con-
tributions to the Central Bosrd as it may think necessary to enable the
Board to perform its functions under this Act.

35. The State Government may, after due appropriation made by the
Legislature of the State by law in this behalf, make in each financial year
such contributions to the State Board as it may think necessary to enable
that Board to perform its functions under this Act.

36. (1) The Central Board shall have its own fund, and all sums which
may, from time to time, be paid to it by the Central Government and all
other receipts (by way of gifts, grants, donations, benefactions or pe
wise) of that Board shall be carried to the fund of the Board and al
payments by the Board shall be made therefrom.

it thinks fit for,
(2) The Central Board may expend such sums as i
Performing its functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated
8s expenditure payable out of the fund of that Board.

id the sums which

37. (1) ‘The State Board shall have its own fund, an
May, ioe time to time, be paid to it by the State Government and all
other receipts (by way of gifts, grants, donations, benefactions or

Power of
Bourd to
make ap.
plication
to courts
for res.
training
Sppre-
hended
pollution
of water
in streams
or wells.

Contri-
butions by
Central
Govern-
ment.
Contri-
butions
by
State
Govern-
Tent,

Fund of
Central
Board.

Fund of
State
Board.


Annual
report.

Accounts

of that Board shall be carried to the fund of th,

otherwise) he Board shall be made therefrom, ९ Boag ony

all payments by t Salk
tate Board may expend such sums as it think, ||

(2) by ae under this Act, and such sums shaly be fa Dep

pone a payable out of the fund of that Board, td ay

he case may be, the 51

Central Board or, as ¢ ate 13

के financial year, prepare, in such form and at ae Stay),

may be prescribed, 8 budget in respect of the financial year next hice &
Mi ing the estimated receipt and expenditure, and copies thereng tt

be forwarded to the Central Government or, as the case may ett

State Government. rhe

The Central Board shall during each financial yoo,
सर ly and at such time as may be prescribed, an यह ;
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous fnanes
year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Centra} Govern
and that Government shall cause every such report to be laid bene bot
Houses of Parliament within six months of the date on which jt js Tecely,
ed by that Government.

(2) The State Board shall, during each financial year, prepare, in sch
form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report aiving 4
true and full account of its activities during the previous finaneia} wee
and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the State Government and thy
Government shall cause every such report to be laid before the Stat,
Legislature within a period of six months of the date on which it js
received by that Government.

40, (1) Every Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant

and audit. records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may

“of the audit report

be prescribed by the Central Government or, as the case may be, the
State Government.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by an auditor duly

qualified to act as an auditor of companies under section 226 of the Com-
panies Act, 1956.

(3) The said auditor shall be appointed by the Central Government cr,
as the case may be, the State Government on the advice of the Comptrl-
ler and Auditor General of India,

(4) Every auditor appointed to audit the accounts of the Board under
this Act shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect भा
of the offices of the Board,

(5) Every such auditor shall send a co ther with

py of his report toge'
an audited copy of the accounts to the Central Government or, # हि +
case may be, the State Government,

(6) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the का
under sub-section (5), cause the same to be
before both Houses of Parliament. we
i कं State Government shall, as soon as may be after the ee
it lr sub-section (5), cause the same to be |


23
CHAPTER VII

PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE

41, (1) Whoever fails to comply with any direction given under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 20 within such time as may be
specified in the direction or fails to comply with any orders issued under
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 32 shall, on conviction, be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both
and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine which may ex-

tend to one thousand rupees for every day during which such failure
continues after the conviction for the first such failure.

(2) Whoever fails to comply with any direction issued by a court
under sub-section (2) of section 33 shall, on conviction, be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both and in
case the failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend to

one thousand rupees for every day during which such failure continues
after the conviction for the first such failure.

42. (1) Whoever—

Failure
to comply
with dir-
ections
under sub-
section
(2) or
sub-set-
tion ‘2
uf section
20 of
orders
issued
under
clause (६)
of sub-
section
(2) of
section
32.

Penalty

‘for cer-

(a) destroys, pulls down, removes, injures or defaces any pillar,
post or stake fixed in the ground or any notice or other matter put up,
anscribed or placed; by or under the authority of the Board, or

(b) obstructs any person acting under the orders or directions of
the Board from exercising his powers and performing his functions
under this Act, or

(०) damages any works or property belonging to the Board, or

(d) fails to furnish to any officer or other employee of the Board
any information required by him for the purpose of this Act, or

(e) fails to intimate the occurrence of any accident or other
unforeseen act or event under section 31 to the Board and other au-
thorities or agencies as required by that section, or

~ (f) in giving any information which he is required to give under
this Act, knowingly or wilfully makes a statement which is false
in any material particular, or

(g) for the purpose of obtaining any consent under section 25 or
section 26, knowingly or wilfully makes a statement which is false
in any material particular,

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or
with both.

(2) Where for the grant of a consent in pursuance of the provisions
of section 25 or section 26 the use of a meter or gauge or other measure
or monitoring device is required and such device is used for the purposes
of those provisions, any person who knowingly or wilfully alters or in-
terferes with that device so as to prevent it from monitoring or measur-
ing correctly shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may" extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one thou-
sand rupees or with both,

tain acts.


Penalty
for con-
traven~
tion
of provi-
sions of

1 gection 24
Penalty
for con.
travention
of section
25 or sec~

tion of
names of

Hi

24
nes the provisions of section 24 shay be
for a term which shall not be lege ||
tend to six years and with fine, i

43. Whoever contrave?
able with imprisonment
months but which may: ex

Who i f section 25

ontravenes the provisions 0 ed
og ae with imprisonment for a term which shall not -
rem is sont but which may extend to six years and with fing ey

ह who has been convicted of any offence under yo,
24 Cam isor section 26 is again found guilty of an offence oan
a contravention of the same provision, he shall, on the Second ang Ving
every subsequent conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for 4 Bes
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to ¥en
years and with fine:

Provided that for the purpose of this section no cognizance shay be
taken of any conviction made more than two years before the commis.
sion of the offence which is being punished,

46, If any person convicted of an offence under this Act commits a
like offence afterwards it shall be lawful for the court before which the
second or subsequent conviction takes place to cause the offender's name
and place of residence, the offence and the penalty imposed to be pub-
lished at the offender's expense in such newspapers or in such other
manner as the court may direct and the expenses of such publication
shall be deemed to be part of the cost attending the conviction and shall
be recoverable in the samme manner as a fine,

47.-(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by 8
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was
in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly: °

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment provitled in this Act if he proves
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exer-
cised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where
sn offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has heen committed with the consent of
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, managet,
Secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence
and shall he liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation—For the Purposes of this section,—

(०) “company” means any bod corpora’ cludes a firm

or other association of individuals; sod On
(>) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the fim
‘Seems offence under this Act has been committed by शाह
of Government, the Head of the Department shall be dee™

ed to be guilty of the off aA
and punished acco) ities and shall be Mable to be proceeded #ét!


a5

provided that nothing contained in this section shall rend

lead of the Department liable to any punishment if he cevese tiuk t “=
was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all

on giligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

49. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence unde

t this Ac i
except on 2 complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in cutbrass po
of the पा शा घप पर court inferior to that of a Presidency Magis- aia
trate or 4 lagistrate 0. ७ first class shall try an offenc i
under this Act. y any e punishable

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for any Magistrate of the
first class oF for any Presidency Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprison-
ment for a term exceeding two years or of fine exceeding two thousand
rupees on any person convicted of an offence punishable under this Act.

50. All members, officers and servants of a Board when acting or pur- Mem

to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act and the offic:
Pies made thereunder shall be deemed to be public servants within the we
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. oe

of B
tot
pub
ser
CHAPTER शा
MiscELLANEOUS
51. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Ce:
Gazette,— Wi
(a) establish a Central Water Laboratory; ot es

(b) specify any laboratory oF institute as 8 Central Water
Laboratory, to carry out the functions entrusted to the Central Water
Laboratory under this Act,

(2) The Central Government may, after consultation with the
Central Board, make rules prescribing—

(a) the functions of the Central Water Laboratory;

(b) the procedure for the submission to the said laboratory of
samples of water 07 of sewage or trade effluent for analysis or tests,
the form of the laboratory’s report thereunder and the fees payable
in respect of such report;

(ले such other matters 85 may be necessary OF expedient to en-
able that laboratory to carry out its functions.

52, (1) The State Government may, "by notification in the Official
Gazette,—

(a) establish a State Water Laboratory; oF

(b) specify any laboratory oF institute a3 8

tory, to carry out the functions entrus to

Laboratory under this Act.
(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the State

Board, make rules prescribing—
(a) the functions of the State Water Laboratory;

State Water Labora-
the State Water


26

bmission to the ga;

b) the procedure for the su Said aby
wage of water or of sewage or trade effluent foy analysic" Y of
the form of the laboratory's report thereon and the fac Daya
respect of such report; Ie ig

other matters as may be necessary oy
ene tems to carry out its functions, XDediens &
The Central Government may, by notification jn ‘

aoe ae such persons as it thinks fit and having the Pn
qualifications to be Government analysts for the PUrpose of कक

samples of water or of sewage or trade effluent sent for analysis 45 ae

laboratory established or specified under sub-section (1) of Section PY
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Genes

appoint such persons as it thinks fit and having the छाल

qualifications to be Government analysts for the Purpose of analysis o

. samples of water or of sewage or trade effluent sent for analysis 16 i.

laboratory established or specified under sub-section (1) ०६ section 8.

(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section
12, the Central Board or, as the case may be, the State Board Tay, by
notification in the Official Gazette, and with the approval of the Centrsj
Government or the State Government, as the case May be, appoint such
persons as it thinks fit and having the prescribed qualifications to be
Board analysts for the purpose of analysis of samples of water or of
Sewage or trade effluent sent for analysis to any laboratory established
or recognised under section 16, or, as the case may be, under section 17.

Analysts.

Reports of 54. Any document purporting to be a report signed by a Government
analysts. —_ analyst or, as the case may be, a Board analyst may be used as evidence
of the facts stated therein in any proceeding under this Act,

Local 55. All local authorities shall render such help and assistance and

authori. furnish such information to the Board as it may require for the dis-

ties to charge of its functions, and shall make available to the Board for inspec-

03% tion and examination such records, maps, plans and other documents as
may be necessary for the discharge of its functions.

Compul- 56. Any land required by a State Board for the efficient performance
Guuitlon 0 1t8 functions under this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public
Stand for PU*POS and such land shall be acquired for the State Board under the
the State Provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, or under any other corre
Board. Ponding law for the time being in force,

Returns 51. The Central Board shall furnish to the Central Government, aod

and Paste Board shall furnish to the State Government and to the Central

reports. Board. such reports, returns, statistics, accounts and other information
with respect to its fund or activities as that Government, or, as the ९88
may be, the Central Board may, from time to time, require.

sted 58. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit of aot

bra ceeding in respect of any matter which an appellate authority ,


27

i ther legal proceedin, .

59. No guit or ० ings shall lie
mont of any गीला of Government or any member begets
40 respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be ~_
in pursuance of this Act or the rules made thereunder. oe

60, The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstandin,
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other ped he
Act.

61. (1) Tf at any time the Central Government is of opinion—

(a) that the Central Board or any Joint Board has
1 persistently
made default in the performance of the functions | i
agen ne pegs mposed on it by
(०) that circumstances exist which render it necess i
ame ae on ecessary in the

the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
supersede the Central Board or such Joint Board, as the case may be, je
such period, not exceeding ome year, as may be specified in a
notification;

Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section for
the reasons mentioned in clause (4), the Central Government shall give
a reasonable opportunity to the Central Board or such Joint Board, as
the case may be, to show cause why it should not be superseded and
shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Central
Board or such Joint Board, as the case may be.

(2) Upon the publication of 8 notification under sub-section (1)

superseding the Central Board or any Joint Board, —
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession

vacate their offices as such;

(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under

r discharged by the Central

/। Board shall, until the Central Board or the Joint

Board, as the case may be, is reconstituted under sub-section (3) be

exercised, performed or discharged by such person 07 persons as the
Central Government may direct;

(c) all property owned or controlled t

d shall, until the Central Board or the Joint Board,

such Joint Boar
as the case may be, is reconstituted under sub-section (3) vest in

the Central Government.

(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the
(1), the Central Government may

notification issued under sub-section

(७) extend the period of supersession for such further term,
not exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary; ०

(0) reconstitute the Central Board or
case may be, by fresh
be, and in such case any person who vaca! ;
(a) of sub-section (2) shall not be deemed disqualified for nomina-
tion or appointment:

Provided that the Central Govern
expiration of the period of supersession, whether oF

rmment may at any time before the

nally

Protection
of action
taken in
god
faith,

Overrid_
ing effect

Power of
Central
Govern.
ment to
supersede
the
Central
Board
and Joint
Boards.


Power of
State
Govern-
ment to
supersede
State
Board,

Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
make
rules,

28

(1) or as extended under this Sub-sectio,

b-section
under 50 igeetion, 0, Lake wig

under clause (9) of this su

62. (1) If at any time the State Government is of Opinion,

(a) that the State Board has persistently made

qi 4
performance of the functions imposed on it by or ung efault iy

ler this he
(b) that circumstances exist which render it necessary ; ५४७
public interest so to do, Y in th,

the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazett,
sede the State Board for such period, not exceeding one year, —
specified in the notification: Tay by

Provided that before issuing a notification under this gy) beet
for the reasons mentioned in clause (a), the State Government shay ik
a reasonable opportunity to the State Board to show cause why it shoulg
not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections ६
any, of the State Board, ,

(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section Q)
superseding the State Board, the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3)
of section 61 shall apply in relation to the supersession of the State Board
as they apply in relation to the supersession of the Central Board ors
Joint Board by the Central Government.

63. (1) The Central Government may, simultaneously with the ex-
stitution of the Central Board, make rules in respect of the matters
specified in sub-section (2):

Provided that when the Central Board has been constituted, no such
rule shall be made, varied, amended or repealed without consulting the
Board,

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely; — हे

(a) the terms and conditions of service of the members (other
than the chairman and member-secretary) of the Central Boal
under sub-section (8) of section 5; है

(b) the intervals and the time and place at which meetings
the Central Board or of any committee thereof constituted under 6
Act, shall be held and the procedure to be followed at such meetit
including the quorum necessary for the transaction of business
section 8, and under sub-section (2) of section 9;

a
(०) the fees and allowances to be paid to such members a
committee of the Central Board as are not members of the
under sub-section (3) of section 9;

(d) the manner in which and the purposes for which ane 1:
may be associated with a Board under sub-section (1) of section

1 (९) the terms and conditions of service of the chair™®? ‘i
ae member-secretary of the Central Board under sub-
ef section 5 and under sub-section (J) of section 12;


29

({) conditions subject to which a person may be appointed

पे asa
consulting engineer to the Central Board under sub-section (4) of
section 12;

(9) the powers and duties to be exercised and performed by
the chairman and the member-secretary of the Central Board;

(h) the prohibition or regulation of bathing in any stream or
well or the washing or cleaning therein of things of any class or
description, or the putting of litter or other objectionable matter,
ra poisonous, noxious or polluting or not into any stream or
well;

(i) the prohibition or regulation of the keeping or use, on any
stream, of vessels provided with sanitary appliances from which
polluting matter passes into the stream;

- (j) the form of the report of the Central Board analyst under
sub-section (1) of section 22;

(00) the form of the report of the Government analyst under
sub-section (3) of section 22;

(0) the form in which, and the time within which, the budget
and annual report of the Central Board may be prepared and for-
warded to the Central Government under sections 38 and 39;

(m) the form in which the accounts of the Central Board may
be maintained under section 40;

(n) any other matter relating to the Central Board, including
the powers and functions of that Board in relation to Union terri-

tories;

(०) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.

the Central Government under this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament while it is in session for 4 total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid bee the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica-
tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form “oe of
no effect, as the case may be; 80, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-

viously done under that rule.

(3) Every rule made by

taneously with the constitu-
64. (1) The State Government may, simu!
tion of the State Board, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act
in respect of matters not falling within the purview of section 63:

ti h rule
६ when the State Board has been constituted, no suc!
Pr 20 120 लक विश 16 or repealed without consulting that Board,

Power
of State
Govern-
ment to
make
rules,


30

ular, and without prejudice to the Senerality
such rules may provide for all or any of the follo,

(2) In partic
foregoing power,
matters, namely ae
terms and conditions of service of the members
and the member-secretary) of the State ke

are

(8) of section 5;

(a) the
than the chairman
under sub-section

time and place of meetings of the State Bog
any oer of that Board constituted under this Act है hs
procedure to be followed at such meeting, including the ‘
necessary for the transaction of business under section Aga
under sub-section (2) of section 9;

(c) the fees and allowances to be paid to such members fa
committee of the State Board as are not members of the Bie
under sub-section (3) of section 9;

(d) the manner in which and the purposes for which persons
may be associated with the State Board under sub-section (1) of

section 10;

(e) the terms and conditions of service of the chairman and
the member-secretary of the State Board under sub-section (9) of
section 5 and under sub-section (1) of section 12;

(f) the conditions subject to which a person may be appointed
as a consulting engineer to the State Board under sub-section (4) of

section 12;

(g) the powers and duties to be exercised and discharged by the
chairman and the member-secretary of the State Board;

(h) the form of the notice referred to in section 21;

(i) the form of the report of the State Board analyst under
sub-section (1) of section 22;

(7) the form of the report of the Government analyst under
sub-section (3) of section 22; ;

(k) the form of application for the consent of the State Bosd

red Sub-section (2) of section 25, and the particulars it may °™

(0) the manner in which inqui ye
tio quiry under sub-section (3) % °°
nea 1 roa Rod “4 respect of an application for obtaining
¢ Board and the matte: accou
Sranting or refusing such consent: 75 to be taken into

(m) the for ot
™m and manner in which appeals may a fol-


5t
(n) the form in which, and the time within which, the budget

and annual report of the State Board may be prepared and forward-
ed to the State Government under sections 38 and 39;

(०) the form in which the accounts of the State Board may be
maintained under sub-section (1) ofsertion 40;

(p) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.

The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.

_


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the prevention and control of water pollution and the
restoring of wholesomeness of water, for the establishment, with a view to
out the purposes aforesaid, of Boards for the prevention and control of water ay
lution, for conferring on and assigning to such Boards powers and functions relating
thereto and for matters connected therewith. ;

(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)