AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XXX of 2025 
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY 
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
 further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education Act, 2009. 
        BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:― 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education (Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment 
of section 2. 
2. In the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009,
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2 ––
(i) after   clause  (a),  the following  new  clause  shall  be
i
nserted, namely:― 
“(aa) “ Balvatika” means a preparatory class before 
class I, aimed at providing play-based, foundational learning 
to children between the ages of  three to six years,  to ensure 
their school readiness;” 
(ii) after  clause (ee), the  following  new  clause  shall  be
i
nserted, namely:― 
“(eee) “early childhood education” means play- based 
education provided to children from birth to the age of six 
years, including pre-primary classes, with focus on cognitive, 
psycho-social, emotional, motor and physical development;” 
(iii) For  clause  (f),  the  following  shall  be  substituted,
namely:― 
“(f) “elementary education” means pre-school and
school education for children aged three to fourteen years;” 
(iv) after-clause  (f),  the  following  new clause  shall  be
s
ubstituted, namely:― 
       “ (ff) “foundational literacy and numeracy” means the 
basic  ability to read and understand simple texts, and to 
perform basic arithmetic operations such as addition, 
subtraction, mu ltiplication, and division, typically 
achieved by the stage of class III ;” 
 
5 
10 
 
15 
20 
 
25 
35 of 2009. 
Amendment 
of section 3. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), for the word “six”,
the word “three” shall be substituted.
Amendment 
of section 8. 
4. In the Explanation to section 8 of the principal Act,―
(
i) in  clauses  (i) and (ii),  for  the word  “six”,  the  word
“three”, shall be substituted; and 
(ii) after clause (i) , the following new clauses shall be
inserted, namely:― 
 “( j)  ensure the mandatory achievement of foundational 
literacy and numeracy benchmarks for classes I to III in all 
schools under its jurisdiction: 
        P rovided that the appropriate Government, through 
its designated authorities, shall be responsible a
nd held 
accountable for meeting these benchmarks and shall be 
required to submit annual reports detailing the progress 
towards achieving the foundational literacy and numeracy 
targets, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(k) develop and monitor s tate-level achievement
benchmarks for foundational literacy and numeracy goals in 
classes I to III, in accordance with the National Education 
Policy, 2020; 
(l) ensure that all teachers in its jurisdiction receive
appropriate training in inclusive education  practices, 
particularly concerning children with learning disabilities, 
and ensure that periodic assessments and remedial measures 
are implemented for these children; 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
50 

3 
 
5 
10 
 
15 
20 
(m) ensure the establishment of “ Balvatikas” in every
government school for the purpose of providing early 
childhood education to children between the ages of three to 
six years, with the aim of ensuring school readiness;  
(n) provide digital devices and ensure the
implementation of digital literacy programs for children, with 
particular focu s on underserved and marginalized areas, in 
order to promote equitable access to digital education; 
(o) mandate continuous professional development for
all pre -primary and primary teachers, specifically in the 
pedagogy of early childhood education and incl usive 
education practices; 
(p) ensure early screening of all children for learnin g
di
sabilities at the primary school level, and provide remedial 
support through mainstream educational systems, with 
regular follow-up assessments and progress tracking; and 
(q) ensure the implementation of awareness campaigns
and programs aimed at educating parents on the importance 
of early childhood education through workshops, community 
outreach, and regular parent-teacher interactions. 
25 
 
30 
35 
5. For section 11 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted,
namely:―
“11. (1) With a view to prepare children above the age of 
three years for elementary education and ensure early childhood 
care and education for all children until they complete the age of 
six years, the appropriate Government shall make the necessary 
arrangements for providing free pre -
school education in all 
government schools and other relevant institutions, in accordance 
with the norms prescribed under this Act. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that
‘Balvatikas’ are established in every government school to provide 
early childhood education for children aged three to six years, 
aimed at ensuing their school readiness. 
(3) The provision of pre-school education as outlined in this
section shall include adequate infrastructure, qualified early 
childhood educators, developmentally appropriate learning 
materials, and a play -based curriculum, in alignment with the 
standards specified by an academic authority to be specified by the 
appropriate Government, under this Act." 
Amendment of 
section 11. 
 
Appropriate 
Government to 
provide for pre -
school education. 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
6. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following new sections shall be
inserted, namely;― 
“11A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in 
the official Gazette, establish the Central Council for Early 
Childhood Development, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2 ) The Central Council shall coordinate with the Union
Ministries of Women and Child Development, Education, Finance, 
Labour and Employment, and Commerce and Industry, and civil 
society representatives, to monitor and guide early childhood care 
and education practices across the country. 
(3
) The Central Council shall oversee the follo wing
functions:― 
(a) formulation of standards and guidelines for teacher
training and qualifications in early childhood education;  
Insertion of new 
sections 11A and 
11B. 
 
Council for Early 
Childhood 
Development. 

4 
 
Learning 
Disability 
Assessment.
(b) development and continuous review of an earl y
childhood education curriculum, with a focus on play- based 
learning and inclusive education practices; 
(
c) ensuring appropriate infrastructure tailored to the
developmental needs of children aged three to six years; 
(d) monitoring the implementation of early childhood
education standards at national and state levels, with periodic 
assessments and feedback mechanisms. 
(4) A State Council shall be established at the state level by
each State Government, by notification in the official Gazette, on 
the lines of the Central Council, which shall coordinate with the 
Central Council to ensure effective local implementation of early 
childhood education practices in alignment with the national 
standards. 
11B. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish district-
level learning disability assessment bodies to ensure early 
identification and support for children with learning disabilities. 
(2) All schools shall conduct regular screenings for
identifying learning disabilities, with remedial support integrated 
into the mainstream education system. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that schools are
adequately equipped to provide accommodation, including but not 
limited to special educators, inclusive  assessments, and remedial 
education, as required for children with learning disabilities.” 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20
Insertion of 
new section 
12A. 
 
Regulation of 
Private Pre-
Schools.
7. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be
inserted, namely:―
“12A.(1) All private pre -schools and early childhood 
education centres shall register with the respective State Education 
Department and shall be subject to the curriculum, safety, and 
teacher qualification standards as prescribed by an appropriate 
academic authority to be specified by the appropriate Government 
under this Act, or as notified by the Central Government. 
(2) T he State Government shall regulate all private pre -
schools and early childhood education centres as laid down under 
this Act.  
Provided that such regulation shall require strict adherence to 
the prescribed early  childhood education standards, including but 
not limited to: 
(a
) t
eacher   qualifications   and  ongoing  professional
de
velopment, 
(b) safety and health standards for children,
(c) curriculum and learning outcomes.
(3) N on -compliance with the provisions of this section,
including failure to register or failure to adhere to early childhood 
education standards, shall attract penalties as  provided under 
section 18 of this Act. 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
Amendment 
of section 16. 
8. In section 16 of the principal Act, after sub -section (1), the following
provisos shall be inserted, namely:―
“Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall prevent 
schools from conducting periodic assessments to monitor a child's 
academic progress:  
 
50 

5 
5 
Provided further that the periodic assessments shall be used 
solely for identifying learning gaps and for providi ng remedial 
support and shall not be competitive or harmful to the well -being 
of young children. 
Provided also that periodic assessments shall not be used for 
holding back a child in any class.” 
10 
9. In section 18 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following shall
be substituted, namely:— 
“(1) No school, including private pre -schools or early 
childhood education centres, other than those established, owned, 
or controlled by the appropriate  Government or local authority, 
shall be established or function without obtaining a certificate of 
recognition from the prescribed authority, by making an application 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.” 
Amendment of  
section 18. 
 
15 
 
20 
10. In section 19 of the principal Act―
(i) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:— 
 “Provided that for pre -primary classes in Balvatikas, private 
play schools and other  early childhood education centres, the 
Pupil-Teacher ratio shall not exceed  twenty.”; 
(ii) for the word ‘school’, in the marginal heading and wherever
it occurs, the words ‘school, Balvatika, private play school or other 
early childhood education centre, shall be substituted.” 
Amendment of 
section 19. 
25 
 
30 
11. In section 23 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 “(1A) For pre-primary teachers, specific qualifications and 
training requirements shall be established, including: 
(a) completion of an accredited early childhoo d
education program; 
(b) training in child development, inclusive education
practices, and play-based learning methodologies; 
(c) ongoing professional development and in- service
t
raining to keep abreast of best practices in early childhood 
education.” 
Amendment of 
section 23. 
 
35 
 
40 
12. In section 24 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following new 
sub-section shall  be inserted, namely:— 
 “(1A) Every teacher  shall be mandated to receive training 
in inclusive education practices, with specialized training in 
recognizing and addressing learning disabilities.  
Provided that every school   shall provide appropriate 
infrastructure and special educators in this regard.” 
Amendment of 
section 24. 
 
45 
 
50 
13. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“29A. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure 
universal access to digital devices and affordable internet for all 
students, particularly in underprivileged and rural areas, to bridge 
the digital divide and promote equitable access to technology -
assisted learning. 
(2) Every school, including government and private
institutions,  shall integrate digital literacy programs for students 
and teachers, ensuring equitable access to technology -assisted 
learning across all schools.  
Insertion of new 
section 29A. 
 
Access to Digital 
Devices and 
Digital Literacy. 

6 
 
(3) Non-compliance with the provisions of this section 
shall attract penalties as provided under section 18 of this Act. 
Amendment 
of section 31. 
 14. In section 31 of the principal Act, after sub -section (1), the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—  
  “Provided that the National Commission for Protection of 
Child Rights shall establish a formal grievance redressal 
mechanism for parents of children with disabilities who face 
educational discrimination or inadequate support in schools.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
  

7 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The current state of early childhood education (ECE) and primary 
education in India faces several significant challenges. A vast number of 
children, particularly those from socio -economically disadvantaged 
backgrounds, do not have access to structured and quality pre-primary education. 
Research indicates that over 85 per cent of brain development occurs before the 
age of six, yet many children enter primary school without the necessary 
cognitive, social, and emotional skills, putting them at a disadvantage from the 
very beginning. This plays a role in the low learning outcomes in children in 
primary grades. Studies have revealed that over half of the students in Class 5 
are unable to read Class 2 -level text, and a similar percentage do not achieve 
minimum proficiency levels by the end of primary school. Moreover, there is an 
evident gap in teacher training, with many educators not adequately equipped to 
handle the unique developmental needs of young children. Additionally, private 
and public preschools often operate without standardization, resulting in wide 
discrepancies and in the quality of education, infrastructure, and teacher 
qualifications. Many private pre -schools also operate through formal learning 
curriculum that is detrimental to the development of young learners. 
The proposed Bill aims to address these issues by introducing mandatory 
Early Childhood Education (ECE) programs in all government schools through 
the establishment of Balvatikas, or pre-primary classes, for children aged 3 to 6 
years. The se classes will focus on play -based, experiential learning and will 
ensure that every child is equipped with the foundational cognitive and socio -
emotional skills needed for successful transition into primary school education. 
To further support this, the Bill mandates specialized training for teachers 
engaged in early childhood and primary education, ensuring they are prepared 
to address the developmental needs of young learners through child- centered 
pedagogy and continuous professional development. 
In ad dition to the expanding access to ECE, the Bill emphasizes the 
critical importance of foundational literacy and numeracy skills. It proposes 
clear standards and benchmarks for literacy and numeracy skills by Grade 3, 
holding schools accountable for ensuring that students meet these goals. The Bill 
also includes provisions for regulating both private and public preschools, 
setting minimum standards for curriculum, safety, teacher qualifications, and 
infrastructure. This will ensure uniformity in the quality of early education 
across the country. 
Through these changes, the proposed Bill seeks to create a more equitable 
and effective education system that guarantees every child, regardless of 
background, has access to high -quality early education, enabling them  to 
succeed throughout their educational journey and beyond. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above-said objectives. 
 
FAUZIA KHAN. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides certain additional duties of the appropriate 
Government such as ensuring appropriate training in inclusive education 
practices, particularly for children with learning disabilities to all teachers in 
their jurisdiction, establishment of ‘Balvatikas’ in every government school for 
providing early childhood education to children between the ages of three to six 
years, provision of digital devices and  ensure implementation of digital literacy 
programs for children with particular focus on underserved a nd marginalized 
areas as well as awareness campaigns and programs on the importance of early 
childhood education for parents through workshops, community reach etc.  
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the appropriate  Government shall make all 
necessary arr angements for providing free pre -school education in all 
government schools and other relevant institutions including adequate 
infrastructure, qualified early childhood educators, developmentally appropriate 
learning materials, and a play -based curriculum.  Clause 6 of the Bill provides 
for the establishment of the Central Council for Early Childhood Development 
by the Central Government.   
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non -
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 
  

9 
  AN NEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE 
AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009 
  ( 35 OF 2009) 
 * *   * *   * 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ––
  * *   * *   * 
(
f) “elementary education” means the education from first class to
e
ighth class; 
Definitions. 
 * *   * *   * 
3. (1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen years, including a child
referred to in clause (d) or clause (e) of section 2, shall have the right to free 
and compulsory education in a neighbourhood school till the completion of 
his or her elementary education. 
Right of child to 
free and 
compulsory 
education. 
 * *   * *   * 
8. The appropriate Government shall —
(a) provide free and compulsory elementary education to every
child: 
Provided that where a child is admitted by his or her parents or 
guardian, as the case may be, in a school other than a school 
established, owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds 
provided directly or indirectly by the appropriate Government or a 
local authority, such child or his or her parents or guardian, as the case 
may be, shall not be entitled to make a claim for reimbursement of 
expenditure incurred on elementary education of the child in such other 
school. 
 Explanation.—The term “compulsory education” means 
obligation of the appropriate Government to — 
(i) provide free elementary education to every child of th e
a
ge of six to fourteen years; and 
(ii) ensure compulsory admission, attendance an d
completion of elementary education by every child of the age of 
six to fourteen years; 
(b) ensure availability of a neighbourhood school as specified in
section 6; 
(c) e nsure that the child belonging to weaker section and the
child belonging to disadvantaged group are not discriminated against 
and prevented from pursuing and completing elementary education on 
any grounds;  
(d) provide infrastructure including school building, teaching
staff and learning equipment; 
(e) provide special training facility specified in section 4;
(f) ensure and monitor admission, attendance and completion of
elementary education by every child; 
(g) ensure good quality elementary education conforming to the
standards and norms specified in the Schedule; 
(h) ensure timely prescribing of curriculum and courses of study
for elementary education; and 
Duties of 
appropriate 
Government. 

10 
(i) provide training facility for teachers.
 * *   * *   * 
Appropriate 
Government 
to provide for 
pre-school 
education.
11. With a view to prepare children above the age of three years for
elementary education and to provide early childhood care and education for 
all children until they complete the age of six years, the appropriate 
Government may make necessary arrangement for providing free pre-school 
education for such children. 
 *                        *                          *                          *                         * 
Examination 
and holding 
back in 
certain cases.
16. (1) There shall be a regular examination in the fifth class and in the
eighth class at the end of every academic year. 
(2 ) If a child fails in the examination referred to in sub -section (1), he
shall be given additional instruction and granted opportunity for re -
examination within a period of two months from the date of declaration of 
the result.  
(3) The appropriate Government may allow schools to hold back a chil
d
i
n the fifth class or in the eighth class or in both classes, in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, if he fails in the re -
examination referred to in sub-section (2):  
 Provided that the appropriate Government may decide not to hold 
back a child in any class till the completion of elementary education. 
(4 ) No child shall be expelled from a school till the completion of
elementary education. 
 * *   * *   * 
No School to 
be established 
without 
obtaining 
certificate of 
recognition.
18. (1) No school, other than a school established, owned or controlle d
by the appropriate Government or the local authority, shall, after the 
commencement of this Act, be established or function, without obtaining a 
certificate of recognition from such authority, by making an application in 
such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 
 * *   * *   * 
Qualifications 
for 
appointment 
and terms and 
conditions of 
service of 
teachers. 
23. (1) Any person possessing such minimum qualifications, as laid down
by an academic authority, authorised by the Central Government, by 
notification, shall be eligible for appointment as a teacher. 
(2 ) Where a State does not have adequate institutions offering courses or
training in teacher education, or teachers possessing minimum qualifications 
as laid down under sub- section (1) are not available in sufficient numbers, 
the Central Government may, if it deems necessary, by notification, relax the 
minimum qualifications required for appointment as a teacher, for such 
period, not exceeding five years, as may be specified in that notification:  
        Provided that a teacher who, at the commencement of this Act, 
does not possess minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-
section (1), shall acquire such minimum qualifications within a period 
of five years.  
 Provided further that every teacher appointed or in position as 
on the 31st March, 2015, who does not possess minimum qualifications 
as laid down under sub- section ( 1), shall acquire such minimum 
qualifications within a period of four years from the date of 
commencement of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education (Amendment) Act, 2017. 
( 3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions
of service of, teachers shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
24 of 2017. 
Duties of 
teachers and 
redressal of 
grievances.
24. (1) A teacher appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 23 shall
perform the following duties, namely:— 
(a) maintain regularity and punctuality in attending school;

11 
(b) conduct and complete the curriculum in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (2) of section 29; 
(c) complete entire curriculum within the specified time;
(d) assess the learning ability of each child and accordingly
supplement additional instructions, if any, as required; 
(e) hold regular meetings with parents and guardians and
a
pprise them about the regularity in attendance, ability to learn, 
progress made in learning and any other relevant information about 
the child; and  
(f) perform such other duties as may be prescribed.
(2) A teacher committing default in performance of duties specified in
sub-section (1), shall be liable to disciplinary action under the service rules 
applicable to him or her:  
    Provided that before taking such disciplinary action, 
reasonable opportunity of being heard shall be afforded to such 
teacher.  
(3) T he grievances, if any, of the teacher shall be redressed in such
manner as may be prescribed. 
 *                        *                       *                         *                       * 
 
4 of 2006. 
     31.(1) The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
constituted under section 3, or, as the case may be, the State Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights constituted under section 17, of the Commissions 
for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005, shall, in addition to the functions 
assigned to them under that Act, also perform the following functions, 
namely:— 
(a) examine and review the safeguards for rights provided by or
under this Act and recommend measures for their effective 
implementation; 
(b) inquire into complaints relating to child's right to free and
c
ompulsory education; and 
(c) take  necessary steps as provided under sections 15 and 24 of
the said Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act. 
Monitoring of 
child's right to 
education. 
 * *   *  *  *

RAJYA SABHA 
_________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Right of Children 
to Free and Compulsory Education  
Act, 2009. 
_________ 
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.) 
   RS-P&PS-PMB(E)―299―08.12.2025. 