AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA            
ON 26TH  JULY, 2024
Bill No. XXX of 2024 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:– 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 
5 2.  In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (7), the following new clauses 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
Amendment of 
article 124. 
10 
15 
   “(8) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court,  shall 
be eligible for any further office under the Constitution or under the 
Government of India or under the Government of any State after he has ceased 
to hold his office: 
         Provided that such Judge shall be eligible for any further office created 
under a law passed either by the Parliament or any State Legislature. 
(9) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court,
shall be eligible to join any political party or to be nominated to any political 
post by either the Central or the State Government after he has ceased to hold 
his office.”. 

2 
Amendment of 
article 148.
3. In article 148 of the Constitution, after clause (4), the following new clause
shall be inserted, namely:-
“(4A) No person who has held office as the Comptroller and Auditor
General shall be eligible to join any political party or to be nominated to any
political post by either the Central or the State Government.”. 5 
Insertion of new 
article 220A.
4. After article 220 of the Constitution, the following new article shall be
inserted, namely:-
Prohibition for 
holding of 
offices by a 
Judge of a High 
Court after 
demitting office.
“220 A. (1) No person who has held office as a Judge of a High Court
shall be eligible for any further office under the Constitution or under the
Government of India or under the Government of any State after he has ceased
to hold his office:
Provided that such Judge shall be eligible for any office created under a
law passed either by the Parliament or any State legislature.
(2)  No person who has held office as a Judge of the High Court shall be
eligible to join any political party or to be nominated to any political post by
either the Central or the State Government after he has ceased to hold his
office.”.
10 
15 
Insertion of new 
article 309A.
5. After article 309 of the Constitution, the following new article shall be
inserted namely:-
Restrictions for 
holding of 
offices by 
persons serving 
the Union or a 
State after 
demitting office.
“309A. (1) Notwithstanding any law made or rules framed under article
309, no person who has held any appointment to public services or any post in
connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State shall be eligible,-
(i) for any further office under the Constitution or under the
Government of India or the Government of any State for a period of three 
years after he has ceased to hold such post; and 
(ii) to join any political party or to be nominated to any political post
by either the Central or the State Government for a period of three years 
after he has ceased to hold such post.”. 
20 
25 
Amendment of 
article 319.
6. In article 319 of the Constitution, after clause (d), the following new clause
shall be inserted, namely:- 30 
“(e) the Chairman or a member other than the Chairman of the Union
Public Service Commission or the Chairman or a member other than the
Chairman of the State Public Commission shall be ineligible to join any
political party or to be nominated to any political post by either the Central or
the State Government.”.
35 
Amendment of 
article 324.
7. In article 324 of the Constitution, after clause (6), the following new clause
shall be inserted, namely:-
“(7) No person who has held office as the Chief Election Commissioner or
the Election Commissioner shall be eligible,-
(i) for any further office under the Constitution or under the
Government of India or under the Government of any State; and 
(ii) to join any political party or to be nominated to any political post
by either the Central or the State Government, 
after he has ceased to hold his office.”. 
40 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Constitution of India works on the principles of checks and balances 
amongst various organs of the State. The Executive is accountable to the 
Legislature.  An independent J udiciary keeps a check on the E xecutive and the 
Legislature as per the principles enshrined in the Constitution.  The Election 
Commission, Public Service Commission, Comptroller and Auditor General 
(CAG) are required to perform their constitutional duties without any fear and 
favour, and devoid of any interference from the Government.  The independence of 
these institutions is ensured through fixed tenure, financial independence, stringent 
removal procedure and restrictions after demitting the office. As per article 124, a 
Judge of the Supreme Court after ceasing to hold office cannot appear as a lawyer 
before any court or authority in India. Article 220 provides similar restrictions on a 
Judge of a High Court except for appearance before the Supreme Court or other 
High Courts.  The CAG and the Chairman/Members of the Public Service 
Commission cannot take up any other employment with Central or State 
Governments after demitting office.  These restrictions are laid down to avoid 
favouritism, during the period of holding such positions, towards the Government 
in power with the intent of se curing any post -retirement benefits. However, there 
are no such restrictions for the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts 
regarding any other office after retirement.  
Further there are no such restrictions on any of them when it comes to joining 
political parties, contesting elections or being nominated to certain posts.  There 
are notable instances of persons who held independent constitutional posts and 
later went on to join politics or were nominated to various posts. There have been 
two Supreme Court Judges in 1967 and 1983, who resigned from their posts to 
contest the presidential and parliamentary elections respectively.  Another 
Supreme Court Judge joined a political party in Tamil Nadu and contested 
elections five years after his retirement i n 1999.  A former Chief Election 
Commissioner became a Rajya Sabha Member and Minister in 2004.  A retired 
Chief Justice of India was nominated to the Rajya Sabha in 2020 within four 
months of his retirement. Recently a High Court Judge joined a political party 
immediately after taking premature retirement.  There have also been occasions 
where retired CAG and Judges have been appointed as Governors of States.   
Bureaucrats are also not  far behind in appointment to constitutional post s or 
joining political parties. Numerous bureaucrats have joined political parties and 
contested elections after resigning from service or soon after their retirement. The 
Election Commission had in 2012 recommended to the Union Government to 
provide for a cooling -off period for  top bureaucrats after their retirement before 
they could join political parties and contest elections but the Government rejected 
that recommendation. The Supreme Court had also dismissed a writ petition in 
May, 2022 that sought a direction from the apex Court to the Legislature to frame a 
law imposing a cooling -off period for retired bureaucrats before joining politics. 
The Court observed that it is for the Legislature to determine whether a cooling-off 
period is required for bureaucrats before they join  politics after retirement. There 
are rules at present which restrict a senior bureaucrat from joining a private job for 
at least one year after he or she retires from Government service. But there is no 
restriction on appointment to constitutional posts or on joining political parties.  
The famous judicial quote that ‘justice should not only be done but should 
also be seen to be done’ must be adhered to under all circumstances.  This applies 
equally to Judges, independent constitutional authorities and senior bureaucrats.  It 
is an indispensable trait while discharging their official functions.  Extending this 
principle to the period even after they demit office will have a salutary effect. A 
member of the Constituent Assembly, Shri K.T. Shah, had suggested  that Judges 
of constitutional courts should be legally barred from occupying executive posts. 
But the Constituent Assembly did not find favour with this. Former Union Law 

4 
Minister had once advocated a cooling -off period for Judges saying “pre -
retirement judgments are influenced by a desire for a post-retirement job”.  
 It is therefore proposed to have a cooling-off period of three years for joining 
political parties or being nominated to political posts by the Government for 
bureaucrats. For Judges and other independent constitutional authorities , it is 
proposed that there should be a total ban on any further appointments except as 
required by law passed by the appropriate legislature. This will instill confidence 
in the public at large and negate any allegations of quid pro quo. 
Hence, this Bill. 
A. D. SINGH

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
____________ 
(Shri A. D. Singh, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)─155-31.07.2024. 