1
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
section 305.
Bill No.  XXX of 2023
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 305 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, (hereinafter referred to as the
Code), the following section shall be substituted, namely: —
“305. If any person under eighteen years of age, any insane person, any
delirious person, any idiot, any specially-abled person, or any person in a state of
intoxication, commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide,
shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”
3. In the Code, in section 375, Exception 2, shall be omitted.
5
10
45 of 1860.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Abetment of
suicide of child,
insane person
or specially-
abled person.
Amendment of
section 375.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a society riddled with myriad distinctions. The plight of individuals who are 
specially-abled makes them vulnerable to extraneous pressures or coercion of any kind. The 
World Bank estimates that 15 per cent. of the world's population is affected by one disability 
or another. According to th e 2011 Census, the numb er of disabled in India stands at 2 .68 
crores or 2.21 per cent. o f the population. In th e last decade, India has unfortunately  
witnessed a spate of suicides by the specially -abled.
Suicides can be triggered by a variety of factors. The extreme levels of inequity 
notwithstanding, he specially-abled are at a high risk of being pushed towar ds the 
extreme. Section 305  of the Indian Penal Co de covers children , insane persons, and 
persons under intoxication. Consid ering the potential psychological impact of societal 
inequities,  limitations of opportunity, and general hostility, it becomes essential to 
place the life of the sp ecially-abled  in the same b racket.
Further, cases of  child molestation and Rape have always been a source of tension 
for a developing society lik e India. As per the repo rts of the National Crime Records 
Bureau (NCRB) in 2020, over twenty -eig ht thousand crimes reported under the 
Protection o f Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act wer e against girls. This was  
a total of 99 per cent. of crimes against children under the POCSO act. Further, u nder the 
same report, the crimes against 16 to 18 year old  girls were the hig hest at 14,092.
The data shows that minor girls continue to be the most vulnerable sections of 
society. In this context, up until the year 2022, the Indian Penal Code, 1860 did not ev en 
acknowledge forced sexual intercou rse by a man with his own wife, if she was 15 years 
of age and above. While the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 amended the Indian 
Penal Code to raise the age of consent to sexual intercourse to 18, but, it did not app ly 
further to Exception  2 of section 375.
It created a contradiction where exception 2 of section 375, i.e. “Sexual intercourse 
by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape” 
implied that forced sexual intercourse by a husband with a minor wife was decriminalized. 
However, in 2018, under the Independ ent Tought Vs Unio n o f India, 2017 case, the 
Supreme Court acknowledged this and read down the exception to raise the age of 
consent to 18. This decision was taken in line with  the age of consent and attaining 
majority as established in different laws and statutes across the country. It also  called 
for Parliament to rectify the anomaly and address violations of girls' rights due to child 
marriage. However, no amen dment has been  introduced in  this reg ard since th en.
The very existence of Exception 2, which fails to deter husbands from engaging in 
acts of forced sexual contact with their minor wives, adversely affects the physical and 
mental health of women and undermines their ability to live with dignity. Therefore, the 
provisions mentioned under the exception to this section f urther perpetuate inequality 
and violate the right to life and personal liberty, calling for urgent Parliamentary 
intervention.
This Bill proposes to p rotect the specially-abled  persons and bring such people, 
who abet their suicide, to justice and to bring greater clarity in preventing sexual violence 
against minor married girls.
Hence this Bill.
AMAR PATNAIK.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860 (45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * *
305. If any person under eighteen years of age, any insane person, any delirious
person, any idiot, or any person in a state of intoxication, commits suicide, whoever abets the
commission of such suicide, shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * * * *
375. * * * * * *
Exception 2.—Sexual intercouse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife
not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.
* * * * *
Rape.
Abetment of
suicide of child
or insane
person.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Dr. Amar Patnaik, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)-083–13.12.2023 .