THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH  AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninety-Sixth Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 239AA of the Constitution, in clause (2), in sub-clause (b), for the words
“Scheduled Castes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes and the women” shall be substituted.
3.  After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“330A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of article
239AA.
Insertion of
new article
330A.
Reservation of
seats for
women in the
House of the
People.
Bill No. XXX-C of 2008
AS PASSED BY THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH MARCH, 2010

2
(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (2) of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be:
Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union territory is one, then, in every
block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People, the seat in the
first general elections shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or
the Scheduled Tribes and no seat shall be so reserved in the other two general elections:
Provided further that where the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or Union territory are two,
then, in every block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People,—
(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes in the first two general elections in such a manner that the
same constituency is not reserved for women in both the aforesaid elections; and
(b) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or
the Scheduled Tribes in the third general elections.
(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number
of seats to be filled by direct election to the House of the People in a State or Union
territory shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in that State or Union territory in such manner, as Parliament
may by law determine:
Provided that where the seat, not being a seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to a State or Union territory is one, then, in every
block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People, the seat in the
first general elections shall be reserved for women and no seat shall be so reserved for
women in the other two general elections:
 Provided further that where the seats, not being seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to a State or Union territory are two, then in
every block comprising of three general elections to the House of the People,—
(a) one seat shall be reserved for women in the first two general elections in
such a manner that the same constituency is not reserved for women in both the
aforesaid elections; and
(b) no seat shall be reserved for women in the third general elections.”.
4. In article 331 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
  “Provided that where such nominations are made, in relation to every block
comprising of three general elections to the House, one seat shall be reserved for
nomination of a woman of Anglo-Indian community to every House constituted after
first two general elections and no seat shall be reserved for the women of that community
in the House constituted after the third general elections.”.
5. After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“332A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of every
State.
(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (3) of article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be:
Amendment
of article
331.
Insertion of
new article
332A.
Reservation
of seats for
women in the
Legislative
Assemblies of
the States.

3
Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State is one, then, in every block comprising
of three general elections to the Legislative Assembly of that State, the seat in the first
general elections shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be:
 Provided further that where the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State are two, then, in every block
comprising of three general elections to the Legislative Assembly of that State,—
(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes in the first two general elections in such a manner that the
same constituency is not reserved for women in both the aforesaid elections; and
(b) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes in the third general elections.
(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number
of seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be
reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies
in that State in such manner, as Parliament may by law determine.”.
6.  In article 333 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“Provided that where such nomination is made, in relation to every block
comprising of three general elections to the Assembly, the seat in the Assembly constituted
after the first general elections shall be reserved for nomination of a woman of the
Anglo-Indian community and no seat shall be reserved for the women of that community
in the Assembly constituted after the second and the third general elections.”.
7. After article 334 of the  Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“334A. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part or Part
VIII, the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for women in
the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly
of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a
period of fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution (Ninety-sixth
Amendment) Act, 2010:
  Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House
of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the
National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the then existing House,
Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital
Territory of  Delhi, as the case may be.”.
8. The amendments made to the Constitution by the Constitution (Ninety-sixth
Amendment) Act, 2010 shall not affect any representation in the House of the People, the
Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory
of Delhi until the dissolution of the House, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, as the case may be, in existence at the
commencement of the said Act.
Amendment
of article
333.
Insertion of
new article
334A.
Reservation
of seats for
women to
cease after
fifteen years.
Amendment
not to affect
representa-
tion in the
House of the
People or
Legislative
Assembly of
a State or
Legislative
Assembly of
the National
Capital
Territory of
Delhi.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(As passed by the Rajya Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—1074RS(S5)—09.03.2010.