SERVER 1 \ BILL 2004 \ LAW \6097LAW
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. XXX of 2006
THE ASSAM RIFLES BILL, 2006
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Persons subject to this Act.
CHAPTER II
CONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE FORCE
4. Constitution of Force.
5. Control, direction, etc.
6. Enrolment.
7. Liability for service outside India.
8. Resignation and withdrawal from the post.
9. Tenure of service under the Act.
10. Termination of service by Central Government.
11. Dismissal, removal or reduction by Director-General and by other officers.
12. Certificate of termination of service.
13. Restrictions on right to form associations, freedom of speech, etc.
CHAPTER III
S
ERVICE PRIVILEGES
14. Authorised deduction only to be made from pay.
15. Remedy of aggrieved persons other than officers.
16. Remedy of aggrieved officers.
17. Immunity from attachment.
18. Immunity from arrest for debt.
19. Immunity of persons attending Assam Rifles Court from arrest.
20. Savings of rights and privileges under other law.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFENCES
21. Offences in relation to the enemy and punishable with death.
22. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death.
23. Offences punishable more severely on active duty than at other times.
24. Mutiny.
25. Desertion and aiding desertion.
26. Absence without leave.
27. Striking or threatening superior officers.
28. Disobedience to superior officer.
C
LAUSES

(ii)
CLAUSES
29. Insubordination and obstruction.
30. Fraudulent enrolment.
31. False answers on enrolment.
32. Unbecoming conduct.
33. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct.
34. Ill-treating a subordinate.
35. Intoxication.
36. Permitting escape of person  in custody.
37. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement.
38. Escape from custody.
39. Offences in respect of property.
40. Extortion and corruption.
41. Making away with equipment.
42. Injury to property.
43. False accusations.
44. Falsifying official document and false declarations.
45. Signing in blank and failure to report.
46. Offences relating to Assam Rifles Court.
47. False evidence.
48. Unlawful detention of pay.
49. Violation of good order and discipline.
50. Miscellaneous offences.
51. Attempt.
52. Abetment of offences that have been committed.
53. Abetment of offences punishable with death and not committed.
54. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed.
55. Civil offences.
56. Civil offences not triable by an Assam Rifles Court.
CHAPTER V
P
UNISHMENTS
57. Punishment awardable by Assam Rifles Court.
58. Alternative punishments awardable by Assam Rifles Court.
59. Combination of punishments.
60. Retention in the Force of a person convicted on active duty.
61. Punishments otherwise than by Assam Rifles Courts.
62. Minor punishments.
63. Limit of punishments under section 62.
64. Punishment of officers below the rank of Deputy Commandant, subordinate officer
and Warrant officer by Deputy Inspector-General and others.
65. Punishment of officers below the rank of Commandant, subordinate officers and Warrant
Officer by the Inspector General and others.
66. Punishment of subordinate officers and Warrant Officer by Commandant, etc.
67. Collective fines.

CHAPTER VI
PENAL DEDUCTION
68. Deductions from pay and allowances of officers.
69. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons other than officers.
70. Computation of time of absence or custody.
71. Pay and allowances during trial.
72. Limit of certain deductions.
73. Deduction from public money due to a person.
74. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct.
75. Remission of deductions.
76. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from remitted deductions.
77. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his pay and allowances.
78. Period during which a person is deemed to be a prisoner of war.
CHAPTER VII
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL
79. Custody of offenders.
80. Duty of Commandant in regard to detention.
81. Interval between committal and trial.
82. Arrest by civil authorities.
83. Capture of deserters.
84. Inquiry into absence without leave.
85. Force Police Officers.
CHAPTER VIII
A
SSAM RIFLES COURTS
86. Kinds of Assam Rifles Courts.
87. Power to convene a General Assam Rifles Court.
88. Power to convene a Petty Assam Rifles Court.
89. Contents of warrants issued under sections 87 and 88.
90. Composition of General Assam Rifles Court.
91. Composition of a Petty Assam Rifles Court.
92. Summary Assam Rifles Court.
93. Dissolution of an Assam Rifles Court.
94. Powers of General Assam Rifles Court.
95. Powers of a Petty Assam Rifles Court.
96. Powers of a Summary Assam Rifles Court.
97. Prohibition of second trial.
98. Period of limitation for trial.
99. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act.
100. Application of this Act during term of sentence.
101. Place of trial.
102. Choice between criminal court and Assam Rifles Court.
103. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender.
C
LAUSES
(iii)

CHAPTER IX
PROCEDURE OF ASSAM RIFLES COURTS
104. Presiding Officer.
105. Law Officer.
106. Challenges.
107. Oaths of member, Law Officer and witness.
108. V oting by members.
109. General rules as to evidence.
110. Judicial notice.
111. Summoning of witnesses.
112. Documents exempted from production.
113. Commissions for examination of witness.
114. Examination of witness on commission.
115. Conviction of offence not charged.
116. Presumption as to signature.
117. Enrolment paper.
118. Presumption as to certain documents.
119. Reference by accused to Government officer.
120. Evidence of previous convictions and general character.
121. Lunacy of accused.
122. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial.
123. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 122.
124. Release of lunatic accused.
125. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives.
126. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial.
127. Order of disposal of property regarding which offence is committed.
128. Powers of Assam Rifles Court in relation to proceedings under this Act.
CHAPTER X
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION
129. Finding and sentence not valid unless confirmed.
130. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Assam Rifles Court.
131. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Assam Rifles Court.
132. Limitation of powers of confirming authority.
133. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences.
134. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship.
135. Revision of finding or sentence.
136. Finding and sentence of a Summary Assam Rifles Court.
137. T ransmission of proceedings of Summary Assam Rifles Court.
138. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases.
139. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of Assam Rifles Court.
140. Annulment of proceedings.
(iv)
CLAUSES

CHAPTER XI
EXECUTION OF SENTENCE, PARDON, REMISSION, ETC.
141. Form of sentence of death.
142. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment.
143. Execution of sentence of imprisonment.
144. T emporary custody of offender.
145. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special case.
146. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place.
147. Communication of certain orders to prison officers.
148. Execution of sentence of fine.
149. Informality or error in the order or warrant.
150. Pardon and remission.
151. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole or remission.
152. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment.
153. Orders pending suspension.
154. Release on suspension.
155. Computation of period of suspension.
156. Order after suspension.
157. Reconsideration of case after suspension.
158. Fresh sentence after suspension.
159. Scope of power of suspension.
160. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal.
CHAPTER XII
MISCELLANEOUS
161. Disposal of property of the members of the Force.
162. Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force.
163. Protection for acts of members of the Force.
164. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties.
165. Power to make rules.
166. Power to make regulations.
167. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
168. Repeal and savings.
(v)
CLAUSES

1
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. XXX of 2006
THE ASSAM RIFLES BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the governance of the Assam Rifles, an Armed
Force of the Union for ensuring the security of the borders of India, to carry out
Counter Insurgency Operations in the specified areas and to act in aid of civil
authorities for the maintenance of the law and order and for matters connected
therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Assam Rifles Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “active duty”, in relation to a person subject to this Act, means any duty as
a member of the Force during the period in which such person is attached to, or forms
part of, a unit of the Force—
(i) which is engaged in operations against an enemy or an insurgent or a
terrorist or any person in arms against the Union, or
(ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged on patrol or other guard duty
along the borders of India,
and includes duty by such person during any period declared by the Central Govern-
ment, by notification in the Official Gazette, as a period of active duty with reference to
any area in which or under any provision of this Act or for the purposes of any other
law for the time being in force, any person or class of persons subject to this Act may
be serving;
(b) “Assam Rifles Court” means a Court referred to in section 86;
(c) “battalion” means a unit of the Force constituted as battalion by the Central
Government;
(d) “Chief Law Officer” and “Law Officer” mean, respectively, the Chief Law
Officer and a Law Officer of the Force appointed by the Central Government;
(e) “civil offence” means an offence which is triable by a criminal court;
(f) “civil prison” means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal
prisoner under the Prisons Act, 1894, or under any other law for the time being in force;
(g) “Commandant”, when used in any provision of this Act with reference to any
unit of the Force, means the officer whose duty it is under the rules or regulations or in
the absence of such rules or regulations, by custom of the service, to discharge with
respect to that unit, the functions of a Commandant in regard to matters of the description
referred to in that provision;
(h) “criminal court” means a court of ordinary criminal justice in any part of
India;
(i) “deputation” means a period for which the services of a person belonging to
any department of the Central Government are placed at the disposal of the Director-
General;
(j) “Director-General” and “Additional Director-General” mean, respectively, the
Director-General and Additional Director-General of the Force appointed under sub-
sections (1) and (2) of section 5, respectively;
(k) “enemy” includes all armed mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates,
terrorists and any person in arms against whom it is the duty of any person subject to
this Act to take action;
(l) “enrolled person” means an under-officer or other person enrolled under this
Act;
(m) “Force” means the Assam Rifles;
(n) “Force custody” means the arrest or confinement of a member of the Force
according to rules and includes any military custody of such member under the Army
Act, 1950;
(o) “Inspector-General” and “Deputy Inspector-General” mean, respectively,
the Inspector-General and the Deputy Inspector-General of the Force appointed under
sub-section (2) of section 5;
9 of 1894.
46 of 1950.
Definitions.

3
(p) “member of the Force” means an officer, a subordinate officer, an under-
officer or other enrolled person and includes the persons on deputation;
(q) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(r) “offence” means any act or omission punishable under this Act and includes
a civil offence;
(s) “officer” means a person appointed or in pay as an officer of the Force; but
does not include a subordinate officer or an under-officer;
(t) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(u) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Central Government under
this Act;
(v) “rule” means a rule made under this Act;
(w) “subordinate officer” means a person appointed or in pay as a Subedar
Major, a Subedar or a Naib Subedar of the Force;
(x) “superior officer”, when used in relation to a person subject to this Act,
means—
(i) any member of the Force or a person on deputation to whose command
such person is for the time being subject in accordance with the rules;
(ii) any officer of higher rank or class or of a higher grade in the same class,
and includes when such person is not an officer, a subordinate officer or an under-
officer of higher rank, class or grade;
(y) “terrorist” means any person who, with intent to overawe the Government as
by law established or to strike terror in the people or any section of the people or to
alienate any section of the people or to adversely affect the harmony amongst different
sections of the people, does any act or thing by using bombs, dynamite or other
explosive substances or inflammable substances or fire-arms or other lethal weapons
or poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or any other substances (whether
biological or otherwise) of a hazardous nature in such a manner, as to cause or is likely
to cause death of, or injury to, any person or persons, or damage to, or destruction of,
property or disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community;
.
(z) “under-officer” means a Warrant Officer, Havildar, Naik and Lance Naik of the
Force;
(za) “unit” means any—
(i) battalion; or
(ii) regiment; or
(iii) training institution; or
(iv) Head Quarters of Deputy Inspector-General; or
(v) Head Quarters of Inspector-General; or
(vi) Head Quarters of Director-General,
of the Force and includes any other formation of the Force specified, by notification,
by the Central Government.
(2) All words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian
Penal Code shall have the meanings assigned to them in that Code.
45 of 1860.

4
(3) In this Act, reference to any law not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall
be construed as references to the corresponding law in force in that State.
3.(1) The following persons (whether on deputation or otherwise employed) shall be
subject to this Act, wherever they may be, namely:—
(a) officers and subordinate officers; and
(b) under-officers and other persons enrolled under this Act.
(2) Members of the Force in existence at the commencement of this Act shall be
deemed to have been appointed or, as the case may be, enrolled as such under this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any person who is employed
in the Force on deputation from the regular Army as defined under clause (xxi) of section 3
of the Army Act, 1950 shall not be subject to this Act and shall, during the period of such
deputation, be deemed to be subject to the Army Act, 1950:
Provided that such person in regard to his duties and discipline shall be deemed to be
under the command of the member of the Force under whose command such person for the
time being is placed:
Provided further that, in case of such person, for the purposes of his duties and
discipline, the expression “active duty” defined in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2
shall be deemed to be the “active service” as defined in clause (i) of section 3 of the Army
Act, 1950 for taking any action against him under the provisions of the said Army Act.
(4) Any person who is not subject to this Act is posted for any service with the
members of the Force or engaged to accompany with or to provide any service in any manner
to the members of the Force in such—
(i) camp;
(ii) line of march;
(iii) frontier post;
(iv) active duty; or
(v) counter insurgency operations,
as may be specified, by notification, by the Central Government in this behalf shall be
deemed to be a member of the Force, till he is so posted or engaged in such corresponding
rank as may be determined, by notification, by the Central Government for the purposes of
this Act.
(5) Every person subject to this Act shall remain so subject until retired, discharged,
released, removed or dismissed from the Force in accordance with the provisions of this Act
and the rules.
CHAPTER II
C
ONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE FORCE
4. (1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the Assam Rifles  for ensuring
the security of the borders of India, to carry out counter insurgency operations in the
specified areas and to act in aid of civil authorities for the maintenance of law and order and
the matters connected therewith.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Force shall be reconstituted in such
manner as may be prescribed and the conditions of service of the members of the Force
shall be such as may be prescribed.
Persons
subject to this
Act.
46 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
Constitution
of Force.

5
5. (1) The general superintendence, direction and control of the Force shall vest in,
and be exercised by, the Central Government and subject thereto and to the provisions of
this Act and the rules and regulations, the command and supervision of the Force shall vest
in an officer to be appointed by the Central Government as the Director-General of the Force.
(2) The Director-General shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be assisted
by such number of Additional Director-General, Inspectors-General, Deputy Inspectors-
General, Commandants and other officers as may be appointed by the Central Government.
6. (1) The persons to be enrolled to the Force, the mode of enrolment and the procedure
for enrolment shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the rules and regulations,
every person who has, for a continuous period of three months, been in receipt of pay as a
person enrolled under this Act and borne on the rolls of the Force shall be deemed to have
been duly enrolled.
(3) No person who is not a citizen of India shall, except by the consent of the Central
Government signified in writing, be enrolled in the Force.
7. Every member of the Force shall be liable to serve in any part of India as well as
outside India.
8. No member of the Force shall be at liberty—
(a) to resign his appointment during the term of his engagement; or
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment,
except with the previous permission in writing of the prescribed authority.
9. Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
10. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations, the Central
Government may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act.
11. (1) The Director-General, Additional Director-General or any Inspector-General
may dismiss or remove from service or reduce to a lower grade or rank or the ranks any
person subject to this Act other than an officer.
(2) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector-General may dismiss or remove
from the service any person under his command other than an officer or a subordinate officer
of such rank or the ranks as may be prescribed.
(3) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub-section (2) may reduce to a lower grade or
rank or the ranks any person under his command except an officer or a subordinate officer.
(4) The exercise of any power under this section shall be subject to the provisions of
this Act and the rules and regulations.
12. A subordinate officer or an under-officer or other enrolled person who is retired,
discharged, released, removed or dismissed from service shall be furnished by the officer, to
whose command he is subject, with a certificate in the language which is the mother-tongue
of such person and also in Hindi and English language setting forth—
(a) the authority terminating his service;
(b) the cause for such termination; and
(c) the full period of his service in the Force.
Control,
direction, etc.
Enrolment.
Liability for
service outside
India.
Resignation
and
withdrawal
from the post.
Tenure of
service under
the Act.
Termination
of service by
Central
Government.
Dismissal,
removal or
reduction by
Director-
General and
by other
officers.
Certificate of
termination
of service.

6
13. (1) No person subject to this Act shall, without the previous sanction in writing of
the Central Government or of the prescribed authority,—
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour
union, political association or with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political
associations; or
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society, institution,
association or organisation that is not recognised as part of the Force or is not of a
purely social, recreational or religious nature; or
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book,
letter or other document except where such communication or publication is in the
bonafide discharge of his duties or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character
or is of a prescribed nature.
Explanation.—If any question arises as to whether any society, institution, association
or organisation is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause (b) of this
sub-section, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.
(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take
part in any demonstration organised by any body or persons for any political purposes or for
such other purposes as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
S
ERVICE PRIVILEGES
14. The pay of every person subject to this Act due to him as such under any rules or
regulations for the time being in force shall be paid without any deduction other than the
deductions authorised by or under this Act or any other Act.
15. (1) Any person subject to this Act other than an officer who deems himself wronged
by any officer or subordinate officer may complain to the officer under whose command or
orders he is serving.
(2) When the officer complained against is the officer to whom any complaint should,
under sub-section (1), be preferred, the aggrieved person may complain to such officer’s
next superior officer.
(3) Every officer receiving any such complaint shall make as complete an investigation
into it as may be possible for giving full redress to the complainant; or when necessary, refer
the complaint to superior authority.
(4) Every such complaint shall be preferred in such manner as may, from time to time, be
specified by the Director-General.
(5) The Central Government may revise any decision by the Director-General under
sub-section (2), but, subject thereto, the decision of the Director-General shall be final.
16. Any officer who deems himself wronged by his Commandant or any superior
officer and who on due application made to his Commandant or such superior officer does
not receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled, may complain to the Central
Government in such manner as may, from time to time, be specified by the Director-General.
17.  Neither the arms, clothes, equipment, accoutrements or necessaries of any person
subject to this Act, nor any animal used by him for the discharge of his duty shall be seized,
nor shall, the pay and allowances of any such person or any part thereof, be attached, by
direction of any civil or revenue court or any revenue officer in satisfaction of any decree or
order enforceable against him.
Restrictions
on right to
form
associations,
freedom of
speech, etc.
Authorised
deduction only
to be made
from pay.
Remedy of
aggrieved
persons other
than officers.
Remedy of
aggrieved
officers.
Immunity
from
attachment.

7
18. (1) No person subject to this Act shall, so long as he belongs to the Force, be liable
to be arrested for debt under any process issued by, or by the authority of, any civil or
revenue court or revenue officer, except with the prior consent of the Central Government.
(2) The Judge of any such court or the said officer may examine into any complaint
made by such person or his superior officer of the arrest of such person contrary to the
provisions of this section and may, by warrant under his hand, discharge the person, and
award reasonable costs to the complainant, who may recover those costs in like manner as
he might have recovered costs awarded to him by a decree against the person obtaining the
process.
(3) For the recovery of such costs no court-fee shall be payable by the complainant.
19. (1) No Presiding Officer or member of an Assam Rifles Court, no Law Officer, no
party to any proceeding before an Assam Rifles Court, or his legal practitioner or agent and
no witness acting in obedience to a summons to attend an Assam Rifles Court shall, while
proceeding to, attending or returning from, an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to arrest under
civil or revenue process.
(2) If any such person is arrested under any such process, he may be discharged by
order of the Assam Rifles Court.
20. The rights and privileges specified in the preceding section of this Chapter shall be
in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other rights and privileges conferred on persons
subject to this Act generally by any other law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFENCES
21. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post, place or guard, committed to
his charge or which it is his duty to defend; or
(b) intentionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to this
Act or to army, naval, air force law or any member of other armed forces to abstain from
acting against the enemy or to discourage such person from acting against the enemy;
or
(c) in the presence of enemy, shamefully casts away his arms, ammunition, tools
or equipment or misbehaves in such manner as to show cowardice; or
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to,
the enemy or any person in arms against the Union; or
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy with money, arms, ammunition, stores
or supplies or in any other manner whatsoever; or
(f) in time of active operation against the enemy intentionally occasions a false
alarm in action, camp, quarters or spreads or causes to be spread reports calculated to
create alarm or despondency; or
(g) in time of action leaves his Commandant or other superior officer or his post,
guard, picket, patrol or party without being regularly relieved or without leave; or
(h) having been captured by the enemy or made a prisoner of war, voluntarily
serves with or aids the enemy; or
(i) knowingly harbours or protects an enemy not being a prisoner; or
(j) being a sentry in time of active operation against the enemy or alarm , sleeps
upon his post or is intoxicated; or
Immunity
from arrest
for debt.
Immunity of
persons
attending
Assam Rifles
Court from
arrest.
Savings of
rights and
privileges
under other
law.
Offences in
relation to
the enemy
and
punishable
with death.

8
(k) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of the Force or the
army, naval, air forces of India or any other armed forces of the Central Government co-
operating therewith or any part of such forces,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punish-
ment as is in this Act mentioned.
22. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) is taken prisoner or captured by the enemy, by want of due precaution or
through disobedience of orders, or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner
or so captured fails to rejoin his service when able to do so; or
(b) without due authority holds correspondence with, or communicates
intelligence to, the enemy or any person in league with the enemy or having come by
the knowledge of any such correspondence or communication, wilfully omits to
discover it immediately to his Commandant or other superior officer,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
23. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) forces a safeguard or forces or uses criminal force to a sentry; or
(b) breaks into any house or other place in search of plunder; or
(c) being a sentry, sleeps upon his post or is intoxicated; or
(d) without orders from his superior officer, leaves his guard, picket, patrol or
posts; or
(e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a false alarm in camp or quarters,
or spreads or causes to be spread reports calculated to create unnecessary alarm or
despondency; or
(f) makes known the parole, watchword or countersign to any person not entitled
to receive it; or
(g) knowingly gives a parole, watchword or countersign different from what he
received,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court,
(A) if he commits any such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned; and
(B) if he commits any such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned.
24. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other person to cause any
mutiny in the Force or in the army, naval or air forces of India or any forces co-
operating therewith; or
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavours to
suppress the same; or
Offences in
relation to
the enemy
and not
punishable
with death.
Offences
punishable
more severely
on active duty
than at other
times.
Mutiny.

9
(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or
of any intention to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give
information thereof to his Commandant or other superior officer; or
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the Force or in the army, naval or air
forces of India or any forces cooperating therewith from his duty or allegiance to the
Union,
 shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned.
25. (1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or attempts to desert the service
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court,—
(a) if he commits the offence when on active duty or when under orders for
active duty, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned;
and
(b) if he commits the offence under any other circumstances, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned.
(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly harbours any such deserter shall,
on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognisant of any desertion or attempt at
desertion of a person subject to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own or some
other superior officer, or take any steps in his power to cause such person to be apprehended,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
26. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) absents himself without leave; or
(b) without sufficient cause, overstays leave granted to him; or
(c) being on leave of absence and having received information from the
appropriate authority that any battalion or part thereof or any other unit of the Force,
to which he belongs, has been ordered on active duty, fails, without sufficient cause,
to rejoin without delay; or
(d) without sufficient cause, fails to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place
appointed for exercise or duty; or
(e) when on parade, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause or without
leave from his superior officer, quits the parade or line of march; or
(f) when in camp or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, or in any place
prohibited, by any general, local or other order, without a pass or written leave from his
superior officer; or
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause, absents himself
from any school when duly ordered to attend there, shall, on conviction by an Assam
Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
27. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) uses criminal force to or assaults his superior officer; or
(b) uses threatening language to such officer; or
Desertion and
aiding
desertion.
Absence
without
leave.
Striking or
threatening
superior
officers.

10
(c) uses insubordinate language to such officer,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court,—
(A) if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or, if the offence is
committed on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend
to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and
(B) in other cases, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend
to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned:
Provided that in the case of an offence specified in clause (c), the imprisonment shall
not exceed five years.
28. (1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys, in such manner as to show a
wilful defiance of authority, any lawful command given personally by his superior officer in
the execution of his office whether the same is given orally, or in writing or by signal or
otherwise, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for
a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful command given by his
superior officer shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court,—
(a) if he commits such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned; and
(b) if he commits such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is
in this Act mentioned.
29. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affray or disorder, refuses to obey any
officer, though of inferior rank, who orders him into arrest, or uses criminal force to or
assaults any such officer; or
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person, whether subject to this Act or
not, in whose custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or is not his superior
officer; or
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to apprehend him or to have him in charge;
or
(d) breaks out of barracks, camp or quarters; or
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other order; or
(f) impedes the Force Police referred to in section 85 or any person lawfully
acting on its behalf, or when called upon, refuses to assist in the execution of his duty
a Force Police or any person lawfully acting on his behalf, shall, on conviction by an
Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend, in the
case of the offences specified in clauses (d) and (e), to two years, and in the case of the
offences specified in the other clauses, to ten years, or in either case such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
30. Any person subject to this Act who knowingly attempts to get enrolled or enrolls
any other person who does not fulfil the conditions enabling him to be enrolled, shall, on
conviction by the Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
31. Any person having become subject to this Act who is discovered to have made at
the time of enrolment a wilfully false answer to any question set-forth in the prescribed form
Disobedience
to superior
officer.
Insubordination
and
obstruction.
Fraudulent
enrolment.
False answers
on enrolment.

11
of enrolment which has been put to him by the enrolling officer before whom he appears for
the purpose of being enrolled, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is
in this Act mentioned.
32. Any officer, subordinate officer or an under-officer who behaves in a manner
unbecoming his position and the character expected of him shall, on conviction by an Assam
Rifles Court, be liable to be dismissed or to suffer such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.
33. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or
(b) malingers, or feigns or produces disease or infirmity in himself or intentionally
delays his cure or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily
causes hurt to himself or that person,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
34. Any officer, subordinate officer or an under-officer who uses criminal force to or
otherwise ill-treats any person subject to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or position,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
35. Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state of intoxication whether on
duty or not, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
36. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) when in command of guard, picket, patrol or post, releases without proper
authority, whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any person committed to his
charge, or refuses to receive any prisoner or person so committed; or
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to escape any person who is
committed to his charge, or whom it is his duty to keep or guard,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this
Act mentioned; and if he has not acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
37. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say, —
(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or confinement without bringing him
to trial, or fails to bring his case before the proper authority for investigation; or
(b) having committed a person to Force custody fails without reasonable cause
to deliver at the time of such committal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case
within forty-eight hours thereafter , to the officer or other person into whose custody
the person arrested is committed, an account in writing signed by himself of the
offence with which the person so committed is charged,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
Unbecoming
conduct.
Certain forms
of disgraceful
conduct.
Ill-treating a
subordinate.
Intoxication.
Permitting
escape of
person in
custody.
Irregularity in
connection
with arrest or
confinement.

12
38. Any person subject to this Act who, being in lawful custody, escapes or attempts
to escape, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for
a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
39. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any Force
mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any such property;
or
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in respect of any such property; or
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such property in respect of which any of
the offences under clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) has been committed, knowing or having
reason to believe the commission of such offence; or
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Government entrusted to him;
or
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one
person or wrongful loss to another person,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
40. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) commits extortion; or
(b) without proper authority extracts from any person money, provisions or
service,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
41. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that
is to say,—
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away with any arms, ammunition,
equipment, instruments, tools, clothing or any other thing being the property of the
Government issued to him for his use or entrusted to him; or
(b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause (a); or
(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal or decoration granted to him,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend, in the case of the offences specified in clause (a), to ten years, and in the
case of the offences specified in the other clauses, to five years, or in either case such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
42. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause (a) of section 41 or any
property belonging to any Force mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to
this Act; or
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of, any property of
the Government by fire; or
Offences in
respect of
property.
Escape from
custody.
Extortion and
corruption.
Making away
with
equipment.
Injury to
property.

13
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill-treats or loses any animal entrusted to him,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this
Act mentioned; and if he has acted without reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
43. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing or
having reason to believe such accusation to be false; or
(b) in making complaint against any person subject to this Act, makes any
statement affecting the character of such person, knowing or having reason to believe
such statement to be false, or knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material facts,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
44. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or other document made or signed
by him, or of the contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy, knowingly
makes, or is privy to the making of, any false or fraudulent statement; or
(b) in any document of the description mentioned in clause (a), knowingly makes,
or is privy to the making of, any omission, with intent to defraud; or
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person or knowingly and with intent
to defraud, suppresses, defaces, alters or makes away with any document which it is
his duty to preserve or produce; or
(d) where it is his official duty to make a declaration respecting any matter,
knowingly makes a false declaration; or
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension, allowance or other
advantage or privilege by a statement which is false, and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, or by making or using false entry in
any book or record, or by making any document containing a false statement, or by
omitting to make a true entry or document containing a true statement,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
45. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) when signing any document relating to pay, arms, ammunition, equipment,
clothing, supplies or stores, or any property of the Government fraudulently leaves in
blank any material part for which his signature is a voucher; or
(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or send a report or return which
it is his duty to make or send,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
46. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before an Assam
Rifles Court, wilfully or without reasonable excuse, makes default in attending; or
False
accusations.
Falsifying
official
document and
false
declarations.
Signing in
blank and
failure to
report.
Offences
relating to
Assam Rifles
Court.

14
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by an Assam
Rifles Court to be taken or made; or
(c) refuses to produce or deliver any document in his power or control legally
required by an Assam Rifles Court to be produced or delivered by him; or
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question which he is by law bound to
answer; or
(e) is guilty of contempt of the Assam Rifles Court by using insulting or
threatening language, or by causing any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings
of such Court,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
47. Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly sworn or affirmed before
any Assam Rifles Court or other court competent under this Act to administer an oath or
affirmation, makes any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be
false or does not believe to be true, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable
to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned.
48. Any officer, subordinate officer or an under-officer who, having received the pay
of a person subject to this Act, unlawfully detains or refuses to pay the same when due, shall,
on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
49. Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act or omission which, though
not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the Force shall, on
conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
50. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
to say,—
(a) being in command at any post or on the march, and receiving a complaint that
anyone under his command has beaten or otherwise mal-treated or oppressed any
person, or has disturbed any fair or market, or committed any riot or trespass, fails to
have due reparation made to the injured person or to report the case to the proper
authority; or
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise, intentionally insults the religion,
or wounds the religious feelings of any person; or
(c) attempts to commit suicide, and in such attempt does any act towards the
commission of such offence; or
(d) being below the rank of subordinate officer, when off duty, appears without
proper authority, in or about camp, or when going to, or returning from, any town or
bazaar, carrying a rifle, sword or other offensive weapons; or
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to
obtain, for himself or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or reward for
procuring the enrolment of any person or leave of absence, promotion or any other
advantage or indulgence for any person in the service; or
(f) commits any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or
resident in, the country in which he is serving,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
False
evidence.
Unlawful
detention of
pay.
Violation of
good order
and discipline.
Miscellaneous
offences.

15
51. Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences
specified in sections 21 to 50 (both inclusive) and in such attempt does any act towards the
commission of the offence shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, where no express
provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such attempt, be liable,—
(a) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death, to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned; and
(b) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term provided
for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
52. Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences
specified in sections 21 to 50 (both inclusive) shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court,
if the Act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no express provision is
made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
53. Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences
punishable with death under sections 21, 24 and clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 25
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, if that offence, be not committed in
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment
of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen
years of such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
54. Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences
specified in sections 21 to 50 (both inclusive) and punishable with imprisonment shall, on
conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, if that offence, be not committed in consequence of the
abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment,
be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
55. Subject to the provisions of section 56, any person subject to this Act who at any
place in, or beyond, India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an
offence against this Act and, if charged therewith under this section, shall be liable to be tried
by an Assam Rifles Court and, on conviction, be punishable as follows, that is to say,—
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in
India with death, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment assigned for the offence,
by the aforesaid law and such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment assigned for the
offence by the law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years, or such less punishment as in this Act mentioned.
56. A person subject to this Act who commits an offence of murder or of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder against, or of rape in relation to, a person not subject to
this Act shall not be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this Act and shall not be tried
by an Assam Rifles Court, unless he commits any of the said offences,—
(a) while on active duty; or
(b) at any place outside India; or
(c) at any place specified by the Central Government, by notification in this
behalf.
Attempt.
Abetment of
offences that
have been
committed.
Abetment of
offences
punishable
with death
and not
committed.
Abetment of
offences
punishable
with
imprisonment
and not
committed.
Civil
offences.
Civil offences
not triable by
an Assam
Rifles Court.

16
CHAPTER V
PUNISHMENTS
57. (1) Punishments may be inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons
subject to this Act and convicted by the Assam Rifles Courts, according to the scale following,
that is to say,—
(a) death;
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or any other lesser term but
excluding imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody;
(c) dismissal from the service;
(d) compulsory retirement from service;
(e) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody except
in case of officers and subordinate officers;
(f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their
rank in the case of an under-officer;
(g) forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part of the service for
the purpose of promotion;
(h) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other
prescribed purpose;
(i) fine;
(j) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persons below the rank of
an under-officer;
(k) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for
an offence committed on active duty;
(l) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to dismissal from the service of all
arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such
dismissal;
(m) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence for which he is convicted is made good.
(2) Each of the punishments specified in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be inferior
in degree to every punishment preceding it in the above scale.
58. Subject to the provisions of this Act, an Assam Rifles Court may, on convicting a
person subject to this Act of any of the offences specified in sections 21 to 54 (both inclusive)
award either the particular punishment with which the offence is stated in the said sections
to be punishable or, in lieu thereof, any of the punishments lower in the scale set out in
section 57 regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence.
59. A sentence of an Assam Rifles Court may award in addition to, or without any one
other punishment, the punishment specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 57,
and any one more of the punishments specified in clauses (f) to (m) (both inclusive) of that
sub-section.
60. When on active duty, any enrolled person has been sentenced by an Assam Rifles
Court to dismissal or to imprisonment whether combined with dismissal or not, the prescribed
officer may direct that such person may be retained to serve in the ranks, and such service
shall be reckoned as part of his term of imprisonment, if any.
61. Punishments may also be inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons
subject to this Act without the intervention of an Assam Rifles Court in the manner stated in
sections 62, 64, 65 and 66.
Punishment
awardable by
Assam Rifles
Courts.
Alternative
punishments
awardable by
Assam Rifles
Courts.
Combination
of
punishments.
Retention in
the Force of a
person
convicted on
active duty.
Punishments
otherwise than
by Assam
Rifles Courts.

17
62. Subject to the provisions of section 63, a Commandant or such other officer as is,
with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director-General may, in the
prescribed manner, proceed against a person subject to this Act, otherwise than as an officer
or a subordinate officer or a Warrant Officer who is charged with an offence under this Act
and award such person to the extent prescribed, one or more of the following punishments,
that is to say,—
(a) imprisonment in Force custody up to twenty-eight days;
(b) detention up to twenty-eight days;
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty-eight days;
(d) extra guards or duties;
(e) deprivation of any special position or special emoluments or any acting rank
or reduction to a lower grade of pay;
(f) forfeiture of good service and good conduct pay;
(g) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(h) fine upto fourteen days’ pay in any one month;
(i) deduction from his pay and allowance of any sum required to make good such
compensation for any expense, loss, damage or destruction caused by him to the
Central Government, or to any building or property as may be awarded by his Commandant.
63. (1) In the case of an award of two or more of the punishments specified in clauses
(a), (b), (c) and (d) of section 62, the punishments specified in clause (c) or clause (d) shall
take effect only at the end of the punishment specified in clause (a) or clause (b).
(2) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clause (a), (b) and (c)
are awarded to a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said
punishments, the whole extent of the punishments shall not exceed in the aggregate forty-
two days.
(3) The punishments specified in the said clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall not be awarded
to any person who is of the rank of an under-officer or was at the time of committing the
offence for which he is punished of such rank.
(4) The punishments specified in clause (g) of section of 62 shall not be awarded to
any person below the rank of an under-officer.
64. (1) An officer not below the rank of the Deputy Inspector-General or such other
officer as is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director-General
may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against an officer below the rank of a Deputy
Commandant and of any rank of subordinate officer and of a rank of Warrant Officer who is
charged with an offence under this Act and award one or more of the following punishments,
that is to say,—
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends
upon the length of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a
period not exceeding twelve months, but subject to the right of the accused previous
to the award to elect to be tried by an Assam Rifles Court;
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(c) stoppage of pay and allowance until any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence of which he is convicted is made good.
(2) In every case in which punishment has been awarded under sub-section (1), certified
true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the officer
awarding the punishment to the prescribed superior authority who may, if the punishment
awarded, appears to him to be illegal, unjust or excessive, cancel, vary or remit the punishment
and make such other direction as may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case.
Minor
punishments.
Limit of
punishments
under section
62.
Punishment
of
officers below
the rank of
Deputy
Commandant,
subordinate
officers and
Warrant
Officer by
Deputy
Inspectors-
General and
others.

18
65. (1) An officer not below the rank of the Inspector-General or such other officer as
is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director-General may, in the
prescribed manner, proceed against an officer below the rank of a Commandant and any
subordinate officer and a Warrant Officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and
award one or more of the following punishments, that is to say,—
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends
upon the length of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a
period not exceeding twelve months, but subject to the right of the accused previous
to the award to elect to be tried by an Assam Rifles Court;
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(c) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence of which he is convicted is made good.
(2) In every case in which punishment has been awarded under sub-section (1), certified
true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the officer
awarding the punishment to the prescribed superior authority who may, if the punishment
awarded appears to him to be illegal, unjust or excessive, cancel, vary or remit the punishment
and make such other direction as may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case.
66. A Commandant or such other officer as is, with the consent of the Central
Government, specified by the Director-General may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against
any subordinate officer or a Warrant Officer who is charged with an offence under this Act
and award one or more of the following punishments, that is to say,—
(a) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(b) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence of which he is convicted is made good:
Provided that the punishment mentioned under clause (a) shall only be awarded by an
officer not below the rank of Commandant authorised by the Director-General to award such
punishment.
67. (1) Whenever any weapon or part of a weapon, or ammunition, forming part of the
equipment of a unit of the Force, is lost or stolen, an officer not below rank of the Commandant
of a battalion may, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit and subject to the rules and
regulations, impose a collective fine upon the subordinate officer, under-officer and men of
such unit, or upon so many of them as, in his judgment, should be held responsible for such
loss or theft.
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage on the pay of the individuals on whom
it falls.
CHAPTER VI
P
ENAL DEDUCTOINS
68. The following penal deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of an
officer, that is to say,—
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every day he absents himself
without leave, unless a satisfactory explanation has been given to his commanding
officer and has been approved by the Central Government;
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody or under
suspension from duty on a charge for an offence for which he is afterwards convicted by
a criminal court or an Assam Rifles Court or by an officer exercising authority under
section 64 or section 65;
(c) any sum required to make good the pay of any person subject to this Act
which he has unlawfully retained or unlawfully refused to pay;
Punishment
of officers
below the
rank of a
Commandant,
subordinate
officers and
Warrant
Officer by the
Inspectors-
General and
others.
Punishment
of subordinate
officers and
Warrant
Officer by
Commandant,
etc.
Collective
fines.
Deductions
from pay and
allowances of
officers.

19
(d) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss,
damage or destruction occasioned by the commission of an offence as may be deter-
mined by an Assam Rifles Court by whom he is convicted of such offence or by an
officer exercising authority under section 64 or section 65;
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by an Assam Rifles Court to be forfeited or
stopped;
(f) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court or an Assam Rifles
Court;
(g) any sum required to make good any loss, damage or destruction of public or
regimental property which, after due investigation, appears to the Central Government
to have been occasioned by the wrongful act or negligence on the part of the officer;
(h) all pay and allowances forfeited by order of the Central Government if the
officer is found by a Court of inquiry constituted by the Director General in this behalf,
to have deserted to the enemy, or while in enemy hands, to have served with, or under
the orders of, the enemy, or in any manner to have aided the enemy, or to have allowed
himself to be taken prisoner by the enemy through want of due precaution or through
disobedience of orders or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner by the
enemy, to have failed to rejoin his service when it was possible to do so;
(i) any sum required by order of the Central Government to be paid for the
maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or towards the cost of any
relief given by the said Government to the said wife or child.
69. Subject to the provisions of section 72, the following penal deductions may be made
from the pay and allowances of a person subject to this Act other than an officer, that is to
say,—
(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on desertion or
without leave, or as a prisoner of war unless a satisfactory explanation has been given
and accepted by his Commandant, and for every day of imprisonment awarded
by a criminal court, an Assam Rifles Court or an officer exercising authority under
section 62;
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody on a charge for an
offence of which he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court or an Assam Rifles
Court or on a charge of absence without leave for which he is afterwards awarded
imprisonment by an officer exercising authority under section 62;
(c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he is in hospital on account of
sickness certified by the medical officer attending on him to have been caused by an
offence under this Act committed by him;
(d) for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness certified by
the medical officer attending on him to have been caused by his own misconduct or
imprudence, such sum as may be specified by the order of the Central Government or
such officer as may be specified by that Government;
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by an Assam Rifles Court or by an officer
exercising authority under any of the sections 62, 64, 65 and 66 to be forfeited or
stopped;
(f) all pay and allowances for every day between his being recovered from the
enemy and his dismissal from the service in consequence of his conduct when being
taken prisoner by, or while in the hands of the enemy;
(g) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss,
damage or destruction caused by him to the Central Government or to any building or
property as may be awarded by his Commandant;
Deductions
from pay and
allowances of
persons other
than officers.

20
(h) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court, an Assam Rifles
Court or an officer exercising authority under any of the sections 62 and 69;
(i) any sum required by order of the Central Government or any prescribed
officer to be paid for the maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or
towards the cost of any relief given by the said Government to the said wife or child.
70. For the purpose of clauses (a) and (b) of section 69,—
(a) no person shall be treated as absent or in custody for a day unless the
absence or custody has lasted, whether wholly in one day, or partly in one day and
partly in another, for six consecutive hours or upwards;
(b) any absence or custody for less than a day may be reckoned as absence or
custody for a day if such absence or custody prevented the absentee from fulfilling
any duty which was thereby thrown upon some other person;
(c) absence or custody for twelve consecutive hours or upward may be reck-
oned as absence or custody for the whole of each day during any portion of which the
person was absent or in custody;
(d) a period of absence or imprisonment, which commences before, and ends
after, midnight may be reckoned as a day.
71. In case of any person subject to this Act who is in custody or under suspension
from duty on a charge for an offence, the prescribed officer may direct that the whole or any
part of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld, pending the result of his
trial on the charge against him, in order to give effect to the provisions of clause ( b) of
section 68 and section 69.
72. The total deductions from the pay and allowances of a person made under clauses
(e), (g) to (i) of section 69 shall not, except where he is sentenced to dismissal or removal,
exceed in any one month one-half of his pay and allowances of that month.
73. Any sum authorised by this Act to be deducted from the pay and allowances of
any person may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovering the same, be deducted
from any public money due to him other than a pension.
74. Where the conduct of any person subject to this Act when being taken prisoner
by, or while in the hands of the enemy, is to be inquired into under this Act or any other law,
the Director-General or any officer authorised by him may order that the whole or any part of
the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld pending the result of such inquiry.
75. Any deduction from pay and allowances authorised by this Act may be remitted in
such manner and to such extent and by such authority, as may, from time to time be pre-
scribed.
76. In the case of all persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, whose pay and
allowances have been forfeited under clause ( a) of section 69, but in respect of whom a
remission has been made under section 75, it shall be lawful for proper provision to be made
by the prescribed authorities out of such pay and allowances for any dependants of such
persons, and any such remission shall in that case be deemed to apply only to the balance
thereafter remaining of such pay and allowances.
77. It shall be lawful for proper provision to be made by the prescribed authorities for
any dependants of any person subject to this Act who is prisoner of war or is missing, out of
his pay and allowances.
78. For the purposes of sections 76 and 77, a person shall be deemed to continue to be
prisoner of war until the conclusion of any inquiry into his conduct such as is referred to in
section 74 and if he is dismissed or removed from the service in consequence of such
conduct, until the date of such dismissal or removal.
Computation
of time of
absence of
custody.
Pay and
allowances
during trial.
Limit of
certain
deductions.
Deduction
from public
money due to
a person.
Pay and
allowances of
prisoner of
war during
inquiry into
his conduct.
Remission of
deductions.
Provision for
dependents of
prisoner of
war from
remitted
deductions.
Provision for
dependents of
prisoner of war
from his pay
and allowances.
Period during
which a person
is deemed to be
a prisoner of
war.

21
CHAPTER VII
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL
79. (1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may be taken
into Force custody, under the order of any superior officer.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an officer may order into
Force custody any other officer, though such other officer may be of a higher rank, engaged
in a quarrel, affray or disorder.
80. (1) It shall be the duty of every Commandant to take care that a person under his
command when charged with an offence is not detained in custody for more than forty-eight
hours after the committal of such person into custody is reported to him without the charge
being investigated, unless investigation within that period seems to him to be impracticable
having regard to the public service.
(2) The case of every person, being detained in custody beyond a period of forty-eight
hours, and reason thereof, shall be reported by the Commandant to the Deputy Inspector-
General under whom he is serving or such other officer to whom an application may be made
to convene an Assam Rifles Court for the trial of the person charged.
(3) In reckoning the period of forty-eight hours specified in sub-section (1), Sundays
and other public holidays shall be excluded.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make rules
providing for the manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act
may be taken into and detained in Force custody, pending the trial by any competent authority
for any offence committed by him.
81. In every case where any such person as is mentioned in section 79 and as not on
active duty, remains in such custody for a longer period than eight days, without his trial by
an Assam Rifles Court being ordered to be convened, a special report giving reasons for the
delay shall be made by his Commandant in the manner prescribed, and a similar report shall
be forwarded at intervals of every eight days until an Assam Rifles Court is convened or
such person is released from custody.
82. Whenever any person subject to this Act who is accused of an offence under this
Act, is within the jurisdiction of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or police
officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to Force custody of such person upon
receipt of a written application to that effect signed by his Commandant or an officer autho-
rised by the Commandant in that behalf.
83. (1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the Commandant of the unit
to which he belongs, shall give information of the desertion to such civil authorities as, in his
opinion, may be able to afford assistance towards the capture of the deserter; and such
authorities shall thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in like man-
ner as if he were a person for whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a magistrate
and shall deliver the deserter, when apprehended, into Force custody.
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be
subject to this Act, and to be deserter or to be travelling without authority, and shall bring
him without delay before the nearest magistrate, to be dealt with according to law.
84. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent from his duty without
due authority for a period of thirty days, a court of inquiry shall, as soon as practicable, be
assembled and such court shall, on oath or affirmation administered in the prescribed man-
ner, inquire respecting the absence of the person, and the deficiency, if any, in the property
of the Government entrusted to his care, or in any arms, ammunition, equipment, instru-
ments, clothing or necessaries; and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without due
authority or other sufficient cause, the court shall declare such absence and the period
Custody of
offenders.
Duty of
Commandant
in regard to
detention.
Interval
between
committal
and trial.
Arrest by
civil
authorities.
Capture of
deserters.
Inquiry into
absence
without leave.

22
thereof and the said deficiency, if any, and the Commandant of the unit to which the person
belongs shall make a record thereof in the prescribed manner.
(2) If the person declared absent does not afterwards surrender or is not apprehended,
he shall, for the purpose of this Act, be a deemed to be a deserter.
85. (1) The Director-General or any prescribed officer may appoint persons (in this
Act referred to as Force Police) for discharging the functions specified in sub-sections
(2) and (3).
(2) The duties of a person appointed under sub-section (1), are to take charge of
persons confined for any offence, to preserve good order and discipline and to prevent
breaches of the same by persons serving in, or attached to, the Force.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 79, a person appointed under
sub-section (1) may, at any time, arrest and detain for trial, any person subject to this
Act who commits, or is charged with, an offence, and may also carry into effect any
punishment to be inflicted in pursuance of a sentence awarded by an Assam Rifles Court
or by an officer exercising authority under section 62 but shall not inflict any punish-
ment on his own authority:
Provided that no officer shall be arrested or detained otherwise than on the order of
another officer.
CHAPTER VIII
A
SSAM RIFLES COURTS
86. For the purposes of this Act there shall be three kinds of Assam Rifles Courts, that
is to say,—
(a) General Assam Rifles Courts;
(b) Petty Assam Rifles Courts; and
(c) Summary Assam Rifles Courts.
87. A General Assam Rifles Court may be convened by the Central Government or the
Director-General or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Director-
General.
88. A Petty Assam Rifles Court may be convened by an officer having power to
convene a General Assam Rifles Court or by an officer empowered in this behalf by warrant
of any such officer.
89. A warrant issued under section 87 or section 88 may contain such restrictions,
reservations or conditions as the officer issuing it may think fit.
90. A General Assam Rifles Court shall consist of not less than five officers, each of
whom has held the post of Assistant Commandant for not less than three whole years and of
whom not less than four are of a rank not below that of a confirmed Assistant Commandant.
Explanation.—For  the purpose of this section and section 91, “Assistant Comman-
dant” includes any post of a higher rank and any post declared by the Central Government, by
notification, to be an equivalent post as also any post higher in rank than the post so declared.
91. A Petty Assam Rifles Court shall consist of not less than three officers, each of
whom has held the post of Assistant Commandant for not less than two whole years.
92. (1) A Summary Assam Rifles Court may be held by the Commandant of any unit of
the Force and he alone shall constitute the Court.
Force Police
Officers.
Kinds of
Assam Rifles
Courts.
Power to
convene a
General
Assam Rifles
Court.
Contents of
warrants issued
under sections
87 and 88.
Composition
of General
Assam Rifles
Court.
Composition
of a Petty
Assam Rifles
Court.
Summary
Assam Rifles
Court.
Power to con-
vene a Petty
Assam Rifles
Court.

23
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be
officers or subordinate officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or
affirmed.
93. (1) If an Assam Rifles Court after the commencement of a trial is reduced below the
minimum number of officers required by this Act, it shall be dissolved.
(2) If, on account of the illness of the Law Officer or of the accused before the finding,
it is impossible to continue the trial, an Assam Rifles Court shall be dissolved.
(3) The officer who convened an Assam Rifles Court may dissolve the same if it
appears to him that the exigencies of the service or necessities of discipline render it impos-
sible or inexpedient to continue the said Assam Rifles Court.
(4) Where an Assam Rifles Court is dissolved under this section, the accused may be
tried again.
94. A General Assam Rifles Court shall have the power to try any person subject to
this Act for any offence punishable thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised
thereby.
95. A Petty Assam Rifles Court shall have power to try any person subject to this Act
other than an officer or a subordinate officer for any offence made punishable thereunder
and to pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of death or imprison-
ment for a term exceeding two years.
96. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), a Summary Assam Rifles Court
may try any offence punishable under this Act.
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and reference can without
detriment to discipline be made to the officer empowered to convene a Petty Assam Rifles
Court for the trial of the alleged offender, an officer holding a Summary Assam Rifles Court
shall not try without such reference any offence punishable under any of the sections 21, 24
and 55, or any offence against the officer holding the Court.
(3) A Summary Assam Rifles Court may try any person subject to this Act and under
the command of the officer holding the Court, except an officer or a subordinate officer.
(4) A Summary Assam Rifles Court may pass any sentence which may be passed under
this Act except the sentence of death or of imprisonment for a term exceeding the limit
specified in sub-section (5).
(5) The limit referred to in sub-section (4) shall be—
(a) one year, if the officer holding the Assam Rifles Court has held either the post
of Commandant or a post declared by the Central Government, by notification, to be
equivalent thereto for a period of not less than three years or holds a post of higher
rank than either of the said posts; and
(b) three months, in any other case.
97. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been acquitted or convicted of an
offence by an Assam Rifles Court or by a criminal court or has been dealt with under section
62 or section 64 or section 65 or section 66, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the same
offence by an Assam Rifles Court or dealt with under the said sections.
(2) When any person, subject to this Act has been acquitted or convicted of an
offence by an Assam Rifles Court or has been dealt with under section 62 or section 64 or
section 65 or section 66, he shall not be liable to be tried again by a criminal court for the same
offence or on the same facts.
98. (1) Except as provided by sub-section (2), no trial by an Assam Rifles Court of any
person subject to this Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expiration of a period
of three years and such period shall commence—
Dissolution of
an Assam
Rifles Court.
Power of
General
Assam Rifles
Court.
Power of a
Petty Assam
Rifles Court.
Power of a
Summary
Assam Rifles
Court.
Prohibition
of second
trial.
Period of
limitation for
trial.
.

24
(a) on the date of the offence ; or
(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved
by the offence or to the authority competent to initiate action, from the first day on
which such offence comes to the knowledge of such person or authority, whichever is
earlier; or
(c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, from the first day
on which the identity of the offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence
or to the authority competent to initiate action, whichever is earlier:
Provided that in computing any period under this section, the period during which the
proceedings of investigation has been stayed by any court in such offence by injunction or
order, the period of the continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued
or made; and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to a trial for an offence of deser-
tion or for any of the offences mentioned in section 24 or an offence under section 30.
(3) In computation of the period of three years under sub-section (1), any time spent
by such person in evading arrest after the commission of the offence, shall be excluded.
99. (1) Where an offence under this Act had been committed by any person while
subject to this Act and he had ceased to be so subject, he may be taken into and kept in Force
custody and tried and punished for such offence as if he continued to be so subject.
(2) No such person shall be tried for an offence, unless his trial commences within a
period of three years after he had ceased to be subject to this Act; and in computing such
period, the time during which such person has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing
himself or where the institution of the proceeding in respect of the offence has been stayed
by an injunction or order, the period of the continuance of the injunction or order, the day on
which it was issued or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the trial of any such
person for an offence of desertion or for any of the offences mentioned in section 24 or shall
affect the jurisdiction of a criminal court to try an offence triable by such court as well as by
an Assam Rifles Court.
100. (1) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court to
imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during the term of his sentence, though he is
dismissed from the Force or has otherwise ceased to be subject to this Act, and he may be
kept, removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject to this Act.
(2) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court to death,
this Act shall apply to him till the sentence is carried out.
101. Any person subject to this Act who commits any offence against it may be tried
and punished for such offence in any place whatever.
102. When a criminal court and an Assam Rifles Court have each jurisdiction in re-
spect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the Director-General, or the Inspector-
General or the Deputy Inspector-General within whose command the accused person is
serving or such other officer as may be prescribed, to decide before which court proceedings
shall be instituted, and, if that officer, decides that they shall be instituted before an Assam
Rifles Court, to direct that the accused person shall be detained in Force custody.
103. (1) When a criminal court having jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings shall
be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged offence, it may, by written notice, require
the officer referred to in section 102 at his option, either to deliver over the offender to the
nearest Magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to postpone proceedings,
pending a reference to the Central Government.
Trial, etc., of
offender who
ceases to be
subject to this
Act.
Application
of this Act
during term of
sentence.
Place of trial.
Choice
between
criminal court
and Assam
Rifles Court.
Power of
criminal court
to require
delivery of
offender.

25
(2) In every such case the said officer shall either deliver over the offender in compli-
ance with the requisition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before which
the proceedings are to be instituted, for the determination of the Central Government whose
order upon such reference shall be final.
CHAPTER IX
P
ROCEDURE OF ASSAM RIFLES COURTS
104. At every General Assam Rifles Court or Petty Assam Rifles Court, the senior
member shall be the presiding officer.
105. Every General Assam Rifles Court shall, and every Petty Assam Rifles Court
may, be attended by a Law Officer, or if no such officer is available, an officer approved by the
Chief Law Officer or a Law Officer.
106. (1) At all trials by a General Assam Rifles Court or by a Petty Assam Rifles Court,
as soon as the Court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and members shall be
read over to the accused, who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to being tried by
any officer sitting on the court.
(2) If the accused objects to such officer, his objection and also the reply thereto of the
officer objected to, shall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the court shall,
in the absence of the challenged officer, decide on the objection.
(3) If the objection is allowed by one-half or more of the votes of the officers entitled
to vote, the objection shall be allowed, and the member objected to shall retire, and his
vacancy may be filled in the prescribed manner, by another officer subject to the same right
of the accused to object.
(4) When no challenge is made, or when a challenge has been made and disallowed, or
the place of every officer successfully challenged has been filled by another officer to whom
no objection is made or allowed, the court shall proceed with the trial.
107. (1) An oath or affirmation in the prescribed manner shall be administered to every
member of an Assam Rifles Court and to the Law Officer or, as the case may be, the officer
approved under section 105 before the commencement of the trial.
(2) Every person giving evidence before an Assam Rifles Court shall be examined after
being duly sworn or affirmed in the prescribed form.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall not apply where the witness is a child under
twelve years of age and the Assam Rifles Court is of opinion that though the witness
understands the duty of speaking the truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or
affirmation.
108. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), every decision of an
Assam Rifles Court shall be passed by a majority of votes; and where there is an equality of
votes on either the finding or the sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the accused.
(2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a General Assam Rifles Court without the
concurrence of at least two-thirds of the members of the Court.
(3) In matters, other than a challenge or the finding or sentence, the presiding officer
shall have a casting vote.
109. The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, apply
to all proceedings before an Assam Rifles Court.
110. An Assam Rifles Court may take judicial notice of any matter within the general
knowledge of the members as officers of the Force.
111. (1) The convening officer, the presiding officer of an Assam Rifles Court or court
of inquiry or the Law Officer or, as the case may be, the officer approved under section 105 or
Presiding
Officer.
Law Officer.
Challenges.
Oath of
member, Law
Officer and
witness.
V oting by
members.
General rule
as to
evidence.
1 of 1872.
Judicial
notice.
Summoning
of witness.

26
the Commandant of the accused person may, by summons under his hand, require the
attendance, at a time and place to be mentioned in the summons, of any person either to give
evidence or to produce any document or other thing.
(2) In the case of a witness, who is subject to this Act, the summons shall be sent to his
Commandant and such officer shall serve it upon him accordingly.
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to the Magistrate
within whose jurisdiction he may be, or resides, and such Magistrate shall give effect to the
summons as if the witness were required in the court of such Magistrate.
112. (1) Nothing in section 111 shall be deemed to affect the operation of sections 123
and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or to apply to any letter, postcard, telegram or other
document in the custody of the postal or telegraph authorities.
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Court of Session or High Court, wanted for the purpose of
any Assam Rifles Court, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph au-
thorities, as the case may be, to deliver such document to such person as such Magistrate,
or Court may direct.
(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of any other Magistrate or of any Commis-
sioner of Police or District Superintendent of Police, wanted for any such purpose, he may
require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to cause such search to be
made for, and to detain such document pending the orders of any such Chief Judicial Mag-
istrate, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Court of Session or High Court.
113. (1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by an Assam Rifles Court, it appears to the
Court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of justice, and that the
attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or
inconvenience which, in the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, such court
may address the Chief Law Officer in order that a commission to take the evidence of such
witness may be issued.
(2) The Chief Law Officer may then, if he thinks necessary, issue a commission to any
Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction such witness resides, to take the evidence of such witness.
(3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class to whom the
commission is issued, or, if he is the Chief Judicial Magistrate, he or such Judicial Magistrate
of the first class as he appoints in this behalf, shall summon the witness before him and shall
take down his evidence in the same manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same
powers, as in the trials of warrant-cases under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in any place outside India, the commis-
sion may be issued in the manner specified in sub-heading “B— Commissions for the
examination of witnesses” of Chapter XXIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
114. (1) The prosecutor and the accused person in any case in which a commission is
issued under section 113 may respectively forward any interrogatories in writing which the
court may think relevant to the issue, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Judicial
Magistrate of the first class executing the commission shall examine the witness upon such
interrogatories.
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such Chief Judicial
Magistrate or the Judicial Magistrate of the first class by counsel or, except in the case of an
accused person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross-examine and re-examine, as
the case may be, the said witness.
(3) After a commission issued under section 113 has been duly executed, it shall be
returned, together with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder to the Chief Law
Officer.
Documents
exempted
from
production.
Commission
for
examination
of witness.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Examination
of witness on
commission.
1 of 1872.

27
(4) On receipt of a commission, and deposition returned under sub-section ( 3), the
Chief Law Officer shall forward the same to the court at whose instance the commission was
issued or, if such court has been dissolved, to any other court convened for the trial of the
accused person and the commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open to
inspection by the prosecutor and the accused person, and may, subject to all just exceptions,
be read in evidence in the case by either the prosecutor or the accused, and shall form part of
the proceedings of the court.
(5) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 113, the trial may be
adjourned for specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the com-
mission.
115. A person charged before an Assam Rifles Court—
(a) with desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert or of being absent
without leave;
(b) with attempting to desert may be found guilty of being absent without leave;
(c) with using criminal force may be found guilty of assault;
(d) with using threatening language may be found guilty of using insubordinate
language;
(e) with any one of the offences specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section
39 may be found guilty of any other of these offences with which he might have been
charged;
(f) with an offence punishable under section 55 may be found guilty of any other
offence of which he might have been found guilty, if the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, were applicable;
(g) with any offence under this Act may, on failure of proof of an offence having
been committed in circumstances involving a more severe punishment, be found guilty
of the same offence as having been committed in circumstances involving a less
severe punishment;
(h) with any offence under this Act may be found guilty of having attempted or
abetted the commission of that offence, although the attempt or abetment is not sepa-
rately charged.
116. In any proceeding under this Act, any application, certificate, warrant, reply or
other document purporting to be signed by an officer in the service of the Government shall,
on production, be presumed to have been duly signed by the person by whom and in the
character in which it purports to have been signed, until the contrary is shown.
117. (1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed by an enrolling officer shall, in
proceedings under this Act, be evidence of the person enrolled having given the answers to
questions which he is therein represented as having given.
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or
a copy of this enrolment paper purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer
having custody of enrolment paper.
118. (1) A letter, return or other document respecting the service of any person in, or
the dismissal, removal or discharge of any person from, any unit of the Force, or respecting
the circumstances of any person not having served in, or belonged to any unit of the Force,
if purporting to be signed by or on behalf of the Central Government or the Director-General,
or by any prescribed officer, shall be the evidence of facts stated in such letter, return or other
document.
(2) An Assam Rifles list or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be
evidence of the status and rank of the officers, subordinate officers therein mentioned, and
Conviction of
offences not
charged.
2 of 1974.
Presumption
as to
signatures.
Enrolment
paper.
Presumption
as to certain
documents.

28
of any appointment held by them and of the battalion, unit or branch of the Force to which
they belong.
(3) Where a record is made in any battalion book in pursuance of this Act or of any
rules or otherwise in the discharge of official duties, and purporting to be signed by the
Commandant or by the officer whose duty it is to make such record, such record shall be
evidence of the facts therein stated.
(4) A copy of any record in any battalion book purporting to be certified to be a true
copy by the officer having custody of such book shall be evidence of such record.
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of
absence without leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of any
officer or other person subject to this Act, or any unit of the Force, or has been apprehended
by such officer or person, a certificate purporting to be signed by such officer or by the
Commandant of the unit to which such person belongs, as the case may be, and stating the
fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension, and the manner in which he was
dressed, shall be the evidence of the matters so stated.
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of
absence without leave and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of, or has
been apprehended by, a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police
station, a certificate purporting to be signed by such police officer and stating facts, the date
and place of such surrender or apprehension, and the manner in which he was dressed shall
be evidence of the matters so stated.
(7) Any document purporting to be the report under the hand of a Government scien-
tific expert, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or analysis and
report in the course of any proceeding under this Act, may be used as evidence in any
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Act.
(8) The Assam Rifles Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine the expert referred
to in sub-section (7) as to the subject matter of his report.
(9) Where any such expert is summoned by an Assam Rifles Court and he is unable to
attend personally, he may, unless the Court has expressly directed him to appear personally,
depute any responsible officer working with him to attend the Court, if such deputed officer
is conversant with the facts of the case and satisfactorily depose in the Court on his behalf.
(10) The provisions of sub-sections (7), (8) and (9) shall apply to such Government
scientific experts as specified in sub-section ( 4) of section 293 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
119. (1) If at any trial for desertion or absence without leave, overstaying leave or not
rejoining when warned for service, the accused person states in his defence any sufficient or
reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers in support thereof to any officer
in the service of the Government, or if it appears that any such officer is likely to prove or
disprove the said statement in the defence, the Court shall address such officer and adjourn
the proceedings until his reply is received.
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall, if signed by him, be received in
evidence and have the same effect as if made on oath before the Court.
(3) If the Court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply or if the Court omits to
comply with the provisions of this section, the convening officer may, at his discretion,
annul the proceedings and order a fresh trial.
120. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by an Assam Rifles
Court of any offence, such Assam Rifles Court may inquire into, and receive, and record
evidence of any previous convictions of such person, either by an Assam Rifles Court or by
a criminal court, or any previous award of punishment under section 62 or section 64 or
2 of 1974.
Reference by
accused to
Government
officer.
Evidence of
previous
convictions
and general
character.

29
section 65 or section 66, and may further inquire into and record the general character of such
person and such other matters as may be prescribed.
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries
in, or certified extracts from, books of an Assam Rifles Court, or other official records; and it
shall not be necessary to give notice before trial to the person tried that evidence as to his
previous convictions or character will be received.
(3) At a Summary Assam Rifles Court, the officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit,
record any pervious convictions against the offender, his general character, and such other
matters as may be prescribed, as of his own knowledge, instead of requiring them to be
proved under the foregoing provisions of this section.
121. (1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by an Assam Rifles Court, it appears to the
Court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making his
defence, or that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind
incapable of knowing the nature of the act or knowing that it was wrong or contrary to law,
the Court shall record a finding accordingly.
(2) The presiding officer of the Court, or in the case of a Summary Assam Rifles Court,
the officer holding the trial, shall forthwith report the case to the confirming officer, or to the
authority empowered to deal with its findings under section 137, as the case may be.
(3) The confirming officer to whom the case is reported under sub-section (2) may, if he
does not confirm the finding, take steps to have the accused person tried by the same or
another Assam Rifles Court for the offence with which he was charged.
(4) The authority to whom the finding of a Summary Assam Rifles Court is reported
under sub-section (2), and a confirming officer confirming the finding in any case so re-
ported to him shall order the accused person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner
and shall report the case for the orders of the Central Government.
(5) On receipt of a report under sub-section (4), the Central Government may order the
accused person to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.
122. Where any accused person, having been found by reason of unsoundness of
mind to be incapable of making his defence, is in custody or under detention under section
121, any officer prescribed in this behalf, may,—
(a) if such person is in custody under sub-section ( 4) of section 121, on the
report of a medical officer that he is capable of making his defence, or
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub-section (5) of section 121 on a
certificate of the Inspector-General of Prisons, and if such person is detained in a
lunatic asylum under the said sub-section, on a certificate of any two or more of the
visitors of such asylum and if he is detained in any other place under that sub-section,
on a certificate of the prescribed authority, that he is capable of making his defence,
take steps to have such person tried by the same or another Assam Rifles Court for the
offence with which he was originally charged or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a criminal
court.
123. A copy of every order made by an officer under section 122 for the trial of the
accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central Government.
124. Where any person is in custody under sub-section ( 4) of section 121 or under
detention under sub-section (5) of that section,—
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub-section (4), on the report of
a medical officer, or
Lunacy of
accused.
Subsequent
fitness of
lunatic
accused for
trial.
Transmission
to Central
Government
of orders
under section
122.
Release of
lunatic
accused.

30
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub-section (5), on a certificate from
any of the authorities mentioned in clause (b) of section 122 that in the judgment of
such officer or authority such person may be released without danger of his doing
injury to himself or to any other person,
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody, or
transferred to a public lunatic asylum if he has not already been to such an asylum.
125. Where any relative or friend of any person who is in custody under sub-section
(4) of section 121 or under detention under sub-section ( 5) of that section desires that he
should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may, upon application
by such relative or friend and, on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Government
that the person delivered shall be properly taken care of, and, prevented from doing injury to
himself or to any other person, and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at
such times and places, as the Central Government may direct, order such person to be
delivered to such relative or friend.
126. When any property regarding which any offence appears to have been commit-
ted, or which appears to have been used for the commission of any offence, is produced
before an Assam Rifles Court during a trial, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit for
the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and if the property
is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as it thinks neces-
sary, order it to be sold otherwise disposed of.
127. (1) After the conclusion of a trial before any Assam Rifles Court, the Court or the
officer confirming the finding or sentence of such Assam Rifles Court, or any authority
superior to such officer, or, in the case of Summary Assam Rifles Court whose finding or
sentence does not require confirmation, an officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector-
General within whose command the trial was held, may make such order as it or he thinks fit
for the disposal by destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to be entitled
to possession thereof, or otherwise, of any property or document produced before the Court
or in its custody, or regarding which any offence appears to have been committed or which
has been committed or which has been used for the commission of any offence.
(2) Where any order has been made under sub-section ( 1) in respect of property
regarding which an offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed
and certified by the authority making the same may, whether the trial was held within India or
not, be sent to a Magistrate within whose jurisdiction such property for the time being is
situated, and such Magistrate shall thereupon cause the order to be carried into effect as if
it were an order passed by him under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(3) In this section, the term “property” includes, in the case of property regarding
which an offence appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been
originally in the possession or under the control of any person, but also any property into or
for which the same may have been converted or exchanged, and anything acquired by such
conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.
128. Any trial by an Assam Rifles Court under the provisions of the Act shall be
deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and 228 of the Indian
Penal Code and the Assam Rifles Court shall be deemed to be the Court within the meaning
of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
CHAPTER X
C
ONFIRMATION AND REVISION
129. No finding or sentence of a General Assam Rifles Court or a Petty Assam Rifles
Court shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed as provided by this Act.
Delivery of
lunatic
accused to
relatives.
Order for
custody and
disposal of
property
pending trial.
Order of
disposal of
property
regarding
which offence
is committed.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Powers of
Assam Rifles
Court in
relation to
proceedings
under this
Act.
Finding and
sentence not
valid unless
confirmed.

31
130. The findings and sentences of General Assam Rifles Courts may be confirmed by
the Central Government or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Central
Government.
131. The findings and sentences of Petty Assam Rifles Courts may be confirmed by an
officer having power to convene a General Assam Rifles Court or by any officer empowered
in this behalf by warrant of such officer.
132. A warrant issued under section 130 or section 131 may contain such restrictions,
reservations or conditions as the authority issuing it may think fit.
133. Subject to such restrictions, reservations or conditions, as may be contained in
any warrant issued under section 130 or section 131, a confirming authority may, when
confirming the sentence of an Assam Rifles Court, mitigate or remit the punishment thereby
awarded, or commute that punishment for any punishment or punishment lower in the scale
laid down in section 57.
134. When any person subject to this Act is tried and sentenced by an Assam Rifles
Court while on board a ship, the finding and sentence so far as not confirmed and executed
on board the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such person had been
tried at the port of disembarkation.
135. (1) Any finding or sentence of an Assam Rifles Court which requires confirmation
may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the Court, if
so directed by the confirming authority, may take additional evidence.
(2) The Court, on revision, shall consist of the same officers as were present when the
original decision was passed unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof shall be duly certified in the
proceedings, and the Court shall proceed with the revision:
Provided that, if a General Assam Rifles Court, still consists of five officers, or, if a Petty
Assam Rifles Court, of three officers.
136. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the finding and sentence of a
Summary Assam Rifles Court shall not require to be confirmed, but may be carried out
forthwith.
(2) If the officers holding the trial is of the rank of Deputy Commandant or of a rank
declared under clause (a) of sub-section (5) of section 96 as equivalent thereto or of a lower
rank and has held such rank for less than five years, he shall not, except on active duty, carry
into effect any sentence, until it has received the approval of an officer not below the rank of
a Deputy Inspector-General.
137. The proceedings of every Summary Assam Rifles Court shall, without delay, be
forwarded to the officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector-General within whose
command the trial was held, or to the prescribed officer, and such officer or the Director-
General or any officer empowered by him in this behalf may, for reasons based on the merits
of the case, but not on merely technical grounds, set aside the proceedings, or reduce the
sentence to any other sentence which the court might have passed.
Power to
confirm
finding and
sentence of
General
Assam Rifles
Court.
Power to
confirm
finding and
sentence of
Petty Assam
Rifles Court.
Limitation of
powers of
confirming
authority.
Power of
confirming
authority to
mitigate,
remit or
commute
sentences.
Confirming
of findings
and sentences
on board a
ship.
Revision of
finding or
sentence.
Finding and
sentence of a
Summary
Assam Rifles
Court.
Transmission
of proceedings
of Summary
Assam Rifles
Court.

32
138. (1) Where a finding of guilty by an Assam Rifles Court, which has been confirmed
or which does not require confirmation, is found for any reason to be invalid or cannot be
supported by the evidence, the authority which would have had power under section 150 to
commute the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the finding had been valid may substi-
tute a new finding and pass a sentence for the offence specified or involved in such finding:
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such finding could have been
validly made by the Assam Rifles Court on the charge and unless it appears that the Assam
Rifles Court must have been satisfied of the facts establishing the said offence.
(2) Where a sentence passed by an Assam Rifles Court which has been confirmed, or
which does not require confirmation, not being a sentence passed in pursuance of a new
finding substituted under sub-section (1) is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority
referred to in sub-section (1) may pass a valid sentence.
(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed under sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section (2) shall not be higher in the scale of punishment than, or in excess of, the punish-
ment awarded by, the sentence for which a new sentence is substituted under this section.
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence passed, under this section shall, for the
purpose of this Act and the rules, have effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the case
may be, of an Assam Rifles Court.
139. (1) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by any order
passed by any Assam Rifles Court may present a petition to the officer or authority empowered
to confirm any finding or sentence of the Assam Rifles Court and the confirming authority
may take such steps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as to the correctness,
legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regularity of any proceeding to which the
order relates.
(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by a finding or
sentence of any Assam Rifles Court which has been confirmed may present a petition to the
Central Government, the Director-General or any prescribed officer superior in command to
the one who confirmed such finding or sentence, and the Central Government, the Director-
General or the prescribed officer, as the case may be, may pass such order thereon as it or he
thinks fit.
140. The Central Government, the Director-General or any prescribed officer may
annul the proceeding of any Assam Rifles Court on the ground that they are illegal or unjust.
CHAPTER XI
E
XECUTION OF SENTENCE, PARDONS, REMISSION, ETC.
141. In awarding a sentence of death, an Assam Rifles Court shall in its discretion
direct that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead, or
shall suffer death by being shot to death.
142. Whenever any person is sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court under this Act to
imprisonment, the term of his sentence shall, whether it has been revised or not, be reckoned
to commence on the day in which the original proceedings were signed by the presiding
officer, or in the case of a Summary Assam Rifles Court, by the Court:
Provided that when a person subject to this Act is sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court
to a term of imprisonment, not being an imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period
spent by him in civil or Force custody during investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case,
and before the date of order, such sentence shall be set off against the term of imprisonment
imposed upon him and the liability of such person or officer to undergo imprisonment on
such order of sentence shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the term of imprisonment
imposed upon him.
Alteration of
finding or
sentence in
certain cases.
Remedy
against order,
finding or
sentence of
Assam Rifles
Court.
Annulment of
proceedings.
Form of
sentence of
death.
Commencement
of sentence of
imprisonment.

33
143. ( 1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is passed under this Act by an
Assam Rifles Court or whenever any sentence of death is commuted to imprisonment, the
confirming officer or in case of a Summary Assam Rifles Court, the officer holding the Court
or such other officer as may be prescribed, shall, save as otherwise provided in sub-sections
(3) and (4), direct that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a civil prison.
(2) When a direction has been made under sub-section ( 1), the Commandant of the
person under sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in
the prescribed form to the officer in charge of the prison in which such person is to be
confined and shall arrange for his dispatch to such prison with the warrant.
(3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months
and passed under this Act by an Assam Rifles Court the appropriate officer under sub-
section (1) may direct that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in force custody
instead of in a civil prison.
(4) On active duty, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in
such place as the Deputy Inspector-General within whose command the person sentenced is
serving or any prescribed officer may from time to time appoint.
144. Where a sentence of imprisonment is directed to be undergone in a civil prison,
the offender may be kept in Force custody or in any other fit place till such time as it is
possible to send him to a civil prison.
145. Whenever, in the opinion of an officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector-
General within whose command the trial is held, any sentence or portion of a sentence of
imprisonment cannot for special reasons, conveniently be carried out in Force custody in
accordance with the provisions of section 143, such officer may direct that such sentence or
portion of sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any civil prison or other fit place.
146. A person under sentence of imprisonment may, during his conveyance from place
to place, or when on board ship, aircraft or otherwise, be subjected to such restraint as is
necessary for his safe conduct and removal.
147. When an order is duly made under this Act setting aside or varying any sentence,
order or warrant under which any person is confined in a civil prison, a warrant in accordance
with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making the order or his staff officer or such
other person as may be prescribed, to the officer in charge of the prison in which such person
is confined.
148. When a sentence of fine is imposed by an Assam Rifles Court under section 55,
a copy of such sentence signed and certified by the confirming officer, or where no confirma-
tion is required by the officer holding the trial may be sent to any Magistrate in India and
such Magistrate shall thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in accordance with the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as if it were a sentence of fine imposed by
such Magistrate.
149. Whenever any person is sentenced to imprisonment under this Act and is
undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in which he might be confined under a
lawful order or warrant in pursuance of this Act, the confinement of such person shall not be
deemed to be illegal only by reason of informality or error in, or as respects the order, warrant
or other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was
brought into, or is confined in any such place, and any such order, warrant or document may
be amended accordingly.
150. When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by an Assam Rifles
Court of any offence, the Central Government or the Director-General, or in the case of a
sentence which he could have confirmed or which did not require confirmation, an officer not
below the rank of Deputy Inspector-General within whose command such person at the time
of conviction was serving or the prescribed officer may,—
Execution of
sentence of
imprisonment.
Temporary
custody of
offender.
Execution of
sentence of
imprisonment
in special
case.
Conveyance
of prisoner
from place to
place.
Communica-
tion of
certain orders
to prison
officers.
Execution of
sentence of
fine.
Informality
or error in the
order or
warrant.
Pardon and
remission.
2 of 1974.

34
(a) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, par-
don the person or remit the whole or any part of the punishment awarded; or
(b) mitigate the punishment awarded; or
(c) commute such punishment for any less punishment or punishments men-
tioned in this Act; or
(d) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, re-
lease the person on parole.
151. (1) If any condition on which a person has been pardoned or released on parole
or a punishment has been remitted is, in the opinion of the authority which granted the
pardon, release or remission, not fulfilled, such authority may cancel the pardon, release or
remission, and thereupon the sentence of the Court shall be carried into effect as if such
pardon, release or remission had not been granted.
(2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is carried into effect under the provi-
sions of sub-section (1) shall undergo only the unexpired portion of his sentence.
152. (1) Where a person subject to this Act is sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court to
imprisonment, the Central Government, the Director-General or any officer empowered to
convene a General Assam Rifles Court may suspend the sentence whether or not the of-
fender has already been committed to prison or to Force custody.
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub-section (1) may, in the case of an offender
so sentenced direct that until the order of such authority or officer have been obtained, the
offender shall not be committed to prison or to Force custody.
(3) The powers conferred by sub-sections (1) and (2) may be exercised in the case of
any such sentence which has been confirmed, reduced or commuted.
153. (1) Where sentence referred to in section 152 is imposed by an Assam Rifles
Court other than Summary Assam Rifles Court, the confirming officer may, when confirming
the sentence, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to Force custody until
the orders of the authority or officer specified in section 152 have been obtained.
(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed by a Summary Assam Rifles Court,
the officer holding the trial or the officer authorised to approve the sentence under sub-
section (2) of section 136 may make the direction referred to in sub-section (1).
154. Where a sentence is suspended under section 152 the offender shall forthwith be
released from custody.
155. Any period during which the sentence is under suspension shall be reckoned as
part of the term of such sentence.
156. The authority or officer specified in section 152 may, at any time while a sentence
is suspended, order—
(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the unexpired portion of the
sentence; or
(b) that the sentence be remitted.
157. (1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case may at any time, and shall at
intervals of not more than four months, be reconsidered by the authority or officer specified
in section 152 or by any officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector-General duly
authorised by the authority or officer specified in section 152.
(2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer so authorised it appears to him that
the conduct of offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of the
sentence, he shall refer the matter to the authority or officer specified in section 150.
Cancellation
of conditional
pardon,
release on
parole or
remission.
Suspension of
sentence of
imprisonment.
Orders
pending
suspension.
Release on
suspension.
Computation
of period of
suspension.
Order after
suspension.
Reconsideration
of case after
suspension.

35
158. Where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended under this Act, is
sentenced for any other offence, then,—
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, the two sentences
shall run concurrently.
(b) if the further sentence is for a period of three months or more and is not
suspended under this Act, the offender shall be so committed to prison or to Force
custody for the unexpired portion of the previous sentence, but both sentences shall
run concurrently; and
(c) if the further sentence is for a period of less than three months and is not
suspended under this Act, the offender shall be so committed on that sentence only,
and the previous sentence shall, subject to any order which may be passed under
section 156 or section 157, continue to be suspended.
159. The powers conferred by sections 152 and 156 shall be in addition to, and not in
derogation of, the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.
160. ( 1) Where in addition to any other sentence the punishment of dismissal or
removal has been awarded by an Assam Rifles Court, and such sentence is suspended under
section 152, then, such dismissal or removal shall not take effect until so ordered by the
authority or officer specified in section 152.
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 156, the punishment of dismissal or
removal shall also be remitted.
CHAPTER XII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
161. The Central Government or any other authority empowered in this behalf by that
Government may, by a general or special order, make provisions for the disposal of the
private or regimental property of any person subject to this Act or any other dues including
provident fund of that person, who dies or deserts, or is ascertained to be of unsound mind
or while on active duty is officially reported as missing.
162. (1) The Central Government may, by general or special order published in the
Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such conditions and limitations, and within the local
limits of such area adjoining the border of India, as may be specified in the order, any member
of the Force may,—
(a) for the purpose of prevention of any offence punishable under the Passport
(Entry into India) Act, 1920, the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, the Central Excise
Act, 1944, the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Customs Act, 1962, the Passports Act, 1967 or
the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 or of any cognizable offence punishable
under any other Central Act; or
(b) for the purpose of apprehending any person who has committed any offence
referred to in clause (a),
exercise or discharge such of the powers or duties under that Act or any other Central Act as
may be specified in the said order, being the powers and duties which, in the opinion of the
Central Government, an officer of the corresponding or lower rank is by that or such other
Act empowered to exercise or discharge for the said purposes.
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official
Gazette, confer or impose, with the concurrence of the State Government concerned, any of
the powers or duties which may be exercised or discharged under a State Act by a police
officer upon a member of the Force who, in the opinion of the Central Government, holds a
corresponding or higher rank.
Fresh
sentence
after
suspension.
Scope of
power of
suspension.
Effect of
suspension
and remission
on dismissal.
Disposal of
property of
the members
of the Force.
Powers and
duties
conferrable
and imposable
on members
of the Force.
 34 to 1920.
 16 of 1939.
 1 of 1944.
 31 of 1946.
 52 of 1962.
 15 of 1967.
 42 of 1999.

36
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree that
the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
order.
163. (1) The provision of section 125 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 shall apply to
such members of the Force who exercise or discharge any power or duty under sub-section
(1) of section 162 or on whom any power is conferred or duty is imposed under sub-section
(2) of that section in the same manner as it apply to a police officer.
(2) In any suit or proceeding against any member of the Force for any act done by him
in pursuance of a warrant or order of a competent authority, it shall be lawful for him to plead,
that such act was done by him under the authority of such warrant or order.
(3) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrant or order directing
the act, and if it is so proved the member of the Force shall thereupon be discharged from
liability in respect of the act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction
of the authority which issued such warrant or order.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
any legal proceeding (whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any
member of the Force for anything done or intended to be done under the powers conferred
by, or in pursuance of, any provision of this Act or the rules, shall be commenced within three
months after the act complained of was committed and not otherwise, and notice in writing of
such proceedings and of the cause thereof shall be given to the defendant or his superior
officer at least one month before the commencement of such proceedings.
164. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not incon-
sistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
165. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for the purposes of
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for—
(a) the manner of re-constitution of the Force and the conditions of service of
the members of the Force under sub-section (2) of section 4;
(b) the mode of enrolment and the procedure for enrolment under sub-section
(1) of section 6;
(c) the authority whose previous permission in writing is required for resigning
from appointment or withdrawing from all or any of the duties under section 8;
(d) rank or ranks of an officer or a subordinate officer referred to under sub-
section (2) of section 11;
(e) the authority who shall give previous sanction in writing under sub-section
(1) of section 13;
Protection
for acts of
members of
the Force.
1 of 1872
Power of
Central
Government
to remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.

37
(f) nature of communication or publication under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 13;
(g) other purposes of meeting or demonstration under sub-section (2) of section
13;
(h) form of enrolment under section 31;
(i) any other purpose under clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section 57;
(j) the officer who may direct that an enrolled person who has been sentenced to
dismissal or imprisonment whether combined with dismissal or not may be retained to
serve in the ranks under section 60;
(k) the manner of proceedings against a person and the extent of awarding
punishment under section 62;
(l) the manner of proceeding against an officer below the rank of a Deputy
Commandant and of in the rank of subordinate officer and of a rank of a W arrant Officer
under sub-section (1) of section 64;
(m) the manner of forwarding certified true copies of the proceedings and the
superior authority to whom such copies shall be forwarded under sub-section ( 2) of
section 64;
(n) the manner of proceeding against an officer below the rank of Commandant
and of any rank of subordinate officer and of a rank of Warrant Officer under sub-
section (1) of section 65;
(o) the manner of proceeding against any subordinate officer or a Warrant
 Officer under section 66;
(p) the officer by whose order any sum is required to be paid, for the mainte-
nance of wife or legitimate or illegitimate child of a person subject to this Act other than
an officer, under clause (i) of section 69;
(q) the officer who may direct that the whole or any part of the pay and allow-
ances of person subject to this Act shall be withheld under section 71;
(r) the manner and the extent of remission of deductions from pay and allow-
ances authorised by this Act and the authority by which such remission shall be made
under section 75;
(s) the authorities by whom proper provision to be made out of the pay and
allowances of all persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, for the depen-
dents of such persons under section 76;
(t) the authorities who shall make proper provision out of the pay and allow-
ances of any person subject to this Act, who is prisoner of war or is missing under
section 77;
(u) the manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act
may be taken into and detained in Force custody under sub-section (4) of section 80;
(v) the manner of making special report giving reasons for delay under section
81;
(w) the authority to appoint, and the manner of appointment of, a court of
inquiry; the manner of administering oath or affirmation by such court of inquiry and
the manner of making record under sub-section (1) of section 84;
(x) the officer who may appoint Force Police under sub-section (1) of section 85;
(y) the other officer having the discretion to decide before which court the
proceeding shall be instituted under section 102;

38
(z) the manner of filling up the vacancy of member by another officer under sub-
section (3) of section 106;
(za) the manner of administering oath or affirmation to every member of an
Assam Rifles Court and to the Law Officer, or, as the case may be, the officer approved
under section 105 before the commencement of the trial, under sub-section ( 1) of
section 107;
(zb) the form of being duly sworn or affirmation under sub-section (2) of section
107;
(zc) the officer by whom the letter, return or other documents purported to be
signed shall be the evidence of the facts stated in such letter, return or other document
under sub-section (1) of section 118;
(zd) the other matters to be further inquired and recorded under sub-section (1)
of section 120;
(ze) the other matters to be recorded under sub-section (3) of section 120;
(zf) the manner of keeping in custody of the accused person under sub-section
(4) of section 121;
(zg) the officer who may take steps to have certain persons tried under section
122;
(zh) the authority for issuing certificate in case of detention in any other place
under clause (b) of section 122;
(zi) the officer to whom the proceedings of every Summary Assam Rifles Courts
shall be forwarded under section 137;
(zj) the officer superior in command, to the one who confirmed the findings or
sentence referred to in sub-section (2) of section 139, to whom petition may be pre-
sented under that sub-section;
(zk) the officer who may annul the proceeding of any Assam Rifles Court under
section 140;
(zl) the other officer who shall direct that sentence shall be carried out by the
confinement in a civil prison under sub-section (1) of section 143;
(zm) the officer who shall forward a warrant and the form of such warrant under
sub-section (2) section 143;
(zn) the officer who may from time to time appoint the place of confinement
under sub-section (4) of section 143;
(zo) the other person by whom the warrant shall be forwarded to the officer in
charge of the prison under section 147;
(zp) the officer who may pardon or exercise other powers as specified under
clauses (a) to (c) of section 150;
(zq) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.
166. The Director-General may make regulations for all or any of the purpose of this
Act other than those specified in section 165, subject to approval of the Central Government.
167. Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before, the expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both
Power to
make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.

39
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
168. (1) The Assam Rifles Act, 1941 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,—
(a) the Assam Rifles in existence at the commencement of this Act and consti-
tuted under the Act so repealed shall be deemed to be reconstituted under this Act;
(b) members of the Assam Rifles in existence at the commencement of this Act
and appointed under the Act so repealed shall be deemed to have been appointed or,
as the case may be, enrolled as such under this Act;
(c) any appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation pending immediately
before the commencement of this Act shall be disposed of, continued, held or made, as
the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Assam Rifles Act, 1941, as if
this Act had not come into force;
(d) any thing done or any action taken before the commencement of this Act, in
relation to any person appointed or enrolled, shall be valid and as effective in law as if
such thing or action was done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this
Act.
Repeal and
savings.
5 of 1941.
5 of 1941.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Assam Rifles was initially raised in 1835 as Cachar Levy and was employed on
frontier watch and ward duty to assist the civil administration in the maintenance of law  and
order in the tribal areas of the erstwhile composite State of Assam particularly in Lushai and
Mikir Hills, Naga Hills, Khasi-Jaintia and Garo Hills as also in the erstwhile North-East
Frontier Agency (Now Arunachal Pradesh).
2.  The Force came under the control of the Central Government in 1941 after the
passing of the Assam Rifles Act, 1941 (5 of 1941).  It was administered by the Governor of
Assam through the North-East Frontier Agency (NEFA) under the overall control of the
Ministry of External Affairs, and was later on transferred to the Ministry of Home Affairs in
1965.  Certain Assam Rifles battalions were placed under the operational control of the Army.
The strength of the Assam Rifles battalions was 5 battalions till 1950 and was increased to
take care of border security and internal security duties.  The Assam Rifles is now comprised
of 46 battalions.
3. This Force has been charged with the responsibility of ensuring security of the
borders of India, to carry out counter insurgency operations in the specified areas and to act
in aid of civil authorities for the maintenance of law and order and for matters connected
therewith. The personnel of Assam Rifles are governed by the Assam Rifles Act, 1941 except
for the personnel of those battalions of the Assam Rifles which are at present deployed
under the operational control of the Army in whose case the Army Act, 1950 is applicable
with certain exceptions and modifications. The gradual change in the complexion of the
Force had made the existing Assam Rifles Act, 1941 outdated.  The Assam Rifles Act, 1941 is
not applicable to the officers of the Force and thus there is a vacuum.  Considering the
nature and purpose of the Force and to bring uniformity in application of the legal provi-
sions, it is felt that a separate enactment, which will provide for its special needs, should
regulate the Force.
4. Keeping in view the above, the Assam Rifles Bill, 2003 was introduced in the
thirteenth Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2003 and the same was referred to the Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs for examination and report. The
Committee presented its report on the said Bill in the Parliament on 19th December, 2003. The
Committee adopted the said Bill with certain recommendations which have been examined
and considered by the Government. However, the said Bill was lapsed on the dissolution of
the thirteenth Lok Sabha. As regards the recommendations in respect of clauses 2 and 108
have been incorporated in the present Bill. The other recommendations will be taken care of
while framing the rules and regulations under the proposed legislation.
5. The salient features of the present Bill, inter alia, are as follows:—
(i)  the constitution of the Assam Rifles as an Armed Force of the Union, with
provisions for its control and other provisions relating to its establishment, etc.;
(ii)  establishment and procedure of the Assam Rifles Courts, offences commit-
ted by the Force members, punishment therefor and trial of such offences by the
Assam  Rifles Courts;
(iii)  provisions relating to retention, custody and trial of the offenders under the
proposed legislation;
(iv)  provisions for redressal of grievances of members of the Force who deems
themselves wronged by their superior;
40

41
(v)   provision for imposition of certain restrictions on the rights of member of
the Force in terms of article 33 of the Constitution of India;
(vi)  confirmation, revision and execution of sentences, pardons and remissions,
etc., and miscellaneous provisions;
(vii) deductions to be made from the pay and allowances of the members of the
Force for certain offences;
(viii) provision for prohibition of second trial on the lines of the principles
enshrined in article 20(2) of the Constitution of India;
(ix) provision for a period of limitation for trial of offences under the proposed
legislation;
(x) provision for Law Officer to attend every General Assam Rifles Court and
Petty Assam Rifles Court;
(xi) manner of execution of sentences of death as well as imprisonment and
provisions relating to powers and duties of members of the Assam Rifles;
(xii) statutory protection for acts done by members of the Assam Rifles in dis-
charging their official duty; and
(xiii) proposes to repeal the existing Assam Rifles Act, 1941.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW DELHI; SHIVRAJ  V .  PA TIL.
The 14th March , 2006.

Notes on clauses
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to define the various expressions commonly used in the
Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause specifies the persons who shall be subject to the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (3) specifies that the persons who are on deputation from the regular
Army, shall not be subject to the proposed legislation and they shall continue to be gov-
erned by the Army Act, 1950.  Sub-clause (4) specifies that the persons who are not other-
wise subject to the proposed legislation shall be deemed to be a member of the Force by a
notification issued by the Central Government when such persons are engaged to or accom-
pany with any member of the Force to provide any service in any manner.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to provide for the constitution of the Assam Rifles.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to provide for the general superintendence, direction
and control of the Force and appointment of officers of the Force shall vest in and be
exercised  by the Central Government.  Further, this clause provides that subject to the
provisions of the proposed legislation and rules and regulations made thereunder, com-
mand and supervision of the Force shall vest in an officer to be appointed by the Central
Government or the Director General of the Force.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to provide for the enrolment into the Force and a person
who is not a citizen of India shall not be enrolled in the Force except by the consent of the
Central Government in writing.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to provide the liability of every member of the Force to
serve in any part of India as well as outside India.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to provide for the procedure for the resignation and
withdrawal of a member of the Force.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to provide that every person subject to the proposed
legislation shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to provide the termination of service of any person
subject to the proposed legislation by the Central Government.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to provide that the Director-General, Additional Direc-
tor General or any Inspector-General may dismiss or remove from service or reduce to a lower
grade or rank or ranks any person subject to the proposed legislation other than an officer.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to provide that on termination of service of a subordi-
nate officer, under-officer and an enrolled person will be provided with certificate.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to impose certain restrictions on the rights of members
of the Force to form associations, and on their freedom of speech.  This clause basically
incorporates the principles laid down in article 33 of the Constitution of India.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to provide only authorised deductions to be made
from the pay of every person subject to the proposed legislation.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to provide for redressal of grievance of a person
subject to the proposed legislation, other than an officer, who deems himself wronged by an
officer or a subordinate officer.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to provide for redressal of grievance to an officer who
deems himself wronged by a superior officer.
Clause 17.—This  clause seeks to provide immunity from attachment of pay and other
necessaries including arms, clothes and equipment of a person subject to this legislation by
a process of civil or revenue court.
42

43
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to provide for immunity to person subject to the pro-
posed legislation from arrest for debt by the authority of any civil court, revenue court or
revenue officer except with the prior consent of the Central Government.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to provide for immunity from arrest under civil or
revenue process of any person who is attending an Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to provide that the service privileges specified in clauses
14 to 19 shall be in addition to the privileges which have been conferred on persons subject
to this legislation under any other law.
Clause 21.—This  clause seeks to provide the offences committed in relation to enemy
and are punishable with death.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to provide the offences in relation to enemy and not
punishable with death.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to provide the offences, which are punishable more
severely on active duty than at other times.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to provide the offences of mutiny and punishment for
the same.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to provide the offences of desertion and aiding deser-
tion and punishment for the same.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide the offences related with absence without
leave and punishment for the same.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of striking and threatening
superior officers and punishment for the same.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of disobedience of orders by
superior officer and punishment for the same.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to provide the offence related with insubordination
and obstruction and punishment for the same.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of fraudulent enrolment and
punishment for the same.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to provide the offence related with false answers on
enrolment and punishment for the same.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of unbecoming conduct and
punishment for the same.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to provide the offences, which are certain forms of
disgraceful conduct and punishment for the same.
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of ill-treating a subordinate and
punishment for the same.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of intoxication and punishment
for the same.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of permitting escape from cus-
tody and punishment for the same.
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to provide the offences related with irregularity in
connection with arrest or confinement and punishment for the same.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of escape from custody and
punishment for the same.
Clause 39.—This clause seeks to provide the offences in respect of property and
punishment for the same.

44
Clause 40.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of  extortion and corruption and
punishment for the same.
Clause 41.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of making away with equipment
and punishment for the same.
Clause 42.—This clause seeks to provide the offence related with injury to property
and punishment for the same.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to provide the offences of false accusation and pun-
ishment for the same.
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to provide the offences relating to falsifying of official
document and false declaration and punishment for the same.
Clause 45.—This clause seeks to provide the offence of signing in blank and failure to
report and punishment for the same.
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to provide the offences relating to Assam Rifles Court
and punishment for the same.
Clause 47.—This clause seeks to provide the offence for false evidence before any
Assam Rifles Court or any other court competent to administer oath and affirmation and
punishment for the same.
Clause 48.—This clause seeks to provide the offence for unlawful detention of pay
and punishment for the same.
Clause 49.—This clause seeks to provide the offence for violation of good order and
discipline and punishment for the same.
Clause 50.—This clause seeks to provide certain miscellaneous offences and the
punishment for the same.
Clause 51.—This clause seeks to provide for attempt to commit offences specified in
clauses 21 to 50,  a distinct offence and punishment for the same.
Clause 52.—This clause seeks to provide offence of abetment of offences that have
been committed.
Clause 53.—This clause seeks to provide offence of abetment of offences punishable
with death and not committed.
Clause 54.—This clause seeks to provide offence of abetment of offences punishable
with imprisonment and not committed.
Clause 55.—This clause seeks to provide for the trial of a person subject to this
legislation for commission of a civil offence, that is offences triable by courts of ordinary
criminal justice, subject to the provisions of clause 56.
 Clause 56.—This clause seeks to provide that an offence of murder, culpable homi-
cide not amounting to murder, rape when committed against a person not subject to this
legislation shall not be tried by an Assam Rifles Court except in cases where the said
offences are committed while on active duty at any place outside India or at any place
specified by the Central Government by notification under clause 2(1)(a)(ii).
Clause 57.—This clause seeks to provide for various punishments which may be
awarded by Assam Rifles Courts. In this clause the various punishments that have been
provided are punishment of death; imprisonment which may extend to life or any other lesser
term excluding imprisonment for three months in Force custody; dismissal from service;
compulsory retirement; imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force cus-
tody; reduction to the rank; forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part of
service for the purpose of promotion; forfeiture of service for the purpose of increase in  pay,
pension or any other prescribed purpose; fine; severe reprimand or reprimand; forfeiture of

45
pay and allowances not exceeding three months for an offence committed on active duty;
forfeiture of all arrears of pay and allowances in case of person sentenced to dismissal;
stoppages of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the
offence is made good. The punishments specified above are to be deemed to be inferior in
degree to every punishment preceding it in the above scale.
Clause 58.—This clause seeks to enable an Assam Rifles Court to take into account
the nature and degree of the offence committed and award to the accused person convicted
for any offence under clauses 21 to 54, the punishment lower in the scale within the meaning
of clause 57.
Clause 59.—This clause seeks to provide for combination of punishments, which
may be awarded by Assam Rifles Courts.
Clause 60.—This clause seeks to provide for retention in the Force, in the case of an
enrolled person, when sentenced to dismissal or imprisonment on active duty.
Clause 61.—This clause seeks to provide for imposing punishment otherwise than by
Assam Rifles Court in accordance with clauses 62, 64, 65 and 66.
Clause 62.—This clause seeks to authorise commandants and other officers specified
by the Director-General with the consent of the Central Government to try in the prescribed
manner any person lower in rank than an officer or subordinate officer for an offence and
award one or more of the punishments specified therein.
Clause 63.—This clause seeks to impose certain limitations in respect of the award of
punishments under clause 62.
Clause 64.—This clause seeks to authorise a Deputy Inspector-General or other of-
ficer specified by the Director-General with the consent of Central Government to try in the
prescribed manner an officer below the rank of Deputy Commandant and any rank of subor-
dinate officer and of a rank of Warrant Officer to award one or more of the minor punish-
ments specified therein.
Clause 65.—This clause seeks to authorise an Inspector-General or other officer
specified by the Director-General with the consent of Central Government to try in the
prescribed manner an officer below the rank of Commandant and a subordinate officer and
a Warrant Officer and award one or more of the minor punishments specified therein.
Clause 66.—This clause seeks to authorise a Commandant or such other officer speci-
fied by Director-General, Assam Rifles with the consent of Central Government to try any
subordinate officer or a Warrant Officer and award one or more of the minor punishments
specified in the clause.
Clause 67.—This clause seeks to provide for imposition of collective fines in case of
loss or theft of weapons or ammunition of a unit of the Force upon the subordinate  officers,
under-officers and men of the unit considered to be responsible for the loss or theft. To
avoid abuse, it has been provided that the power can be exercised only  by an officer not
below the rank of the Commandant of a battalion.
Clause 68.—This clause seeks to provide for the penal deductions, which can be
made from the pay and allowances of an officer.
Clause 69.—This clause seeks to provide for the penal deductions that can be made
from the pay and allowances of persons other than an officer.
Clause 70.—This clause seeks to provide for method of computation of period of
absence or custody for the purpose of sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause 69.
Clause 71.—This clause seeks to provide for withholding of whole or any part of pay
and allowances of a person who is in custody or under suspension from duty on a charge for
an offence.

46
Clause 72.—This clause seeks to provide the limit of certain deductions from the pay
and allowances of members of the Force.
Clause 73.—This clause seeks to provide for deductions, which can be made from the
public money, which is due to members of the Force.
Clause 74.—This clause seeks to provide that during the inquiry into the conduct of
the prisoner of war in the hands of the enemy, the whole or any part of the pay and allow-
ances of such prisoner shall be withheld during inquiry by the order of Director-General or
an authorised officer.
Clause 75.—This clause seeks to provide for the power to remit any deduction made
from the pay and allowances of a person subject to the proposed legislation.
Clause 76.—This clause seeks to provide that in the case of a prisoner of war whose
pay and allowances have been forfeited under clause 69, but remission has been made under
clause 75, provisions shall be made for dependents from the remitted deductions.
Clause 77.—This clause seeks to provide for making provision for dependents of
prisoner of war and missing persons out of pay and allowances of such persons.
Clause 78.—This clause seeks to provide for the period during which a person is
deemed to be a prisoner of war.
Clause 79.—This clause seeks to provide for the arrest of offenders and keeping them
in Force custody. This clause also provides for arrest of an officer who is engaged in a
quarrel, affray or disorder on the orders of an officer junior in rank.
Clause 80.—This clause seeks to provide that the charge against every person taken
into Force custody must be investigated within forty-eight hours (excluding Sundays and
other public holidays) unless investigation within that period is impracticable having regard
to the public service. In case of delay the matter has to be reported to superior authorities.
Clause 81.—This clause seeks to provide that in every case where any person who is
not on active duty remains in Force custody for a longer period than eight days without an
Assam Rifles Court for his trial being convened, a special report should be forwarded at
intervals of eight days until an  Assam  Rifles Court is ordered to be convened for his trial  or
such person is released from custody.
Clause 82.—This clause seeks to provide that the civil authorities shall aid in arrest
and delivery of any person subject to the proposed legislation on receipt of any written
application to that effect from Force authorities.
Clause 83.—This clause seeks to provide that the civil authorities shall, on receipt of
information from the Commandant of a unit regarding a deserter, take steps for his apprehen-
sion and delivery into Force custody.
Clause 84.—This clause seeks to provide for an inquiry when any person subject to
the proposed legislation is absent without leave for a period of thirty days.
Clause 85.—This clause seeks to provide for appointment  of Force Police officers by
Director-General or a prescribed officer for discharging certain duties specified therein.
Clause 86.—This clause seeks to provide for three kinds of Assam Rifles Courts,
namely, General Assam Rifles Courts, Petty Assam Rifles Courts and Summary Assam Rifles
Courts, for the  trial of offences under the proposed legislation.
Clause 87.—This clause seeks to provide the power to convene a General Assam
Rifles Court by Central Government, Director-General, Assam Rifles or by an officer empo-
wered in this behalf by a warrant.
Clause 88.—This clause seeks to provide the power to convene a Petty Assam Rifles
Court by authorities  empowered to convene a General Assam Rifles Court and also by an
officer authorised in this behalf by a warrant.

47
Clause 89.—This clause seeks to provide the contents of warrants issued under
clauses 87 and 88, that such warrants may contain such restrictions, reservations and con-
ditions as may be deemed fit by the officer issuing it.
Clause 90.—This clause seeks to provide the composition of a General Assam Rifles
Court convened under clause 87.
Clause 91.—This clause seeks to provide the composition of a Petty Assam Rifles
Court convened under clause 88.
Clause 92.—This clause seeks to provide the power to convene and composition of a
Summary Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 93.—This clause seeks to provide the dissolution of an Assam Rifles Court
after the commencement of a trial, in certain cases like exigencies of service, illness of Law
Officer or accused making it impossible to continue the trial or when reduced below the
minimum number of members prescribed under the Act and also provides for retrial of ac-
cused person when an Assam Rifles Court is dissolved under this clause.
Clause 94.—This clause seeks to provide the power of a General Assam Rifles Court
to try any member of the Force for any offence and to pass any sentence authorised
thereby.
Clause 95.—This clause seeks to provide the powers of Petty Assam Rifles Court to
try any member of the Force except an officer and a subordinate officer  and to award any
sentence under this legislation except death sentence and imprisonment for a term exceeding
two years.
Clause 96.—This clause seeks to provide the power of a Summary Assam Rifles Court
as to trial and award of punishment.
Clause 97.—This clause seeks to provide prohibition of second trial for the same
offence on the lines of the principles contained in article 20 (2) of Constitution of India.
Clause 98.—This clause seeks to provide a period of limitation for trial of all offences
under the legislation. The period of limitation shall not apply to offences of desertion,
mutiny and fraudulent enrolment. This clause provides as to how the period of limitation
shall be tabulated. When computing the period of limitation, the period during which pro-
ceedings of investigation have been stayed by any court by injunction or order, the day on
which it was issued and the day on which it was withdrawn shall be excluded. In computing
the period of limitation, the period spend by any person in evading arrest shall also be
excluded.
Clause 99.—This clause seeks to provide that a person who has ceased to be subject to
the proposed legislation can be taken into arrest, tried and punished  as if he continued to be
so subject. This clause also provides for the period of limitation within which the action against
a person can be taken. This period is three years from the date the person has ceased to be
subject to the legislation. However, in computing this period the time during which the person
avoided arrest or where the proceedings have been stayed by an injunction or order of the
court, the day on which it was issued and the day on which it was withdrawn shall be excluded.
Clause 100.—This clause seeks to provide for the application of the proposed legisla-
tion during the term of sentence of imprisonment of the person convicted by an Assam Rifles
Court.
Clause 101.—This clause seeks to provide for trial of an offender under the proposed
legislation at any place.
Clause 102.—This clause seeks to provide for choice between criminal court and
Assam Rifles Court in the case of offences where criminal court and Assam Rifles Court are
having concurrent jurisdiction and in such cases the first choice will be with the Director-
General, Assam Rifles.

48
Clause 103.—This clause seeks to provide the power of criminal court to give notice
for delivery of an accused person in the case of an offence under clause 102. This clause also
provides for reference to Central Government in the case of any difference of opinion by the
officers of the Force.
Clause 104.—This clause seeks to  provide the senior member to act as presiding
officer in a General Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 105.—This clause seeks to provide that every General Assam Rifles Court
shall be and Petty Assam Rifles Court may be attended by a Law Officer or an officer
approved by the Chief Law Officer or a Law Officer.
Clause 106.—This clause seeks to provide the right of an accused person at a General
Assam Rifles Court and Petty Assam Rifles Court to object to be tried by any member sitting
in the Court on assembling of the Court and procedure to be followed when such an objec-
tion is raised.
Clause 107.—This clause seeks to provide for administration of oath or affirmation to
every member of an Assam Rifles Court, Law Officer  and witnesses giving evidence before
it.
Clause 108.—This clause seeks to provide every decision of an Assam Rifles Court
shall be passed by majority of votes and in the case of equality of votes on finding and
sentence, the decision shall be in the favour of the accused. This clause also provides that
concurrence of at least two-third of members shall be required in the case of a death sen-
tence. Further provides the presiding officer shall have casting vote in matters other than
challenges under clause 106, finding and sentence.
Clause 109.—This clause seeks to provide for application of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 to all proceedings before an Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 110.—This clause seeks to confer power on the Assam Rifles Court to take
judicial notice of any matter within the general knowledge of officers of the Force.
Clause 111.—This clause seeks to confer power on the  convening authority, presid-
ing officer of an Assam Rifles Court or Court of Inquiry and the Law Officer to summon a
witness by issuing  summons to give evidence or to produce a document or other thing.  It
provides that in the case of a witness subject to the proposed legislation, the summons shall
be sent to his Commandant and in the case of any other witness, the summons shall be given
effect through a Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the witness resides.
Clause 112.—This clause seeks to provide for exception to provisions of clause 111
with respect to operations of provision of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 or to a document in the custody of postal or telegraph authorities.  Further, this clause
provides in the case of documents in the custody of postal or telegraph authorities, a Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Court of Session or High Court may
direct the postal or telegraph authorities to deliver such documents for the purpose of an
Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 113.—This clause seeks to provide appointment of commission for examina-
tion of witnesses, during the course of trial by any Assam Rifles Court, when the attendance
of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience.
Clause 114.—This clause seeks to provide that in the case of a commission issued
under clause 113, the prosecutor and the accused person may forward interrogatories in
writing for examination of witness for the commission issued and may also appear before the
commission for examination of such witness.  Further, this clause provides for the procedure
to be followed on execution of such commission.
Clause 115.—This clause seeks to provide for conviction by an Assam Rifles Court
for offences not charged, in case of certain offences, for an offence of same nature but of
lesser gravity.

49
Clause 116.—This clause seeks to provide for the presumption as to signature and the
character by whom and in which it purports to have been signed, in respect of certain
documents when produced before an Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 117.—This clause seeks to provide for presumption as to evidence of question
and answers in an enrolment paper duly signed by an enrolling officer when produced in a
proceeding under this legislation.
Clause 118.—This clause seeks to provide presumption by an Assam Rifles Court as
to certain documents like a letter, return or a document respecting the service of a person, an
Assam Rifles list or Gazette, a record made in any battalion book in pursuance of this
legislation, any document or report under the head of a Government scientific expert, etc.
This clause also provides power of an Assam Rifles Court to summon and examine a Govern-
ment expert as to the subject-matter of this report.
Clause 119.—This clause seeks to provide that  when the accused in the case of
offence under clause 25 or clause 26, refers to a Government officer for any sufficient or
reasonable excuse in his defence and it appears that such officer is likely to prove or dis-
prove the said statement of accused, the court may address such officer and adjourn the
proceedings until his reply is received and the written reply, if signed by such officer shall be
received in evidence as if given on oath before the court.
Clause 120.—This clause seeks to provide for taking evidence as to the previous
convictions and general character of an accused person on his conviction for purposes of
awarding the punishment.
Clause 121.—This clause seeks to provide the Assam Rifles Court to record a finding
as to the lunacy of the accused, when the accused person is by reason of unsoundness of
mind incapable of making his defence or that he committed the act alleged due to unsound-
ness of mind and confirmation of such a finding. This clause also provides that the confirm-
ing authority in such cases will report the matter to Central Government for order as to
detention of such accused person.
Clause 122.—This clause seeks to provide for the trial of an accused person who was
found by reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence on his
subsequent fitness on the report of a medical officer or on a certificate of the Inspector
General of Prisons and in the case of an accused kept in mental asylum, by two or more
visitors of that asylum that he is capable of making his defence.
Clause 123.—This clause seeks to provide that a copy of certificate under clause 122
shall forthwith be sent to the Central Government.
Clause 124.—This clause seeks to provide for  the release of a lunatic accused kept in
custody under clause 121 by Central Government on the certificate by any of the authorities
mentioned in clause 122 that such person may be released without danger of his doing injury
to himself or any other person. This clause also provides for transfer of such person to
public lunatic asylum if not already sent to such asylum by Central Government.
Clause 125.—This clause seeks to provide for delivery of a lunatic accused detained
under clause 121 to his relatives on the orders of Central Government.
Clause 126.—This clause seeks to provide for custody and disposal of any property
in respect of which an offence appears to have been committed.
Clause 127.—This clause seeks to provide that the competent authority may order
disposal of property regarding which offence is committed, on conclusion of a trial before
any Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 128.—This clause seeks to provide that the trial by an Assam Rifles Court shall
be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of Indian
Penal Code and Assam Rifles Court shall be deemed to be a court within the meaning of
sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

50
Clause 129.—This clause seeks to provide that the finding and sentence of General
Assam Rifles Court and a Petty Assam Rifles Court shall be valid only if it is confirmed as
provided in clauses 130 and 131.
Clause 130.—This clause seeks to provide that the finding of a General Assam Rifles
Court may be confirmed by Central Government or by any officer empowered by warrant of
Central Government.
Clause 131.—This clause seeks to provide that the  finding of a Petty Assam Rifles
Court to be confirmed by an officer empowered to convene a General Assam Rifles Court or
by an officer empowered by a warrant of such officer.
Clause 132.—This clause seeks to provide certain restrictions, reservations and con-
ditions in the warrants issued under clauses 130 and 131.
Clause 133.—This clause seeks to impose certain restrictions, reservations and con-
ditions on  the power of confirming authority  under clause 132 to mitigate, remit or commute
the sentence awarded.
Clause 134.—This clause seeks to provide confirmation of a finding and sentence in
respect of an accused person subject to this legislation, who has been tried and sentenced
while on board a ship, to confirm and execute as if, such person had been tried at the port  of
disembarkation.
Clause 135.—This clause seeks to provide for revision of a finding and sentence of an
Assam Rifles Court, which requires confirmation, once on the order of confirming authority
by the same Court.
Clause 136.—This clause seeks to provide that the finding and sentence of a Sum-
mary Assam Rifles Court is not required to be confirmed and will be carried out forthwith.  It
also provides that in the case of a finding and sentence of a Summary Assam Rifles Court,
where the trial is held by an officer holding the rank of Deputy Commandant or of a rank
declared under clause 96(5)(a) as a lower rank and has held such rank for less than three
years, then, the sentence will not be given effect to until approved by an officer not below
the rank of a Deputy Inspector-General.
Clause 137.—This clause seeks to provide that the proceeding of a Summary Assam
Rifles Court shall be forwarded to an officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector-General
within whose command the trial was held and the power of the said officer to set aside or
reduce the sentence on the merit of the case but not on technical grounds.
Clause 138.—This clause seeks to provide for alteration or substitution of finding or
sentence awarded by an Assam Rifles Court by an authority empowered under clause 150  to
commute the punishment when it is found for any reason to be invalid or cannot be sup-
ported by the evidence.
Clause 139.—This clause seeks to provide for the remedy available to any person
subject to the proposed legislation against any order including finding and sentence by an
Assam Rifles Court and the power of the Central Government, Director-General, Assam
Rifles or the prescribed officer on receipt of any petition from such person.
Clause 140.—This clause seeks to provide for the  power of Central Government, the
Director-General or any prescribed officer to annul the proceedings of an Assam Rifles Court
which is illegal or unjust.
Clause 141.—This clause seeks to provide that while awarding a death sentence, the
Assam Rifles Court shall in its discretion direct whether the convict shall suffer death by
being hanged by neck or shall suffer death by being shot to death.
Clause 142.—This clause seeks to provide the date from which the sentence of imprison-
ment awarded by an Assam Rifles Court commences and also provides for set off from the period
of imprisonment the period spent in custody during investigation and trial in the same case.

51
Clause 143.—This clause seeks to provide the procedure for executing the sentence
of imprisonment awarded by an Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 144.—This clause seeks to provide for keeping in Force custody or in any
other fit place of an offender who has been directed to undergo sentence of imprisonment in
a civil prison.
Clause 145.—This clause seeks to provide for execution of sentence of imprisonment
or a portion thereof in any civil prison or other fit place in special cases.
Clause 146.—This clause provides for imposing restraint on a person subject to the
proposed legislation under the sentence of imprisonment during his conveyance for his safe
conduct and removal.
Clause 147.—This clause seeks to provide for communication of order setting aside or
varying any sentence, in the case of a person confined in a civil prison, to prison authorities.
Clause 148.—This clause seeks to provide for execution of sentence of fine awarded
by an Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 149.—This clause seeks to provide for amendment of any informality or error
in the order or warrant issued in respect of any person sentenced to imprisonment under the
proposed legislation.
Clause 150.—This clause seeks to provide for the power of Central Government,
Director-General and an officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector-General  to pardon,
mitigate, commute and grant  parole to any person subject to the proposed legislation
convicted by an Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 151.—This clause seeks to provide for cancellation of conditional pardon,
parole and remission in certain cases.
Clause 152.—This clause seeks to confer power on Central Government, Director-
General or any officer empowered to convene a General Assam Rifles Court to suspend the
sentence of imprisonment awarded by an Assam Rifles Court.
Clause 153.—This clause seeks to provide for orders by competent authority in the
case of a sentence mentioned in clause 152, until orders suspending the sentence is made.
Clause 154.—This clause seeks to provide for release of an offender when a sentence
is suspended under clause 152.
Clause 155.—This clause seeks to provide that the period of sentence spent under
suspension shall be reckoned as part of term of such sentence.
Clause 156.—This clause seeks to provide that authority specified under clause 152
may order that the offender shall undergo the un-expired portion of sentence or remit the
sentence.
Clause 157.—This clause seeks to provide for reconsideration of orders of suspen-
sion of sentence in intervals of not more than four months.
Clause 158.—This clause seeks to provide that an offender, whose sentence is sus-
pended under the proposed legislation, is sentenced for any other offence, then, the two
offences shall run concurrently.
Clause 159.—This clause seeks to provide that the powers under clauses 152 and 156
shall be in addition to power of mitigation, remission and commutation.
Clause 160.—This clause seeks to provide for the effect of suspension and remission
on the punishment of dismissal.
Clause 161.—This clause seeks to provide for disposal of the private or regimental
property of any person subject to the proposed legislation who dies or deserts or is ascer-
tained to be of unsound mind or while on active duty is reported to be missing.

52
Clause 162.—This clause seeks to empower Central Government to confer on mem-
bers of the Force, the powers exercisable by other Government officers under Central Acts
in regard to the prevention of any offence against such Acts or the apprehending of any
person who has committed any such offence. In the case of Central Acts expressly men-
tioned in the clause, the powers can be conferred in respect of all offences because such
offences are primarily of a Trans-frontier nature. In the case of other Central Acts, the
powers can be conferred only in respect of cognizable offences. Further, this clause seeks to
empower the Central Government to confer upon members of the Force powers exercisable
under State Acts, by police officers holding corresponding ranks and makes it clear that
such powers may be conferred on with the concurrence of the State Government concerned.
Clause 163.—This clause seeks to provide protection for acts of the members of the
Force who exercise or discharge any power or duty under sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause
162 of the proposed legislation.
Clause 164.—This clause seeks to confer powers on Central Government to issue any
order published in the Official Gazette to make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of the proposed legislation as may appear  necessary for removing any difficulty.
Clause 165.—This clause seeks to provide for the power of the Central Government to
make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 166.—This clause seeks to provide for the power of the Central Government to
make regulations for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 167.—This clause seeks to provide that the rules and regulations made under
the proposed legislation shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 168.—This clause seeks to provide for the repeal of the Assam Rifles Act, 1941
and saving of all acts, appointment and enrolment done under the repealed Act.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2(1)(d) read with clause 105 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
appoint Chief Law Officer and Law Officer to attend the General Assam Rifles Court and
Petty Assam Rifles Court, respectively.
2. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of an Armed Force of the Union called
the Assam Rifles for ensuring security of the borders of India, to carry out counter insur-
gency operations in the specified areas and  to act in aid of civil authorities for the mainte-
nance of law and order and the matters connected therewith.
3. Clause 5 of the Bill   empowers the Central Government to appoint an officer as
Director-General of the Force on whom the command and supervision of the Force shall be
vested and other officers to assist the Director-General.
4. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for enrolment of persons to the Force.
5. Clause 85 of the Bill empowers the Director-General or any prescribed officer to
appoint persons as Force Police for discharging the functions specified in sub-clauses (2)
and (3) of the said clause.
6. The Assam Rifles was constituted in 1835 as Cachar Levy and was employed on
frontier watch and ward duty to assist the civil administration in the maintenance of law and
order in the tribal areas of the erstwhile composite State of Assam particularly in Lushai
Hills, Mikir Hills, Naga Hills, Khasi, Jaintia and Garo Hills and also in the erstwhile North-
East Frontier Agency (now Arunachal Pradesh) will be deemed to have been constituted
under the proposed legislation ( vide clause 168). All expenses incurred concerning the
administration of the Force would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. As the Force
has already been constituted, no additional expenditure of a non-recurring nature is likely to
be involved when the Bill is enacted and brought into force. The recurring expenditure on
the administration of the Force during 2005-06, was of the order of Rs. 1124.53 crores.
53

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 165 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the matters with respect to
which rules may be made under the said clause. These matters relate to, inter alia, the
manner of reconstitution of the Force and the conditions of service of the members of the
Force under sub-section (2) of section 4; the mode of enrolment and the procedure for
enrolment under sub-section (1) of section 6; the authority whose previous permission in
writing is required for resigning from appointment or withdrawing from all or any of the
duties under section 8; rank or ranks of an officer or a subordinate officer referred to under
sub-section (2) of section 11; the authority who shall give previous sanction in writing
under sub-section (1) of section 13; nature of communication or publication under clause
(c) of sub-section (1) of section 13; other purposes of meeting or demonstration under sub-
section (2) of section 13; form of enrolment under section 31; any other purpose under
clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section 57; the officer who may direct that an enrolled
person who has been sentenced to dismissal or imprisonment whether combined with
dismissal or not may be retained to serve in the ranks under section 60; the manner of
proceedings against a person and the extent of awarding punishment under section 62; the
manner of proceeding against an officer below the rank of a Deputy Commandant and of the
rank of subordinate officer and of a rank of a Warrant Officer under sub-section (1) of
section 64; the manner of forwarding certified true copies of the proceedings and the
superior authority to whom such copies shall be forwarded under sub-section (2) of section
64; the manner of proceeding against an officer below the rank of Commandant and of any
rank of subordinate officer and of a rank of Warrant Officer under sub-section (1) of section
65; the manner of proceeding against any subordinate officer or a Warrant Officer under
section 66; the officer by whose order any sum is required to be paid, for the maintenance
of the wife or legitimate or illegitimate child of a person subject to this Act other than an
officer, under clause (i) of section 69; the officer who may direct that the whole or any part
of the pay and allowances of person subject to this Act shall be withheld under section 71;
the manner and the extent of remission of deductions from pay and allowances authorised
by this Act and the authority by which such remission shall be made under section 75; the
authorities by whom proper provision to be made out of the pay and allowances of all
persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, for the dependants of such person
under section 76; the authorities who shall  make proper provision out of the pay and
allowances of any person subject  to this Act, who is prisoner of war or is missing under
section 77; the manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may
be taken into and detained in Force custody under sub-section (4) of section 80; the manner
of making special report giving reasons for delay under section 81; the authority to appoint,
and the manner of appointment of, a court of inquiry; the manner of administering oath or
affirmation by such court of inquiry and the manner of making record under sub-section (1)
of section 84; the officer who may appoint Force Police under sub-section (1) of section 85;
the other officer having the discretion to decide before which court the proceeding shall be
instituted under section 102; the manner of filling up the vacancy of member by another
officer under sub-section (3) of section 106; the manner of administering oath or affirmation
to every member of an Assam Rifles Court and to the Law Officer, or, as the case may be, the
officer approved under section 105 before the commencement of the trial, under sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 107; the officer by whom the letter, return or other documents purported
to be signed shall be the evidence of the facts stated  in such letter, return or other docu-
ments under sub- section (1) of section 118; the other matters to be further inquired and
recorded under sub-section (1) of section 120; the other matters to be recorded under sub-
section (3) of section 120; the manner of keeping in custody of the accused person under
sub-section (4) of section 121; the officer who may take steps to have certain persons tried
54

55
under section 122; the authority for issuing certificate in case of detention in any other place
under clause (b) of section 122; the officer to whom the proceedings of every Summary
Assam Rifles Courts shall be forwarded under section 137; the officer superior in command,
to the one who confirmed the findings or sentence referred to in sub-section (2) of section
139, to whom petition may be presented under that sub-section; the officer who may annul
the proceeding of any Assam Rifles Court under section 140; the other officer who shall
direct that sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a civil prison under sub-section
(1) of section 143; the officer who shall forward a warrant and the form of such warrant under
sub-section (2) of section 143; the officer who may from time to time appoint the place for
confinement under sub-section (4) of section 143; the other person by whom the warrant
shall be forwarded to the officer in charge of the prison under section 147; the officer who
may pardon or  exercise other powers as specified under clauses (a) to (c) of section 150 and
any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to
be, or may be, made by rules under clause (39) of sub-section (2) of section 165.
2. Clause 166 empowers the Director-General to make regulations for all or any of the
purposes of the proposed legislation other than those specified in clause 165, subject to the
approval of the Central Government.
3. The rules and regulations made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after they are made, before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matters of
procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the governance of the Assam Rifles, an Armed
Force of the Union for ensuring the security of the borders of India, to carry out Counter
Insurgency Operations in the specified areas and to act in aid of civil authorities for the
maintenance of the law and order and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)
MGIPMRND—6578RS—18.03.2006.