THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to further amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follow:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After article 21 A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:
‘‘21 B.  (1) The State shall provide health protection to all citizens which shall include;
(a) prevention, treatment and control of diseases;
(b) access to essential medicines;
(c) maternal, child and reproductive health;
Short Title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No.  XXX  of 2017
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to
Health.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 15TH DECEMBER, 2017

2
(d) access to basic health services;
(e) access to emergency medical treatment; and
(f ) access to mental healthcare.
Provided that the State in such manner as deemed fit, shall provide the above objectives
for every citizen by earmarking not less than eight per cent of the annual estimated receipts
of the State for healthcare.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 47 of the Indian Constitution makes it a duty of the State to raise the level of
nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health. However, the current
status of healthcare in India reflects that further measures are required to be taken by the
State to assure health to all citizens of the State.
The Government expenditure on health is only 1.4 per cent of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) and the public health infrastructure is inadequate and unequally distributed. The
Draft National Health Policy, 2015 takes note of the fact that over 63 million persons are
faced with poverty every year due to healthcare costs alone as there is no financial protection
for the vast majority of healthcare needs. According to Sample Registration System (SRS)
2013, 1.26 million children under the age of five are estimated to die in our country every
year due to preventable diseases.
Thus, due to lack of enforceability of Directive Principles, right to health remains
unenforceable for citizens. However the Supreme Court in Paschim Banga Khet mazdoor
Samity & ors V . State of West Bengal & ors, while widening the scope of Article 21 held that
providing adequate medical facilities for the people is an obligation of the Government in a
welfare state. The right to health is also internationally recognised as a fundamental human
right. In 1946, the World Health Organisation stated in its Constitution that ‘‘the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of health is one of the fundamental rights of every human
being without distinction of race, religion, political belief, economic or social condition.’’
This right is also included in the Universal Declaration of Human rights and in the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural rights, of which India is a signatory.
The initial Draft of National Health Policy, 2017 declared that Right to Health shall be
guaranteed as an enforceable fundamental right under the Constitution in order to empower
the citizens to hold the State accountable for it. The National Health Policy, 2017 requires
the States to spend at least 8 per cent of their Annual Budgets on Healthcare.
Therefore, it is essential to amend the constitution of India and make right to health a
fundamental right of the citizens.
Hence, this Bill.
V . VIJAYASAI REDDY

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the right to healthcare a fundamental right. It
provides that every citizen shall have right to health protection which shall be provided by
the appropriate Government. Such Bills, if enacted, by Parliament or State Legislatures will
involve expenditure recurring and non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India as
well as Consolidated Fund of the concerned State. However, it is not possible to access the
actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri V . Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2885RS(S3)—15-12-2017.