ASINTRODUC EO IN fHE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXX] of 1999
TS
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
A
BILL

Surther to amend the Constitution of India

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999.
2. In article 171 of the constitution:—

5 (i) in clause (3) of sub-clayse (c), the words “not Jower jn standard than that of
a secondary school” shall be deleted;

(7) for clause (5), the following cJayse shal} be substituted, namely:-—

“(5) The members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause

(2) of clause (3) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical

10 experience for a period of not less than ten years in respect of such matters as
the following, namely:—

Agriculture, art, cinema, cooperative movement culture, education,

engincering, environmental studies, finance, industry, information technol-
ogy, law, literature, medicine, science and technology and social service.

Short nie

Amendment of
anticle 171.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 171 of the Constitution of India lays down the provisions for the composi-
tion of the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council.

Under sub clause (c) of clause (3) of said article, only those teachers who possess
teaching experience of at least 3 years in Secondary Schools and above are eligible to vote
in the elections to the Legislative Council from the teachers constituency. The principal
objective of providing representation of teachers in the Legislative Council is inter alia to
ensure that the problems of all categories of teachers could be effectively brought in the
legislative forum for solution. But the law, as it stands, leaves a bulk of teaching commu-
nity, namely, the teachers engaged in teaching primary classes, totally unrepresented in
the Legislative Council.

Secondly, clause (5) of Article 171 provides for the nomination of a few members
by the Governor of the State to the Council from amongst the persons having special
knowledge or practical experience in matters like, literature, science, art, co-operative
movement and social service. In view of the tremendous explosion of knowledge in sev-
eral matters it is proposed to broad base the areas of various disciplines from which the
Governor could nominate the members to the Legislative Council.

The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives by suitably amending article 171 of the
Constitution.

P. PRABHAKAR REDDY


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF [NDIA

+ +. कं कक
171. (/) od कक कक

(c) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorate consisting of
persons who have been for at least three years engaged in teaching in such educational
institutions within the State, not lower in standard than that of a secondary school, as may
be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament;

ae कक के कक
(5) The Members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause (९) of clause

(3) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of
such matters as the following, namely:—

Literature, science, art, co-operative movement and social service.

ae ae ae a

Composition
of the Legisia-
tive Council.


RAJYA SABHA

LY
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND— 2032RS—25-11-1999