1
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 9 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 in sub-section (1) after the first proviso the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
''Provided further that no citizen of India, shall be deemed to have lost his
citizenship merely on grounds of his or her availing the facility conferred by the order
enacted by Portuguese Government, of registering their births in Portugal, to the
Bill No. XXXII  of  2014
Short title
and
Commence-
ment.
Amendment
of Section 9.
57 of 1955.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

Indians citizens, residing in the territory of erstwhile Union Territory of Goa, Daman
and Diu and the Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, then ruled by the
Government of Portugal, unless such Indian citizens voluntarily apply for the citizenship
of that country with specific intension of renouncing the citizenship of India.
2

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Thousands of Goans born in ''Estado da India'', i.e. Goa, Daman  & Diu, prior to
19.12.1961, and in Dadra & Nagar Haveli, prior to 21.08.1954 and their births registered in the
Civil Registration Offices of these territories before the above mentioned dates have been
given a facility by the Portuguese Government by issuing an order in 2006, to register their
birth in Portugal.
There is an urgent need that thousands of other Indian citizens who were residing in
the erstwhile Union Territory of Goa, Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli who got
their births registered in Portugal, in the last seven to Eight years in the bonafide belief that
such a registration will help them to go to Europe freely, without any hassles, and whereas,
some others, believed that the facility may help them easy access  to the foreign universities.
There was, apparently, no intention, of the most of the applicants that, in the process, they
would lose the Indian citizenship.
Recently, a Member of Goa by Assembly, who had registered his birth in Portugal
availing the above said facility has been declared, by an order issued by the Central Govt.
under the Citizenship Act, 1955, as having caused his Citizenship in India.
The issue has taken a complicated turn as these thousands of Indian citizens are likely
to be considered as non-citizens and there is a danger of ceasing Indian citizenship if the
provisions of Indian citizenship are not interpreted by taking into this background.
Hence, this Bill.
SHANTARAM NAIK

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
—————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—3788RS(S3)—18-12-2014.