10

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH Juty, 2000

Bill No, XXXIX of 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999.

2. In the preamble to the Constitution, for the word “India”, occurring at two places
the word “Bharatwarsh” shall be substituted.

3. In article 1 of the Constitution,—

(i) in clause (1) for the words “India, that is Bharat”, the word,
“Bharatwarsh” shall be substituted.

(ii) in clause (3) for the words “India” the word “Bharatwarsh” shall be
substituted.

4. In article 85 of the Constitution, —

( in the marginal heading for the words “prorogation and dissolution,”
the words “prorogation, suspension and dissolution” shall be substituted;

(ii) in cluase 2, the following sub-clause shall be added at the end,
namely:—

“(c) keep the House of the People (Lok Sabha) in suspended animation for a
specified period.”

Short title.

Amendment of

Amendment of
article 1,

Amendment of


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The ancient name of our country i.e. Bharat is symbol of our unity, integrity and
ancient culture. It will be appropriate if this name of our country be incorporated in our
Constitution.

Now a days, in the elections, often a hung Parliament emerges. As a result, Lok
Sabha needs to be dissolved many a time within a period of five years and the nation has
to bear a heavy expenditure on mid-term polls. To avoid dissolution of Lok Sabha before
completing five years term and holding frequent mid-term polls, minor amendments can
be made in the Constitution to tackle such a situation.

Article 85(2) of the Constitution should, therefore, be amended by incorporating
the words at the end “(c) suspend the Lok Sabha”, Such a provision will give us two
benefits, Firstly the business of the suspended Lok Sabha will get suspended as is the
case in the case of Legislative Assemblies in States and it will make way of political
polarisation. Thus, the country could be saved from facing unnecessary elections. In the
event of the President suspending the Lok Sabha on the advice of the Prime Minister,
immediately, thereafter, the President will administer the country with the help of caretaker
Prime Minister, The President, on being satisfied that any party or an alliance of parties
is in a position to form the Government, will revoke the suspension of Lok Sabha and
invite the concerned party to form the Government.

The Bill, accordingly, seeks to amend the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.

RAJNATH SINGH ‘SURYA’


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

* * * * *

85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to
meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between
its last sitting in one session and the date appointment for its first sitting in the next
session.

(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the House of either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People.

* * * * *

Sessidns of
Parliament,
Prorogation
and dissolu-
tion.


RAJYA ‘SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Rajnath Singh “Surya”, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2067RS—28.07.2000.