10

As INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

Bill No. XXXIV of 2001
—————

THE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (IDENTIFICATION AND
DEPORTATION) BILL, 2001

A
Bu
to set up a Commission to identify and deport illegal immigrants in the country.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Megal Immigrants (Identification and Deportation)
Act, 2001.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act ‘illegal immigrant’ means any person who comes to India without any
proper and valid document issued by the designated Authority of the Government of
India.

3. The Central Government shall set up a Commission to be known as the

National Commission for identification and deporting illegal immigrants (hereinafter
to be known as National Commission).

Short title, ex-
tent and Com-
mencement,

Definition.

National Com-
mission for
identification
and deporting
illegal rmmi-
grants,


State Commis-
sion.

Appointment,
term and salary
of Chairman
and other
members of
State Commis-
sion.

Duties of the
State Commis-
sion.

Powers of the
Commission.

Commission
to direct the
State
Government.

State Govern-
ment to take
action on di-
rection of the
Commission.
Representa-
tion to the
National
Commission,

2

4. (1) The National Commission shall consist of:—

(i) a Chairman who shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court to be
appointed by the President of India; and

(ii) two other members to be appointed by the President of India.

(2) The Chairman and other members shall hold office for a term of five years and
shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be determined by the Central
Government.

5. The Central Government shall also set up a ‘State Commission’ for a State or a
group of States for identification and deportation of illegal immigrants.
6. (1) Every State Commission shall consist of:
(0) a Chairman who shall be a retired Judge of High Court; and
(ii) four other members.

(2) The Chairman and other members of the State Commission shall be appointed by
the Central Government in consultation with the Chairman of the National Commission.

(3) The Chairman and the other members shall hold office for a term of five years
and shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be determined by the
Central Government.

7. Every State Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—

(४) to carry out necessary exercise to identify illegal immigrants and their
nationality in their respective area;

(ii) to prepare and send list of all illegal immigrants in their respective area to
the District Administration.

8. The National Commission and every State Commission shall exercise the powers
of a civil court in regard to discharge of its functions.
9. The Commission shall direct the respective State Government to:—

(i) stop all assistance enjoyed by the illegal immigrants immediately;

(ii) impound the ration card in the possession of illegal immigrants;

(iii) terminate the services of illegal immigrants, in case such immigrants are
employed in any public sector and inform persons concerned in case they are em-
ployed in private sector;

(iv) take such necessary action to recover loans borrowed by illegal immi-
grants;

(०) facilitate speedy hearing of cases against illegal immigrants; and

(vi) take immediate action for deporting them to the countries of their origin.
10. The State Government shall take such action as directed by the National Com-

mission within three month.

11. ( Any person, who has any complaint against a decision of any State Commis-
sion, shall be entitled to represent to the National Commission, who shall hear the same
and dispose it of within one month.

(ii) Every applicant, who represents to the National Commission under clause (i),
shall be given an opportunity of being heard before disposing of such application by the
National Commission.

5

10

20

25

30

35


3

12. The State Commission and the district administration shall ensure that no
inconvenience is caused to any bona fide citizen of the country during the enforcement of
the provisions of this Act.

13. The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 (39 of 1983) is
5 hereby repealed.

14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
tules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

No inconven-
ience to be
caused to bona
fide citizens.

Repeal of Act
39 of 1983,

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In our country, there are lakhs of illegal immigrants who have come from many
countries. Our country is poor and cannot afford to feed the immigrants. There have been
complaints that these people indulge in criminal activities. They take the share of benefits
which would have been otherwise available to bona fide citizens. They harass the genuine
citizens and usurp their rights. One Central Act namely the Illegal Migrants (Determination
by Tribunals) Act, 1983 is there but it has proved to be ineffective.

It is, therefore, proposed to set up a Commission to identify and deport illegal
immigrants to the countries of their origin. Due care will be taken not to harass bona fide
citizens by repealing the existing Central Act.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; SATISH PRADHAN
February 19,2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of the National Commission for
identification and deporting of illegal immigrants from the country. Clause 4 provides for
salaries and allowances payable to the Chairman and other members of the Commission.
Clause 5 provides for setting up of State Commission for a State or a group of States and
clause 6 provide for salaries and allowances payable to the Chairman and other members
of State Commission.

The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about one crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to set up a Commission to identify and deport illegal immigrants in the country.

(Shri Satish Pradhan, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—7229RS—13-03-2001.