AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON 26TH JULY, 2024. 
Bill No. XXXIII of 2024 
THE PROTECTION OF RIGHTS OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY 
NATURAL DISASTER BILL, 2024 
A 
BIL
L 
to
 provide for protecting the interests and rights of persons affected by the impact of 
recurring natural disasters due  to climate change and other factors by 
 constitution of a National Commission for Natural Disaster 
 Affected Persons for the said purpose and for 
 matters connected therewith and 
 incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: – 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Protection of Rights of Persons Affected
by Natural Disaster   Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
2. In t his Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “Commission” means the National Commission for Natural Disaster
Affected Persons constituted under Section 4 of this Act.
Definitions. 

2 
(b) ‘‘natural disaster’’ means any  calamity, catastrophe, or grave
occurrence arising from natural rather than human -driven causes, such
as earthquake, cyclone, floods, tsunami, droughts, cloudburst,
landslides, lightning strikes, forest fires, epidemics etc. affecting a large
area and  resulting in substantial  loss of human life or damage to and
destruction of, private property, or public infrastructure, or  damage to,
or degradation of the natural environment, and so  declared by a
notification by the Central Government;
(c) ‘‘natural disaster affected persons’’  means  the  persons
residing in regions, particularly  coastal belts, mountainous regions and
other areas which are particularly vulnerable to  natural disaster; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5 
10 
Notifying 
regions as 
disaster prone 
3. The Central Government shall, on recommendation of the Commission
constituted under Section 4 of this Act, notify the regions which are
particularly vulnerable to climate change, as ‘natural disast er-prone
areas’ in the Official Gazette;
15 
Constitution of 
a National 
Commission for 
Natural Disaster 
Affected 
Persons. 
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the official 
Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the National 
Commission for Natural Disaster Affected Persons to exercise 
the powers conferred upon and to perform such functions as 
assigned to it, under this Act. 
(2) T
he Commission shall consist of the following: —
(i) the Union Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change – Chairperson, ex-officio;
(ii) the Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India –
Member, ex-officio;
(iii) the Chairperson, National Disaster Management Authority –
Member, ex-officio;
(iv) one environmental activist to be nominated by the President of
India in such manner as may be prescribed – Member; and
(v) one member to be nominated from each State by the respective
State Government in such manner as may be prescribed –
Members.
(3) T
he headquarters of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
(4) T
he Commission may establish its offices at such other places within 
the country, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of the non -official Members of the
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
 
20 
25 
30 
 
35 
40 
. 
Duty and 
functions of the 
Commission.
 
5. (1)   The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely –
(a) lay down a national policy and guidelines for protection of the
rights and interests of natural disaster affected persons during all
 
45 

3 
5 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
35 
stages of disaster management, including preparedness, response, 
recovery, and rehabilitation; 
(b)  formulate schemes and plans for management of natural disasters
across the country including mechanism for forewarning and damage
control measures to be taken in anticipation of such disasters to
minimize and mitigate the devastation and destruction resulting
therefrom;
(c) management of immediate relief and rehabilitation of natural
disaster affected persons;
(d) study and identify regions which are prone to recurring
natural disasters and particularly vulnerable to climate change
impacts and make recommendations to the C entral Government
to notify such regions as "natural disaster -prone areas" in the
Official Gazette;
(e) recommend to the Central Government  to provide special
financial assistance to the States or Union Territories in which natural
disaster prone areas 
are located for the purpose of undertaking
recovery, mitigation and preventive measures such as provision of
adequate compensation based on the Commission’s field assessment
of the nature and quantum of loss of lives and property or damage
thereto;
(f) constantly monitor the increasing impact of climate change
and submit policy recommendations to the Central Government,
which shall address the concerns of such regions while allocating
resources;
(g) receive and examine complaints regarding violation of the
rights of natural disaster affected persons including negligence or
failure in providing timely relief and rehabilitation or non-compliance
of the policy and guidelines issued by it from time to time and
recommend appropriate action in the matter; and
(h) such o ther functions, as it may consider necessary, for
implementation of the provisions of this Act and any other matters
incidental to the above functions.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure
related to the functions enumerated in sub -section (1) and for matters
connected therewith.
 
40 
6. (1)  The Commission may appoint such number of officers and staff as it
may consider necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under
this Act.
(2) The mode of recruitment, the salary and allowances payable to,
and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and staff of
the Commission appointed under sub- section (1) shall be such as
may be prescribed.
Secretariat of the 
Commission. 

4 
Central 
Government to 
provide 
adequate funds 
to the 
Commission.
 
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law on this behalf, grant such sums of money to the
Commission, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
Accounts and 
Audit. 8. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may 
be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission as audited and certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed
by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be
forwarded annually by the Commission to the Central Government
which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
 
5 
 
10 
Annual Report 
of the 
Commission. 
9. (1) The Commission shall prepare every year, in such form and within
such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government an annual 
report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous 
year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual and special reports
of the Comm ission to be laid before each House of Parliament along
with a memorandum of action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations of the Commission and the reasons for non-
acceptance of the recommendations, if any, within a period of one year
from the date of receipt of such report.
15 
20 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation
of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
 
25 
Act to have an 
overriding 
effect. 
11. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other
law for the time being in force.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
12. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty.
30 
Power to make 
rules. 13. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
35 
40 
45 

5 
ST
ATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Ac
cording to reports from several international agencies, during the 
period from 1970 to 2019, natural hazards accounted for 50 per cent. of all 
disasters, 45 per cent. of all reported deaths and 74 per cent. of all reported 
economic losses. 
Glo
bally, there were more than 11,000 reported disasters attributed 
to these hazards,  with over two million deaths and $3.64 trillion in  
economic losses. More than 91 per  cent. of the se deaths occurred in 
developing countries.  Meanwhile, economic losses have increased 
sevenfold globally, rising from an average of $49 million in 1970s , to a 
staggering $383 million per day in 2010s. 
Indi
a as a country with a vast land area and high population density 
has found itself in the cusp of many natural disasters which take away the 
lives of hundreds of innocent people and result in huge economic losses.  
The
re is a need to ensure that the regions which are particularly 
vulnerable to climate change -induced disasters are not left alone and are  
supported by the nation so that an equitable  growth and development is  
made possible  for all areas of the country. States which are repeatedly 
facing recurring natural disasters needs special assistance and attention, so 
that they do not lag behind in development.  
The
 Bill proposes to constitute  a National Commission for Natural 
Disaster Affected Persons for protecting the interests and rights of persons 
affected by the impact of natural disasters arising due to climate change 
and other factors by constant monitoring of the increasing impact of climate 
change and make policy recommendations to the Central Government to 
mitigate its adverse effects on the vulnerable population. 
Hen
ce, this Bill. 
V. SI
VADASAN

6 
FI
NANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 provides for the constitution of the National Commission 
for Natural Disaster Affected Persons and the appointment of a Chairperson 
and Members therein as well as the salary and allowances payable to, and 
other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of 
the Commission.  Clause 5 lays down the duties and functions of the 
Commission including the study and identification of regions which are 
prone to natural disasters and particularly vulnerable to climate change 
impacts and to constantly monitor the increasing impact of climate change 
and submit policy recommendations to the Central Government in this 
regard.  Clause 6 provides for the establishment of a Secretariat to support 
the functioning of the Commission and the salary and allowances payable 
to and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and staff of the 
Commission.  Clause  7 of the Bill provides  that the Central Government 
shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, 
grant such sums of money to the Commission, as it may think fit,  for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at 
this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be 
involved. 

7 
  
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to 
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
________ 
A 
  BILL 
to provide for prot ecting the i nterests and rights of persons affected by the 
i
mpact of recurring natural dis asters du e to climate change and o ther factors by 
constitution of a National Co mm ission for Natural 
 Disaster Affected Persons for the said purpose and for 
 matters co nn ected therewith and 
 incidental thereto. 
__________ 
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—174—31.07.2024 