Bill No. XXXII-F of eshdeeeeoeeotese OFT 963%
——— IS

rdinary, Part Ir .
of India feats ean ae
tte 1964 as
jn & ऐप 12th Mays
। ted
alts, 1 da
४४४०

T HIND]
SHINA BHARAT HIND
Tae ACHAR SABHA BILL, 1964

(AS PASSED BY THE Housss og PARLIAMENT)



Bill No, XXXIIL-F of 1963
THE DAKSHINA BHARAT HINDI PRA
ie CHAR SABHA

(As PASSED BY THE Housss oF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL

to declare the institution known as the Dakshina Bharat Hindi
Prachar Sabha, having at present its registered office at Madras
to be an institution of national importance and to provide for
certain matters connected therewith. ;

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic
of India as follows :—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar

Short
Sabha Act, 1964. title and
com-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- ™°&2¢*
a के ‘ ment.
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Defini-

(a) “memorandum” means the memorandum of association ee
of the Sabha filed with the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies,
2ofig60, Madras, under the Societies Registration Act, 1860;

(b) “rules and regulations” includes any rule or regulation,
by whatever name called, which the Sabha is competent to make
in the exercise of the powers conferred on it under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860, but shall not include any bye-laws or
standing orders made under the rules and regulations for the
conduct of its work;

(c) “Sabha” means the Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar
Sabha registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.


2

Beciare 3. Whereas the objects of the institution
ton of the Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha are such as to 116७ a
— National importance, it is hereby declared that the Dashing." “
Hindi Hindi Prachar Sabha is an institution of national ; er
Prachar nal ™Mportang, tt
Sabha

88 an in-

stitution

of natio-

nal im-

portance,

known ag the
make it an

Grant of i i i i in th ; नि

वेज लक 4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the niversity Grants

diplomas “Commission Act, 1956, or in any other law for the time being in | 4

= tes, the Sabha May hold such examinations and Srant such 6९०७, ty

by the diplomas and certificates for proficiency in Hindi or in the teaching

Sabha. of Hindi as may be determined by the Sabha from time to time हे

os 5. (1) The Sabha ‘shall maintain proper accounts and other rele.
vant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts jing]
the balance-sheet in such for

Uding
71 as may be prescribed by the ९
Government.

entra]
(2) The accounts of the Sabha shall, once

at least in every year,
be audited by ७ chartered accountant in practi

ce within the
the Sabha:

Provided that no member of th
2ecountant or a person who is in pi
shall be eligible for appointment a

e Sabha who is 8 chartered
artnership with such member,
$ an auditor under this section,
(3) Every auditor shall, in the performance of his duties, have at
all reasonable times access to th

(९ registers, books of account, recdrds
and other documents of the Sabha or of any committee, council,
board or branch of the Sabha.

(4) As soon as ma
auditors shall submit ¢!
a copy thereof to the

y be practicable at the end of each year, the
heir report to the Sabha and shall also forward
Central Government for its information,

Prior 6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Societies Registra- a
epproval tion Act, 1860, or in the memorandum or rules and regulations, the 21 ०180).
Coie Sabha shall not, except with the previous approval of the Central

Govern- Government,—
ment

necessary (a) alter, extend or abridge any of the purposes for Mic
ee it has been established or for which it is being used merry
before the commencement of this Act, or amalgamate i aoe?

certain


*

न 3

partially, with any other institution or society; ction
by the
Sabha.

either wholly or

(b) alter or amend in any manner the memorandum or rules

and regulations; or
(0 be dissolved.
7. (1) The Central Government may constitute, after consultation Review
“¢he Sabha, one or more committees consisting of such number °f work

vith @ : a
ot persons as it thinks fit to appoint thereto for all or any of the Es Oe:

following purposes, namely: —
(a) reviewing the work done by the Sabha during any
specified period and the progress made by it; and

(b) evaluating the work done by the Sabha,

(2) The Sabha shail afford all necessary facilities to any commit-
tee constituted under sub-section (1) for the purpose of enabling it
to carry out its duties.

(3) The report of any committee constituted under sub-sec-
tion (1) shall be submitted to the Central Government within such
time and in such manner as that Government may direct.

(4) The Sabha shall be entitled to appoint a representative who
shall have the right to be present and to be heard at such review or
evaluation.

(5) The Central Government may address the President of the
Sabha with reference to the result of such review or evaluation as
disclosed in the report of any committee constituted under sub-sec-
tion (1), and the President of the Sabha shall communicate to the
Central Government the action, if any, taken thereon.

(6) When the Central Government has, in pursuance of sub-sec-
tion (5), addressed the President of the Sabha in connection with
any matter and the President of the Sabha does not within a
reasonable time take action to the satisfaction of the Central Govern-
ment in respect thereof, the Central Government may, after allowing
the Sabha an opportunity of furnishing explanations or making
representations, issue such directions as that Government considers
necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report
and the Sabha shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any law
| इज the ti the memorandum or rules and
with such directions.

mittee constituted under sub-sec-
ances as the Central Government
ances together with the expenses



RATYA SABHA

A

BILL
to declare the institution known as the ~

Prachar Sabha, having at Present its
Madras, to be an institution
Provide for certain Matters

at
r
connected there be “4

wi to

(As passeq by the Houses of Parlj