1
THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory V oting Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means—
(i) in the case of a State, the Government of that State;
(ii) in the case of an Union Territory having its own legislature, the
Government of that Union Territory; and
(iii) in other cases, the Central Government.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XXXIV of 2022
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 22ND JULY, 2022

2
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(c) "voter" in relation to a constituency means a person whose name is entered
in the electoral roll of that constituency for the time being in force and who is not
subject to any of the disqualification mentioned in section 16 of the Representation of
the People Act, 1950.
3. It shall be compulsory for every voter who is eligible to vote at an election to
exercise his right to vote when called for by the Election Commission:
Provided that a voter may be exempted from exercising his right to vote—
(a) if he is physically incapacitated from an illness of a serious nature and
produces a medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner certifying such
incapacity; or
(b) if the Election Commission or such other authority as may be empowered by
the Election Commission, on receipt of a request either before or after the poll, from the
voter, is satisfied that there are genuine and bona fide grounds for such exemption.
4. The Election Commission shall ensure protection and safety of all voters who come
to polling booths to cast their votes.
5. The Election Commission shall send a list of names of all eligible voters, who have
not cast their votes, to Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, in
such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) There shall be set up adequate number of polling booths at convenient locations.
(2) The polling booths shall be set up in such a way—
(a) that number of voters in each booth shall be equal to the extent possible;
(b) that the distance between one polling booth and another shall not exceed
five hundred meters:
Provided that in hilly regions and desert areas polling booths may be set up according
to density of population, in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. There shall be made suitable arrangements enabling the persons deployed in
connection with the polling duty to cast their votes.
8. There shall be made separate arrangement in every polling booth for senior citizens,
physically challenged persons and pregnant women to enable them to cast their votes.
9. Any person, who fails to cast his vote shall be liable to—
(a) a fine of rupees five hundred, or two day's imprisonment, or forfeiture of his
ration card;
(b) be rendered ineligible for contesting any election for a period of ten years
from the date of his conviction;
(c) be ineligible for entitlement to any welfare scheme announced by the
appropriate Government from time to time:
Provided that if such person is an employee of the Union Government or the State
Government or the Union Territory Administration or any public sector undertaking owned
Compulsory
voting.
Protection
and safety for
voters at
polling
booths.
Sending of list
of names of
voters not
casting their
votes to the
Government.
Adequate
number and
spacing of
polling
booths.
Special
arrangements
for poll staff.
Special
arrangements
for senior
citizens, etc.
Punishment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
43 of 1950.

3
or controlled by Union Government or the State Government or the Union Territory
Administration, such person shall also be punished with—
(a) forfeiture of ten days' salary; and
(b) delay in promotion for a period of two years.
10. Any voter who, despite his illness or physical incapacity has exercised his right to
vote at an election or any voter who has exercised his right to vote at all elections held during
a period of fifteen years preceding the commencement of this Act without any break, shall
be—
(a) given preference in jobs in the services under the Central Government; and
(b) given preference in admission to the institutions of higher education.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should be of no effect, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the ease may be. However, any such modification or annulment of that rule
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Incentive for
voting.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our country is the largest democracy in the world having population of around
139 crores. The Constitution has adopted the system of universal adult suffrage to secure
political justice.
A strong Parliamentary system is there. Since 1951, free and fair elections have been
conducted at regular interval for both Houses of Parliament, State Legislatures and Local
Bodies. Election in India sets norms for many other countries.
But it has been observed that only around sixty per cent voters use their right to vote.
It has been observed during almost all elections in the country that the number of voters
actually voting is very less than that of eligible voters. Hence, average polling remains very
low. This tendency of election clearly indicates us that taking appropriate steps to encourage
citizens for exercising their voting rights to elect their representatives is needed so that the
results of elections may reflect the intents of all voters and not only of a part of them. In many
cases, citizens knowingly do not cast votes or even they boycott elections. Hence, the
purport of this Bill is to make voting compulsory for every voter subject to certain restrictions
to increase the percentage of voting in the country. However, under this Act such voters,
who are either physically incapacitated or have genuine grounds for not doing so, have been
exempted.
Since voting is being made compulsory, punishment for those who are not voting has
been proposed. Moreover, those voters have been proposed to be given incentives who
despite their illness, have continuously exercised their right to vote at elections.
Some of the countries that introduced mandatory voting laws were Belgium in 1892.
Argentina in 1914 and Australia in 1924. Countries that enforce compulsory voting are
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Brazil, Chile, Cyprus, Ecuador. Fiji, Greece.
Lichtensteen, Mexico, Nauru, Peru, Singapore, Switzerland (One Canton only), Turkey and
Uruguay. Compulsory voting is a system in which electors are bound to vote in elections or
attend a polling place on voting day. Compulsory voting system confers a higher degree of
political legitimacy.
Hence this Bill.
DEEPAK  PRAKASH
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 provides for setting up of adequate polling booths in every constituency.
Clauses 7 and 8 provide for special arrangements for persons deployed for poll duty and for
senior citizens, physically challenged persons and pregnant women to enable them to cast
their votes. Clause 11 requires the Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying
out the purposes of the Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees eight thousand
crore is likely to be involved. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand
crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill which will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

MGIPMRND—646RS(S3)—25-07-2022.
RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Deepak Prakash, M.P .)