Short title
and
commencement.
THE ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to amend the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Armed Forces Tribunal (Amendment) Act, 2012.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 8 of the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the following section shall  be substituted, namely:—
“8. The Chairperson or a Member  of the Tribunal shall hold office as such for a
term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office but they shall not
be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that no Chairperson shall hold the office after he has attained,—
(a)  in case he has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, the age of seventy
years;  and
(b) in case  he has been the Chief Justice of  a High Court, the age of
sixty-seven years:
Substitution of
new section
for section 8.
Term of office
of Chairperson
or Member.
55 of 2007.
Bill No. XXXII of 2012
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
5
10

2
  Provided further that no Judicial Member shall hold the office as such Judicial
Member after he has attained the age of sixty-seven years:
Provided also that no Administrative Member shall hold office as such
Administrative Member after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.”.
3.  For section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“19.The Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction, powers and
authority in respect of contempt  of itself as a High Court has and may exercise  and,
for this purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 shall have effect
subject to the modifications that—
(a) the references  therein to a  High Court shall be construed as  including
a reference to such Tribunal;
(b) the references  to the Advocate-General in section 15 of the said Act
shall be construed in relation to the Armed Forces Tribunal,  as a reference to the
Attorney-General or the Solicitor-General  or  the Additional Solicitor-General.
Power to
punish for
contempt.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 19.
70 of 1971.
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Armed Forces Tribunal Act was enacted in 2007 to provide for adjudication or
trial by the Armed Forces Tribunal of disputes and complaints with respect to commission,
appointments, enrolment and conditions of service in respect of persons subject to the
Army Act, 1950,  the Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act, 1950 and also to provide for
appeals arising out of orders, findings or sentences of court martial held under the said Acts
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. The Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 came into force with effect from the 15th June,
2008 with a view to provide for quicker and less expensive justice to the members of the
three services (Army, Navy and Air Force). The Principal Bench of the Armed Forces Tribunal
has started functioning in Delhi from the 10th August, 2009. Regional Benches of the said
Tribunal at eight places, namely, Jaipur, Chandigarh, Lucknow, Guwahati, Kolkata, Chennai,
Kochi and Mumbai, have also started functioning subsequently.
3. Under the existing provisions contained in section 8 of the Armed Forces Tribunal
Act, the Chairperson or a Member of a Tribunal shall hold office for a period of four years
from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for reappointment.
However, no Chairperson shall hold office as such after he has attained— (a) in case he has
been a Judge of the Supreme Court, the age of seventy years; and (b) in case he has been
the Chief Justice of a High Court, the age of sixty-five years. It further provides that the
Members, both Judicial and Administrative, shall hold office until they attained the age of
sixty-five years. The Judicial Members are not completing their term of office and thus
vacancies are arising frequently on regular basis in the Tribunal.
4. It is, therefore, proposed to change the term of office of the Chairperson and
Members from four years to five years from the date on which they enter upon their office
and shall not be eligible for reappointment. It is further proposed to enhance the age limit of
the Chairperson, in case he has been the Chief Justice of a High Court, from sixty-five years
to sixty-seven years. In order to avoid repeated selection of Members for short tenures so
as to provide the Tribunal with stability and continuity, it is also proposed to enhance the
age limit of Judicial Member from sixty-five years to sixty-seven years.
5. Section 19 of the Armed Forces Tribunal Act enables the Tribunal to punish for
criminal contempt only and not for civil contempt. The aforesaid Act in its present form
does not contain any provision for the execution of the orders finally passed by the Tribunal.
As a result of which cases involving serious questions of law of public importance are to be
taken to the Supreme Court for appropriate directions. It is, therefore, proposed to confer
powers of civil contempt to the said Tribunal in addition to the existing powers of criminal
contempt. The proposed amendment would give the same jurisdiction, powers and authority
to the said Tribunal in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and may exercise
and, for this purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, shall have effect
subject to certain modifications mentioned in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; A.K. ANTONY .
The 25th June, 2012.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE  ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL ACT, 2007
(55 OF 2007)
* * * * *
8.  The Chairperson or a Member shall hold office for a term of four years from the date
on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that no Chairperson shall hold office as such after he has attained,—
(a) in case he has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, the age of seventy
years; and
(b) in case he has been the Chief Justice of a High Court, the age of
sixty-five years:
Provided further that no other Member shall hold office as such Member after he
has attained the age of sixty-five years.
* * * * *
19. (1) Any person who is guilty of contempt of the Tribunal by using any insulting or
threatening language, or by causing any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of
such Tribunal shall, on conviction, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years.
(2)  For the purposes of trying an offence under this section, the provisions of
sections 14, 15, 17, 18 and 20 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 shall mutatis mutandis
apply, as if a reference therein to—
(a) Supreme Court or High Court were a reference to the Tribunal;
(b) Chief Justice were a reference to the Chairperson;
 (c) Judge were a reference to the Judicial or Administrative Member of the
Tribunal;
(d) Advocate-General were a reference to the prosecutor; and
(e) Court were a reference to the Tribunal.
* * * * *
Term of
office.
Power to
punish for
contempt.
4
70 of 1971.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007.
————
( Shri A.K. Antony, Minister of Defence)
MGIPMRND—1955RS(S3)—06-08-2012.