Short title.
Insertion of
new article
25A.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2.  After article 25 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“25A. Subject to other provisions of this Part, the state shall ensure that every
person enjoys communal harmony.
Explanation— For the purposes of this article, ‘right to communal harmony’
includes—
(a) peaceful co-existence of different groups or communities, whether
based on religion, caste, place of birth, race or language;
(b) protection against any act or omission which is intended to cause
violence or destruction of property by creating disharmony or arousing feelings
of enmity, hatred or ill-will among different groups or communities;
(c) prompt legal and judicial remedy in case of violation of this right.”
Right to
Communal
Harmony.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH AUGUST, 2016
Bill No.  XXXIX  of  2016
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Communal disturbances wither the social fabric of the country and waver the focus of
the Government and the people from developmental agenda. Incidents of communal clashes
are detrimental to the democratic principles on which our nation was founded and bring into
question the commitment of the Government to observe secular principles of the Constitution.
Communal polarization which often follows any incident of communal tension especially
affects and alienates minority communities. Communal violence hampers the feeling of
brotherhood and enables terrorist elements to sway young impressionable minds towards
extremism. Therefore, it is incumbent upon any Government of the day to state, in very clear
and unequivocal terms, its commitment towards maintaining communal peace in the country
under all circumstances and to acknowledge and respect that every citizen in this country
enjoys a right to communal harmony which derives its essence from the right to life, personal
liberty, freedom of speech and expression and freedom of religion. Further, every State needs
to agree that evey incident of communal violence must be investigated in a just and unbiased
manner irrespective of the caste, religion, class, occupation, office and political affiliation of
the accused.
It is expected that every Government would find itself beholden to the Constitutional
ideals and will take positive steps to strengthen communal ties by promoting cultural
exchanges, dialogues and early detection and prevention of communal flare-ups and to use
all available means to guarantee the right to communal harmony through Constitutional,
legislative and administrative safeguards.
Hence, this Bill.
HUSAIN DALWAI
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2246RS(S3)—05-08-2016.