AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA         
ON 26TH JULY, 2024
Bill No. XXXI of 2024 
THE RIGHT TO OLD AGE CARE BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the right to old age care to all senior citizens in the country 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
     BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:– 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Old Age Care Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions. 

2 
(b) "local authority" means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal
Council of Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat, by whatever name
called, and inclu des such other authority or body having
administrative control or empowered by, or under any law for the time 
being in force to function as a local authority in any city, town or
village;
(c) "
old age care" means proper nutritious food, healthcare including
medicines, leisure and ensuring proper mental and physical wellbeing
and welfare of the senior citizen;
(d) "
prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this Act; and
(e) "
senior citizen" means any citizen living within the territory of India
above the age of sixty-five years.
5 
10 
Right to old 
age care.
3. (1) Every senior citizen shall have the right to old age care.
(2) N
o senior citizen shall be denied old age care on account of their lack
of income or other circumstances. 15 
Special 
provisions for 
differently-
abled senior 
citizens.
4. The appropriate Government shall while ensuring universal access to old
age care to all senior citizens, take special measures to address the special
needs of and provide special facilities to the differently -abled senior
citizens.
Universal 
access to old 
age care.
5. The access to old age care should be designed in such a way that no senior
citizen is left out of the ambit of its benefit due to income inequality, social
inequity or information asymmetry.
20 
Sharing of 
financial 
responsibility
6. (1) The Central Government and the State Governments shall have
concurrent responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) T
he Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and
recurring expenditure for the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
(3) T
he Central Government shall provide to the State Governments, as
grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure referred to in
sub-section (2) as it may determine, from time to time, in consultation with
the State Governments.
25 
30 
Duties of 
appropriate 
Government 
or local 
authority.
7. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government or local authority, as
the case may be, to—
(a) ensure free old age care to every senior citizen;
(b) ensure that no senior citizen is discriminated against and/or
prevented from accessing old age care;
(c) notify or establish, where it is not so established, a well-equipped
old age care centre, within such area or limits of neighbourhood, as
may be prescribed; and
(d) provide necessary infrastructure for the old age care centres
including building, equipments and well-trained staff. 
35 
40 

3 
5 
10 
15 
8. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for carrying
out the provisions of this Act.
(2) E
very rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one
House, before that House.
Power to make 
rules. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India has the one of youngest population as of now. But the number of old age 
people are increasing each year with the lowering of birth rate and death rate. Increased life 
expectancy of the citizens will translate into a more aged population.   Further, wi th an 
increase in the proportion of the younger generation migrating to other cities or countries 
in search of livelihood and career avenues, aged parents and relatives are often left isolated 
in their home towns with no one to take care of them in their old age and sickness.  
Necessary steps need to be taken urgently to see that the problem is addressed 
properly. Senior citizens need help in terms of old age care and resources and information. 
The Central Government shall take it up as it s statutory responsibility backed by 
sound legislation to ensure right to old age care to all senior citizens of India.  
The Bill seeks to achieve this objective. 
V. SIVADASAN

5 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (2) of Clause 3 of the Bill provides that no senior citizen  shall be 
denied old age care on account of their lack of income or other circumstances. Clause 4 
provides that 
the appropriate Government shall take special measures to address the 
special needs 
of and provide special facilities to the differently-abled senior citizens .  
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall have the primary 
responsibility for providing funds for the purpose of implementation of the Act and 
shall 
provide funds to the State Governments, to meet such percentage of expenditure, 
as 
may be prescribed, as grants-i n -aid of revenues, to enable them to carry out the 
purposes of this Bill.  
Clause 
7 provides that it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government or the 
local aut
hority, as the case may be, to notify or establish, a well-e quipped old age care 
centre, within such area or limits of neighbourhood, as may be prescribed and also 
provide infrastructure including building, equipments and well-t rained staff.  
The
 Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of
 India. It is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the expenditure involved . 

6 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the right to old age care to all senior citizens in the country and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—176—31.07.2024. 