1
THE HANDLOOM WEAVERS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of distressed handloom weavers who are debt ridden, exploited
and are committing suicide and for introduction of welfare measures like life insurance
coverage, interest free working capial and consumption loan, healthcare, education
to the children, availability of affordable raw material, modernization of looms,
housing and compulsory purchase of handloom cloth by government and for the
establishment of an authority and a welfare fund and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Handloom Weavers (Protection and Welfare) Act,
2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Appropriate Government" means in the case of a state, the Government of
that state and in other cases the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXXIII of  2009
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
Central
Government
to establish
National
Handloom
Weavers
Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
63 of 1948.
(b) "Authority " means the National Handloom Weavers Welfare Authority
established under section 3;
(c) "Fund" means the Handloom Weavers Welfare Fund established under section 5;
(d) "handloom" means any loom used for production of cloth other than the
powerloom as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "weaver" means a person engaged in the production of cloth on a handloom
and includes a person who owns, works or operates on a handloom for the production
of cloth;
(g) "worker" means a handloom worker whether male or female engaged by a
weaver and who earns wages on daily or any other basis by working on handloom.
3.  (1)The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be called the National Handloom Weavers Welfare Authority
for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Hyderabad in the State of Andhra
Pradesh and the Authority may establish offices at such other places in the country, as it
may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall be appointed by the
Central Government, namely:—
(a) a chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional experience in
handloom sector;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of the two
Houses;
(d) three members to represent handloom cooperatives;
(e) three members to represent the handloom weavers;
(f) four members to represent the Union Ministries of finance, Planning, Labour
and Employment and Textiles;
(g) four members to be nominated by the Government of the States to be rotated
amongst them in alphabetical order.
(4) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(5) The term of Office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the authority
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such Officers and members of staff
and with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed from time to time.
4. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of the Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps in close coordination
with the Governments of the States for the overall welfare, removal of poverty and
indebtedness, raising the standard of living, modernize the looms and making easy availability
of raw materials at affordable prices and marketing of handloom cloth of and for the handloom
weavers, their families and workers.

3
Establishment
of Handloom
Weavers
Welfare Fund.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall,—
(a) Formulate welfare policy for the handloom weavers and workers;
(b) maintain records of handlooms existing in all the villages, districts and other
places throughout the country;
(c) maintain a District-wise register of handloom weavers and handloom workers
with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) regulate the service conditions of workers in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(e) fix minimum wages for handloom workers from time to time;
(f) ensure modernization of all the old handlooms;
(g) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to handloom weavers
cooperatives and for their democratic functioning;
(h) organise exhibitions, melas and such other activities to promote handloom
sector in different parts of the country;
(i) make suitable arrangements for purchase of handloom cloth by Government
agencies on cash and carry basis;
(j) encourage export of handloom cloth  and handloom garments from the country
in a big way;
(k) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the appropriate
Government from time to time.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a fund to be
called the Handloom Weavers Welfare Fund with a corpus of rupees five thousand crore and
thereafter shall contribute to the fund from time to time after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf along with the Government of the States in such ratio as
may be prescribed.
(2) There shall also be credited to the fund such other sums as may be received by way
of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals, weavers and workers,
body  corporates, financial institutions firms, partnerships, etc.
(3) The fund shall be managed by a Board of Trustees, which shall be constituted by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) the fund shall be spent on,—
(a) providing interest free consumption loans to handloom weavers from time to
time;
(b) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved
families of handloom weavers who die prematurely;
 (c) providing loans at nominal interest for purchasing cotton yarn and other
necessary raw materials to the handloom weavers;
(d) insuring all handlooms, handloom weavers and workers;
(e) providing healthcare facilities, maternity and such other facilities to the
handloom weavers and workers;
(f) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of weavers
and workers;

4
Role of Central
Government
and other
Ministries.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual report.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
(5) Such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to ensure regular supply of yarn
to the handloom weavers at affordable and subsidized rates throughout the country.
(2)  The appropriate Government, all its Ministries, Departments, subordinate Offices,
Public Sector Enterprises shall purchase their entire cloth requirements for dusters,
curtains, table cloth and such other things exclusively from the primary handloom weavers
and not from the mills and power loom sectors.
(3) The appropriate Government shall ban the export of cotton and cotton yarn from
the country.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the authority in each Financial Y ear such sums as may be considered
necessary and adequate for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this
Act.
8. The Authority shall prepare once in every calendar year in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the President of India, who
shall cause, the same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement to this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be laid
before both the Houses of Parliament.
10. The Provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In a vast nation like ours there are lakhs of handloom units in whcih millions of weavers
and workers weave cloth on the looms to earn their livelihood. These handlooms units are
mainly located in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra and, in fact, handloom units are there in every part of our country. For most of
the weavers, it is their family profession which passes on from one generation to other and
their entire families are involved in this profession such as dyeing, bleaching, mercerizing,
embroidery, printing, etc. For them, handloom is the only source of their livelihood and
prosperity. Handloom cloth is very popular amongst the people not only in the country but
also abroad, where it is in great demand. In fashion world too, it is very popular.
But unfortunately, handloom sector is not doing very well and it is at the verge of
collapse and extinction. The foremost reason for this is non-availability of cotton yarn at
affordable prices. The cotton yarn, which is the principal raw material for handloom cloth has
become very costly and it is difficult for the weavers to purchase it from the market. If it is
purchased at market price, then the cloth become prohibitively costly for the buyers. This
situation is leading to closure of the handloom units. One of the primary reasons of costly
cotton yarn is the export of cotton and cotton yarn from the country resulting in scarce
availability of yarn in the country. Other reasons are costly handloom cloth which has gone
beyond the reach of common man, non-purchase of handloom products by the Government
and its organisations, exploitation by private traders, non-availability of easy consumption
and working loans from banks and other financial institutions resulting in exploitations of
weavers by money-lenders, absence of welfare funds for the weavers and any statutory
authority to watch their interest.
Another shocking factor is that this vital sector has been consistently ignored by the
successive Governments at the Centre as well as in the States. As a result, the powerloom
sector and cloth mills have invaded this sector. Their lobby is so strong that it has ensured
non-implementation of the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production) Act, 1985 by
obtaining an injunction from the Court and no Government has tried to get it vacated from
the Court. This way, the very purpose of enacting the law has been defeated. This way, it is
very likely that the handloom sector may vanish in near future, if no concrete, remedial
measures are taken to save this sector.
The most disturbing and sad part is that the frustrated handloom weavers, who are
neck deep in debt trap are committing suicides in various parts of the country. Thousands of
such hapless weavers have already ended their lives and much more are at the verge of doing
so. The circle region of Andhra Pradesh is very much ahead in this regard. Reports of many
starvation deaths of handloom weavers have also come to light, which is no doubt is a blot
on our democratic polity. As such remedial measures have to be taken urgently so that
handloom weavers and handloom factories are saved from extinction. It has, therefore, been
proposed to establish the National Handloom Weavers Authority and also the Handloom
Weavers Welfare Fund for the purpose. Some other miscellaneous provisions have also
been proposed. This will certainly improve the lot of handloom weavers and save them from
starvation and committing suicides in various parts of our nation.
Hence this Bill.
GIREESH KUMAR SANGHI
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Handloom Weavers Welfare
Authority and to have a Secretariat with such officers and members of staff. Clause 5 provides
for the establishment of Handloom Weavers Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides that the Central
Government should ensure regular supply of yarn to handloom weavers at subsidised rates.
Clause 7 provides that the Central Government to provide appropriate funds to the Authority.
The Bill, if enacted and brought into force, will involve an expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of this Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of legislative
powers is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of distressed handloom weavers who are debt ridden, exploited
and are committing suicide and for introduction of welfare measures like life insurance
coverage, interest free working capital and consumption loan, healthcare, education to
the children, availability of affordable raw material, modernization of looms, housing
and compulsory purchase of handloom cloth by government and for the establishment
of an authority and a welfare fund and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2312RS(S5)—03-05-2010.