AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026
Bill  No.  XXXIV of  2026 
___________________ 
THE CENTRAL NURSING UNIVERSITY BILL, 2026 
_
__________________ 
AR
RANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
1
. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Establishment of University.
4. Objects of University.
5. Powers and functions of University.
6. Jurisdiction.
7. University to be open to all castes, creed, race or class.
8. Visitor of University.
9. Officers of University.
10. Chancellor.
11. Vice-Chancellor.
12. Pro-Vice-Chancellor.
13. Deans of Schools.
14. Registrar.
15. Finance Officer.
16. Controller of Examinations.
17. Librarian.
18. Other Officers.
19. Authorities of University.
20. The Court.
21. Executive Council.
22. Academic Council.
23. Board of Studies.
24. Finance Committee.
25. Other authorities of University.
26. Fund of University.
27. Power to make Statutes.
28. Power to make Ordinances.
29. Regulations.
30. Annual report.
31. Annual accounts.

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
32. Returns and information.
33. Condition of service of employees.
34. Right to appeal.
35. Filling of casual vacancies.
36. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
37. Special mode of appointment.
38. Committee.
39. Honorary degrees.
40. Convocations.
41. Alumni Association.
42. Students’ Council.
43. Delegation of powers.
44. Protection of action taken in good faith.
45. Act not in derogation of other laws.
46. Power to remove difficulties.
47. Statues, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official
Gazette and to be laid before Parliament.
48. Transitional provisions.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026 
Bill  No. XXXIV of  2026 
THE CENTRAL NURSING UNIVERSITY BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to establish and incorporate a Central Nursing University at Kannur in the 
State of Kerala to promote nursing education, training, research 
and leadership development, committed to the highest 
standards of academic rigour, professional 
ethics and social responsibility and 
for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:– 
5
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Nursing University Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the
University; 
(b) "academic staff'" means such categories of staff as are
designated as academic staff by the Ordinances; 
(c) "Board of Studies" means the Board of Studies of a
Department of the University; 
(d) "Chancellor", "Vice-Chancellor" and "Pro-Vice-Chancellor"
mean, respectively, the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor and Pro-Vice-
Chancellor of the University; 
(e) "College" means a college maintained by the University;
(f) “Court” means the Court of the University;
(g)
"Department" means a Department of Studies and includes a
Centre of Studies; 
(h) "employee" means any person appointed by the University and
includes teachers and other staff of the University; 
(i) "Executive Coun cil" means the Executive Council of the
University; 
(j) "Faculty" means a Faculty of the University;
(k) "Finance Committee" means the Finance Committee of the
University; 
(l) “Fund” means the University Fund referred to in section 26;
(m) "Institution" me ans an academic institution, not being a
College, maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University;  
(n) “Outlying Campus” means the campus of the University as
may be established by it at any place within or outside India; 
(o) “Regional Centre” means a centre established or maintained
by the University for the purpose of coordinating and supervising the 
work of Study Centres in any region and for performing such other 
functions as may be conferred on such centre by the Executive Council;  
(p) "Regulations" means the Regulations made under this Act by
any authority of the University specified in section 19; 
(q) "Statutes" and "Ordinances" mean, respectively, the Statutes
and the Ordinances of the University, for the time being in force; 
(r) "Study Centre" means a centre established, maintained or
recognised by the University for the purpose of advising, counselling, 
training or for rendering any other assistance required by the students; 
(
s) "teachers of the University" means Professors, Associate
Professors, Assistant Professors and such other persons as may be 
appointed for imparting instructions, training or conducting research in 
the University or in any Outlying Campus, College or Institution or 
Regional Centres and Study Centres,  maintained by the University and 
a
re designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(t) "University" means the Central Nursing University as
established and incorporated under this Act; and 
(u) “Visitor” means the Visitor of the University.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

3
5 
1
0 
15 
3. ( 1) There shall be established a University by the name of “The Central
Nursing University”.
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Kannur in the State
of Kerala and it may establish or maintain Outlying Campuses,
Colleges, Regional Centres and Study Centres at such other places in
India as it may deem fit:
Provided that the University may, with the prior approval of 
the Central Government, also establish or maintain Outlying 
Campuses and Study Centres outside India. 
(3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor and the first
members of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic
Council, and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or
members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership,
are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of “The Central
Nursing University”.
(4) The University shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession
and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to
acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by the said
name, sue or be sued.
Establishment of 
University. 
20 
25 
30 
3
5 
40 
45 
50 
4. T he objects of the University shall be —
(a) to promote advanced, multidisciplinary and competency-based
nursing education at undergraduate, postgraduate, doctoral and post-
doctoral levels, with a focus on strengthening India’s public health 
system and universal health coverage; 
(b) to establish a national centre of excellence for nursing
education, training, research and leadership development, committed to 
the highest standards of academic rigor, professional ethics and social 
responsibility; 
(c) to develop highly skilled nurse educators, nurse practitioners,
nurse researchers and nurse leaders capable of responding to the 
evolving health- care needs of the country, including primary health 
care, maternal and child health, geriatric care, mental health, critical 
care and community health nursing; 
(d) to promote cutting- edge research and innovation in nursing
and allied health sciences, evidence- based practice, health systems 
strengthening and health policy, with special emphasis on context-
specific solutions for India and other developing countries; 
(e)
to serve as a national resource centre for curriculum
development, standard-setting, f aculty development and continuing 
professional education in nursing, in coordination with regulatory 
bodies and health institutions; 
(f) to foster equity, inclusion and gender justice in nursing
education and practice, and to enhance the professional statu s, career 
progression and leadership opportunities of nurses, particularly women;  
(g) to integrate education, service and research through strong
partnerships with hospitals, public health institutions, community 
health systems and national health programmes; 
(h) to promote the use of digital technologies, simulation-based
training and modern pedagogical methods to improve the quality, 
accessibility and effectiveness of nursing education and training; 
(i) to strengthen international collaboration and exchange in
nursing education and research, positioning India as a global hub for 
high-quality nursing education and workforce development; and 
Objects  of 
University. 

4
(j) t o contribute to national health priorities and sustainable
development goals by producing a competent, ethical an d socially 
accountable nursing workforce dedicated to improving health outcomes 
for all. 
Powers and 
functions of 
University. 
5. (1) The University shall have the following powers and functions,
namely:—
(a) to provide instruction, teaching, training and research in
nursing and allied health sciences at undergraduate, postgraduate, 
doctoral and post-doctoral levels; 
(b) to grant, subject to s uch conditions as the University may
determine, diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees or other 
academic distinctions on, persons, on the basis of examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing, and to withdraw any such 
diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinction for good 
and sufficient cause; 
(c) to establish, maintain and administer faculties, schools,
departments, colleges, constituent institutions, teaching hospitals, and 
such centers and specialised laboratories or other units for research and 
instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the 
furtherance of its objects; 
(d) to establish and maintain, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, such Outlying Campuses, Regional Centres, 
specialised laboratories or other units for research, instruction and 
training as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the 
furtherance of its objects; 
(e) to establish, maintain or recognise Study Centres in the
manner laid down by the Statutes; 
(f) to prescribe courses of study, curricula, syllabi, methods of
teaching, training and evaluation, and to conduct examinations and 
assessments in accordance with academic standards and regulatory 
norms; 
(g) to recognize institutions, hospitals and health facilities for
clinical training, internship, residency and field practice in nursing and 
allied health sciences; 
(h) to undertake, promote and coordinate research, innovation and
consultancy in nursing education, clinical practice, public health, health  
systems and health policy, and to publish the results thereof; 
(i) to collaborate with national and international universities,
research institutions, professional bodies, government agencies and 
multilateral organizations for academic exchange, joint pro grammes, 
research and capacity building; 
(j) to function as a national resource and advisory institution for
nursing education, workforce development and professional standards, 
and to provide expert advice to the Central and State Governments and 
statutory bodies; 
(k) to institute professorships, fellowships, scholarships,
studentships, prizes and other academic awards for the promotion of 
excellence in nursing education and research; 
(l) to appoint teachers, officers, nurses, researchers, other
academic s taff and other employees of the University and to define 
their duties, terms and conditions of service in accordance with the 
Statutes; 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

5
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
 
(m) to establish and maintain teaching hospitals, community
health centres and outreach units, or to enter into arrangements with 
existing health institutions for the purpose of education, training and 
research; 
(n) to admit students from across the country and abroad, in
accordance with such criteria as may be prescribed, ensuring equity, 
inclusion and merit-based access. 
(o) to create, manage and administer endowments, grants, trusts
and funds, including research and development funds, for the 
furtherance of the objectives of the University; 
(p) to acquire, hold, lease, mortgage or dispose of movable and
immovable property , and to enter into contracts and agreements 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of the University; 
(q) to receive grants, donations, gifts and other contributions from
the Central Government, State Governments, national and international 
agencies, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; 
(r) to frame Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations consistent with
this Act for the governance, administration and academic functioning 
of the University; 
(s) to establish mechanisms for quality assurance, accreditation,
ethical standards, grievance redressal and internal accountability; 
(t) to promote continuing nursing education, in- service training
and capacity building for nursing professionals in the country; 
(u) to take all such measures as may be necessary to promote
professional ethics, social accountability and public service among 
nursing professionals; and 
(v) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary or
incidental to the attainment of the objects of the University. 
(2) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-section (1), it shall be the
endeavour of the University to maintain an all- India character and high
standards of teaching, training and research, and the University shall, among
other measures which may be necessary for the said purpose, take, in
particular, the following measures, namely:—
(a) admission of students and recruitment of faculty shall be made
on all-India basis; 
(b) admissions of students shall be made on merit, either through
Common Entrance Tests conducted individu ally by the University or in 
combination with other Universities, or on the basis of marks obtained 
in the qualifying examinations in such courses where the intake of 
students is small; 
(c) inter-University mobility of Faculty shall be encouraged;
(d) semester system, continuous evaluation and choice-based
credit system shall be introduced and the University shall enter into 
agreements with other Universities and academic institutions for credit 
transfer and joint degree programmes; 
(e) innovative courses and programmes of studies shall be
introduced with provision for periodic review and restructuring; 
(f) active participation of students shall be ensured in all academic
activities of the University, including evaluation of teachers; 

6
(g) a ccreditation shall be obtained from the National Assessment
and Accreditation Council or any other accrediting agency at the 
national level; and 
(h) e-governance shall be introduced with an effective
management information system. 5 
Jurisdiction. 6. The University shall in the exercise of its powers have jurisdiction over the
whole of India and to Outlying Campuses and Study Centres outside India.
U
niversity to 
be open to all 
castes, creed, 
race or class.  
7. The University shall be open to persons of any sex and of whatever caste,
creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or
impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession
in order to entitle such person to be appointed as a teacher of the University
or to hold any other office therein or to be admitted as a student in the
University or to graduate there at or to enjoy or exercise any privilege
thereof:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent 
the University from making special provisions for the employment or 
admission of women, persons with disabilities or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other soc
ially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens: 
Provided further that no such special provision shall be made on 
the ground of domicile. 
10 
15 
20 
Visitor of 
University. 
8. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.
(2) The Visitor shall have such powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
O
fficers of 
University. 
9. The following shall be the officers of the University, namely:—
(a) the Chancellor;
(b) the Vice-Chancellor;
(c) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor;
(d) the Deans of Schools;
(e) the Registrar;
(f) the Finance Officer;
(g) the Controller of Examinations;
(h) the Librarian; and
(i) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the
officers of the University. 
25 
30 
35 
 Chancellor. 10. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner and on
such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the
University and shall, if present, preside at the Convocations of the
University held for conferring degrees and other ceremonial functions and
also the meetings of the Court.
40 
Vice-
Chancellor. 
11. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner
and on such terms and cond itions of service as may be prescribed by the
Statutes.
(2) The Vice- Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic
officer of the University and shall exercise general supervision and control
over the affairs of the University and give effect to the decisions of all the
authorities of the University.
45 

7
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such
other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.
5
 
12. The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed i n such manner and on such
terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
Pro-Vice- 
Chancellor. 
13. Every Dean of School shall be appointed in such manner, and on such terms
and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
Deans  of 
Schools. 
10 
14. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign
documents and authenticate records on behalf of the University, and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the
Statutes.
Registrar. 
15 15. The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner, and on such terms
and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
Finance Officer. 
20 
16. The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such manner, and on
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
Controller  of 
Examinations. 
17. The Librarian shall be appoi nted in such manner and on such terms and
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
Librarian. 
25 
18. The manner of appointment, terms and conditions of service and powers and
duties of other officers of the University shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Statutes.
Other Officers. 
30 
19. The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely:—
(a) the Court;
(b) the Executive Council;
(c) the Academic Council;
(d) the Board of Studies;
(e) the Finance Committee; and
(f) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be
the authorities of the University. 
Authorities of 
University. 
35 
40 
45 
20. (1) The constitution of the Court and the term of offi ce of its members shall
be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that such number of members, as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes, shall be elected from among the teachers, employees and 
students of the University. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following
powers and, functions, namely:—
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and
programmes of the University and to suggest measures for the 
improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and p ass resolutions on the annual report and the
annual accounts of the University and the audit report on such 
accounts; 
The Court. 

8
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be
referred to it for advice; and 
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the
Statutes. 
Executive 
Council. 
21. (1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the
University.
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its
members and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Executive Council shall have adequate number 
of women members: 
Provided further that such number of members as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among the elected members of 
the Court. 
5 
10 
Academic 
Council. 
22. (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and
the Ordinances made thereunder, co-ordinate and exercise general
supervision over the academic policies of the University.
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its
members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Statutes:
Provided that the Academic Council shall have such number of 
members as may be prescribed by the Statutes from among the elected 
members of the Court. 
15 
20 
Board  of 
Studies. 
23. The constitution of the Board of Studies, the term of office of its members
and its powers and functions shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Statutes.
25 
Finance 
Committee. 
24. The constitution of the Finance Committee, the term of office of its
members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Statutes.
O
ther 
authorities  of 
University. 
25. The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as may be
declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
30 
Fund  of 
University. 
26. (1) There shall be a University Fund which shall include––
(a) any contribution or grant made by the Central Government;
(b) any contribution or grant made by the State Government;
(c) any contribution made by Government, semi-Government or
autonomous bodies; 
(d) any gifts, bequests, donations, endowments or other grants;
(e) income received by the University from fees and charges;
(f) income received by the University from undertaking projects
and consultancy services; 
(g) money received by the University from the co llaborating
industries, co-operative societies, federations, unions and other 
organisations in terms of the provisions of the Memorandum of 
Understanding between the University and such collaborating industry, 
co-operative society, federation, union or other organization; and 
(h) money received from any other source, provided that any
funding from foreign sources shall require prior approval of the Central 
Government. 
35 
40 
45 

9
5
 
10 
(2) All funds of the University shall be deposited in such banks or invested
in such manne r as the Executive Council may decide on the
recommendation of the Finance Committee.
(3) The funds of the University shall be applied towards meeting the
expenses of the University including expenses incurred in the exercise of its
powers and discharge of its functions by or under this Act.
(4) The University, at all times, shall strive to be self- sufficient in meeting
its expenses and shall, while launching new courses or programmes,
establishing new schools or other infrastructure, creating or filling posts,
incurring recurring or non-recurring expenses and creating any other
financial liability, take into account financial resources that are either
available with the University or tied up with stakeholders or any other
source.
1
5 
20 
25 
27. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other
bodies of the University, as may be constituted from time to time; 
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of
the said authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, 
and all other matters relating to those authorities and other bodies for 
which it may be necessary or desirable to provide; 
(c) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other
academic distinctions; and 
(d) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be,
provided for by the Statutes. 
Power to make 
Statutes. 
30 
35 
28. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment
as such; 
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas
and certificates of the University; 
(c) the establishment of Centers of Studies, Boards of Studies and
other Committees; and 
(d) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be, or
may be, provided for by the Ordinances. 
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice- Chancellor with the
previous approval of the Executive Council and the Ordinances so made
may also be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Executive
Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
Power to make 
Ordinances. 
40 29. The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with the
provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances made thereunder, for
the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any,
appointed by them and no t provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinances made thereunder, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
Regulations. 
45 
50 
30. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the
directions of the Executive Council, which s hall include, among other
matters, the steps taken by the University towards the fulfillment of its
objects and shall be submitted to the Court after the approval of the
Executive Council on or before such date as may be prescribed by the
Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
Annual report. 

10
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its
comments, if any, on or before such date as may be prescribed.
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1), shall also
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be
after it is submitted, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament.
5 
A
nnual 
accounts. 
31. ( 1) The annual accounts and balance sh eet of the University shall be
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at
least every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited
by the Comptroller and Auditor- General of India or by such persons as he
may authorise on his behalf.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the University shall
have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit
as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India has in connection with the
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other
documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the University.
(3)
A copy of the annual accounts of the University as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by
him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be submitte d
to the Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive
Council.
(4) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be
brought to the notice of the Court and the observations of the Court, if any,
shall, after being c onsidered by the Executive Council, be submitted to the
Visitor.
(5) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as
submitted to the Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Government,
which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
R
eturns and 
information. 
32. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or
other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central
Government may, from time to time, require, within such period as may be
specified by the Central Government. 35 
C
ondition of 
service of 
employees. 
33. ( 1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written
contract, which shall be lodg ed with the University and a copy of which
shall be furnished to the employee concerned.
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any
employee shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of
Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Executive Council,
one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire
appointed by the Visitor.
(3
) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall lie in any
civil court in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal:
Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall preclude the employee from 
availing of the judicial remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the 
Constitution.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub-section ( 2) shall be
deemed to be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of this section
within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
40 
45 
50 
2
6 of 1996. 

11
5
 
10 
34. (1) Every employee or student of the University or of a College or an
Institution or a Regional Centre or a Study Centre established or maintained
by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes,
to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of
the University, or of the Principal or the management of any College or
Institution or Regional Centre or Study Cent re, as the case may be, and
thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the
decision appealed against.
(2) The form, manner and the procedure for filing and disposing of appeal
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be such as may be provi ded by the
Statutes.
Right to appeal. 
15 
35. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of
any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may
be, by the person or body who appoints, elects or co-opt s the member whose
place has become vacant and the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a
casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue
of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a
member.
Filling of casual 
vacancies. 
20 36. No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall
be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies
among its members.
Proceedings of 
authorities or 
bodies not 
invalidated by 
vacancies. 
25 
37. The Executive Council may appoint a person of high academic distinction
and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Associate
Professor or any other equivalent academic post in the University on such
terms and conditions as it deems fit:
Provided that the Executive Council may also create 
supernumerary posts for a specified period for appointment of such 
persons. 
Special mode of 
appointment. 
3 0 
35 
38. (1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees
persons who are not members of such authority.
(2) A Committee appointed under sub-section (1) may deal with any subject
delegated to it, subject to subsequent confirmation by the authority
appointing it.
Committee. 
40 
39. The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic
Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two- thirds
of the members present and voting, make proposals to the Visitor fo r the
conferment of honorary degrees:
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, 
on its own motion, make such proposals. 
Honorary 
degrees. 
40. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees shall be held in
such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
Convocations. 
41. There shall be an Alumni Association for the University. Alumni 
Association. 
45 42. There shall be constituted in the University, a Student's Council for every
academic year, consisting of—
(a) the Dean of Students Welfare who shall be Chairperson of the
Student Council; 
Students’ 
Council. 

12
(b) twenty-five students to be nominated by the Academic
Council on the basis of merit in studies, sports and extra-curricular 
activities; and  
(c) twenty-five elected repr esentatives of students in the manner
prescribed by the Ordinances. 5 
Delegation of 
powers. 
43. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority
of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or
authority or person under his or its respective control and subject to the
condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the powers so
delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such
powers.
10 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith.  
44. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer or other
employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the
Statutes or the Ordinances. 15 
Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws. 
45. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to
and not in derogation of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and
any other law for the time being in force.
3
 of 1956. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
46. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inco nsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may
appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after 
the expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions, and if, b efore the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree
that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only
in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that order.
20 
25 
30 
Statutes, 
Ordinances and 
Regulations to 
be published in 
the Official 
Gazette and to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 
47. (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be
published in the Official Gazette.
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session im mediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree
that the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute,
Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the
power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of
commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations or
any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute,
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any
person to whom such Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.
35 
40 
45 
50 

13
5
 
10 
15 
48. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes,—
(a) the first Chancellor and first Vice-Chancellor shall be
appointed by the Visitor in such manner and on such conditions as may 
be deemed fit and each of the said officer shall hold office for such 
term, not exceeding five years as may be specified by the Visitor; 
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be
appointed by the Visitor and each of the said officers shall hold office 
for a term of three years; 
(c) the first Court and the fi rst Executive Council shall consist of
not more than thirty- One members and eleven members, respectively, 
who shall be nominated by the Central Government and shall hold 
office for a term of three years; and 
(d) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than
twenty-one members, who shall be nominated by the Central 
Government and they shall hold office for a term of three years: 
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or 
authorities, the same shall be filled by appointment by the Visitor 
or nomination by the Central Government, as the case may be, in 
the manner prescribed by the Statutes. 
Transitional 
provisions. 

14
S TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
K erala has historically played a pioneering role in the development of the  
nursing profession in India and globally. Since the 1960s, nurses from Kerala have 
opened new avenues of employment for Indian migrants across Europe, the United 
States of America and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries. The nursing 
profession has made a significant contribution to the economic development of the 
State through remittance inflows, which form a major component of Kerala’s 
economy. Kerala is widely recognized for providing high- quality professional 
training in nursing, resulting in a n unparalleled global demand for nurses from the 
State.  
Despite this strong legacy and global demand, the number of nursing colleges 
and available seats in Kerala remain relatively low compared to the growing 
number of aspirants seeking nursing education. At present, the total number of 
nursing seats in the State is approximately 7,300, which is significantly below the 
demand from prospective students. Owing to the shortage of seats, a large number 
of students are compelled to pursue nursing education in n eighbouring States such 
as Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, often incurring higher financial 
costs. Expansion of nursing education infrastructure within Kerala is, therefore, 
essential to meet the increasing demand and to reduce the financial burd
en on 
students and families. 
In view of the above, it is considered necessary to establish a Central Nursing 
University in Kerala as a centre of excellence in nursing education, training, 
research and advanced clinical practice. Locating the University in Kannur will 
ensure balanced regional development by strengthening higher educational 
opportunities in North Kerala and improving access to nursing education for 
students from northern districts who currently depend on institutions in other 
States. Kannur o ffers adequate land availability for developing a comprehensive 
residential university campus with advanced training and research facilities. The 
district also has strong connectivity through an international airport, railways and 
national highways, making it accessible for students, faculty and global 
collaborations. Further, North Kerala has a long tradition of contributing to the 
global nursing workforce. Establishing a premier nursing institution in Kannur will 
strengthen skill development, support the State’s health- care system, and contribute 
to national and global demand for qualified nursing professionals. 
On the whole, the University will expand access to high- quality nursing 
education, strengthen research and innovation in nursing and help address both 
domestic and global demand for skilled nursing professionals. The proposed 
legislation also seeks to promote equitable access to advanced nursing education, 
strengthen faculty development, enhance clinical training infrastructure, and 
position India as a global leader in nursing education and health workforce 
development.  
Hence, the Bill. 
SANDOSH KUMAR P.
 

15
F INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
C lause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish a Central Nursing University as a body 
corporate at Kannur in the State of Kerala. 
It is expected that the proposed University would require about rupees one 
thousand crore during the next Plan period. The expenditure would be met from the 
Consolidated Fund of India through the University Grants Commission under the 
budgetary provisions of the Ministry of Education. 

16
M EMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
S ub-clause (2) of clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Vice- Chancellor to make 
the first Ordinances of the University with the previous approval of the Central 
Government and provides that the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed 
or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the 
Statutes. The matters in respect of which Ordinances may be made, or as the case 
may be, amended, r epealed or added to, relate to admission of students, courses of 
study, medium of instruction and examination, the manner of co-operation and 
collaboration with other Universities, institutions and other agencies, the setting up 
of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees and other such matters. 
Clause 29 of the Bill enables the authorities of the University to make 
Regulations, consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the 
conduct of their own business and that of the Commit tees, if any, appointed by 
them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the 
manner prescribed by the Statutes. 
Clause 43 empowers that any officer or authority of the University may 
delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or its 
respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the 
exercise of the powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority 
delegating such powers. 
Clause 46 empowers the Central Government, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, to make provisions to remove certain difficulties, which may 
appear to be necessary or expedient and such an order is not to be made after the 
expiry of a period of three years from the commencement of the Act and such order 
shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 47 provides that every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under 
the Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and they shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
As the matters in respect of which the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations 
may be made relate to matters of procedure or detail only, the delegation of 
legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
______________ 
A 
BILL 
to establish and incorporate a Central Nursing University at Kannur in the 
State of Kerala to promote nursing education, training, research 
and leadership development, committed to the highest 
standards of academic rigour, professional 
ethics and social responsibility and 
for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
______________ 
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–171–16.03.2026. 