THE REMOV AL OF UNEMPLOYMENT AMONGST THE YOUTH
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the removal of unemployment amongst the youth by way of making right
to work mandatory so that the State generates employment opportunities for them
and failing to do so the State will have to pay unemployment allowance and
for measures to promote self employment amongst the unemployed youth
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Removal of Unemployment Amongst the Youth
Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXXIII of 2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH AUGUST, 2010
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Fund" means the National Youth Unemployment Assistance Fund
established under section 4 of this Act.
(c) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act;
(d) "Self employment" means to work independently for one's clients or
customers by setting up own production or selling unit or establishment and not for
any employer.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
every major citizen shall have the right to gainful employment and it shall be the duty of the
appropriate Government to provide such employment opportunity to every unemployed
citizen within its territorial Jurisdiction.
(2) The gainful employment referred to in sub-section (1) shall be provided according
to the age, educational qualifications and physical status of the concerned citizens.
(3) For carrying out the purposes of this Act, it shall be the duty of the appropriate
Government to generate requisite number of employment opportunities in the public sector,
Private sector, small scale industries, cottage and village industries, khadi and other weaving
industries, food processing sector, self employment opportunities, agriculture and other
sectors.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to fill up all the vacant posts in the
Ministries, Departments, Public Sector Enterprises and other Government agencies and
organisations within a time frame.
(5) Till such time gainful employment is provided to a citizen or is made self employed
under any Government scheme or loan provided by a Bank or Financial Institution, he shall
be paid by the appropriate Government an unemployment allowance, not being less than
rupees two thousand per month in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the unemployment allowance shall not be paid under this Act to any
citizen who:—
(a) has an income from any source not being less than the amount of unemploy-
ment allowance fixed under this Act. However, in case any citizen has an earning from
any other source which is less than the amount of unemployment allowance fixed
under this Act, his unemployment allowance shall be reduced by the amount of his
earning; or
(b) is covered under any scheme of unemployment allowance prevalent in a
State or Union Territory, as the case may be.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish the National Youth Unemployment Assistance Fund with initial corpus of
Rupees Fifty Thousand Crore and thereafter shall contribute to the fund from time to time
along with the Government of the States in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(2) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by
way of donation, contribution, assistance or otherwise from individuals, body corporate,
financial institution, firms, partnership etc.;
(3) All amounts due and payable as unemployment allowance and all expenditures
relating to the management and administration of the fund shall be paid out of the fund;
(4) The fund shall be managed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Definitions.
Right to
gainful
employment
and unem-
ployment
allowance.
Establishment
of the
National
Youth
Unemploy-
ment
Assistance
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to any matter dealt with by this
Act.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide requisite funds to all the State Governments and Union Territory
Administrations for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rule for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Act of have
overriding
effect.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT  OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our country is very vast and second most populous nation of the globe. The population
explosion has given rise to the phenomenal unemployment in the country. According to an
estimate, there are more than five crore unemployed youth registered in the employment
exchanges in the country and the number of unregistered unemployed youth is more than
the registered ones and such youth are mostly in remote rural and semi urban areas and their
number is multiplying day by day. The situation of employment in the country is so grim that
even highly qualified youth are also unemployed and millions who pass out their degree and
diploma examinations from the Universities, Colleges and Institutes join them every year.
This is causing unrest and frustration amongst the youth and they are easily lured by anti-
social and anti-national forces for their nefarious and destructive activities like the naxalite
violence or terrorists operations in various parts of the country. Many of them turn to crimes
and spoil their lives. Unemployment is also the reason for brain drain and exodus of substantial
number of skilled and unskilled youth, doctors, engineers and scientists from the country. At
the same time opportunities of employent generation are on the decline for various reasons
and Governments too are contributing a lot in this regard. For instance, in the Central
Government, every Ministry or Department has to surrender ten per cent of total vacancies
arising every year due to superannuation of employees etc. and if any post remains unfilled
for over a year, it automatically lapses. So, apart from surrendering the required posts, the
Ministries, Departments deliberately do not fill substantial number of posts to allow them to
lapse. Agriculture has remained the largest employer but due to vagaries of nature and
unremunerative prices, employment generation is decreasing very fast in agriculture sector.
So, it is the situation in small scale industrial and village industries. Modernisation in other
industries is also reducing employment opportunities. Hence, the situation is going out of
control every day.
Our Constitution gives every citizen a fundamental right to life but this right in the
absence of source of decent and meaningful life remains only on paper. The Supreme Count
has also stressed for the need of necessary means and employment to enjoy the right to life.
Ours is a Welfare State and as such the onus is on the State to ensure the welfare of its
citizens by providing gainful employment opportunities to them and for that more and more
employment opportunities have to be created. The youth have to be given fundamental right
of gainful employment and if, the State fails to provide the citizen gainful employment then
he should be paid unemployment allowance on monthly basis. This is the need of the hour
which will go a long way in ensuring a dignified life to the youth of our nation.
Hence this Bill.
AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Youth Unemployment
Assistance Fund with an initial corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore to be provided by the
Central Government, Clause 6 of the Bill makes it mandatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds to the States and Union Territories for carrying out the purposes of
the Bill. The Bill if, enacted will involve expenditure from the consolidated fund of India. It is
not possible to quantify the funds at this juncture but in addition to rupees fifty thousand
crore as initial corpus it is estimated that a sum of rupees sixty thousand crore may involve
as recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—3870RS(S3)—13-08-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the removal of unemployment amongst the youth by way of making right to
work mandatory so that the State generates employment opportunities for them
and failing to do so the State will have to pay unemployment allowance and
for measures to promote self employment amongst the unemployed
youth and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)