AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. XXXI of 2025   
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:– 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Environment (Protection) Amendment
Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Insertion of 
new Chapter 
IIIAA. 
2. In the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, after section 17, the
following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely,―
“CHAPTER III AA 
COMPENSATION FOR LOSS AND DAMAGE ARISING FROM 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
5 
Right to 
Compensation. 
17. Any person who has incurred loss and damage as a direct
consequence of environmental and climate change impacts shall have
the right to claim compensation in such form and manner and subject
to such conditions, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Loss and 
Damage Fund. 
 17A. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, 
there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a special 
Fund to be called the Loss and Damage Fund, under the public 
account of India. 
(2 ) The Loss and Damage Fund shall be credited with such sums
of money as the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide 
from time to time. 
(3) The Loss and Damage Fund shall be applied for the purpose of
providing financial assistance and compensation to affected persons
and communities for loss and damage  arising from environmental and
climate change impacts.
(4) T he Loss and Damage Fund shall be under the control of the
Central Government and managed b
y such authority and in such
manner, as the Central Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
(5) The authority as may be appointed by the Central Government
under sub-section (4) shall perform such functions as may be notified,
including, but not limited to,—
(a ) receiving and processing applications for financial
assistance and  compensation on account of loss and damage 
arising from environmental or climate-related causes; 
(b ) conducting enquiry  and deciding the  eligibility and
quantum of financial assistance and compensation, subject to 
such criteria and in such manner as may be prescribed; 
( c) sanctioning and ordering disbursal of financial
assistance and compensation from the Fund; and 
(d ) issue necessary directions and performing such other
functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government 
or as may be prescribed. 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
4
0 
Accounts and 
audit of Loss 
and Damage 
Fund. 
17B. (1) The authority appointed by the Central Government under 
sub-section (4) of section 17A  shall maintain separate accounts and 
other relevant records in relation to the Loss and Damage Fund and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form, as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India. 
(2) The accounting procedure to regulate the manner of crediting the
monies to the Loss and Damage Fund in a year shall be in such
manner as may be prescribed.
4
5 

 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) The accounts of the Loss and Damage Fund shall be audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at such intervals as may be 
specified by him and such audited accounts together with the audit 
report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government. 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 17C. The authority appointed by the Central Government under sub -
section (4) of section 17A shall prepare the annual report in relation to 
the Loss and Damage Fund, giving a full account of its activities, 
defined under this Act, during the previous financial year, in such 
form, as may be prescribed, in each financial year, and submit the 
annual report to the Central Government.  
 Annual Report. 
   17D. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together 
with the audit report on accounts to be laid, as soon as may be after 
the reports are received, before each House of Parliament. 
 Annual report 
and audit report 
to be laid before 
Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
  17E. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, empower the Central Pollution Control Board or any other 
agency to conduct enquiry under this Chapter. 
 Competent 
Authority to 
enquire into the 
loss and 
damage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 1908 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
  17F. (1) The Central Government or State Government, as the case 
may be, may by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise the 
Court not below the rank of District Court as Loss and Damage 
Tribunal. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by any direction, order or decision of 
the authority as may be appointed under this Chapter may prefer an 
appeal to the Loss and Damage Tribunal, within such period and in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Central Government may prescribe special procedure for 
the Tribunal for the speedy disposal of claims.  
(4) The orders issued by the Tribunal may be enforced as decree 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
 Loss and 
Damage 
Tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
       Article 21 of the Constitution which guarantees right to life has been 
interpreted by the Supreme Court to include the right to a clean and healthy 
environment. The ‘polluter pays ’ principle-based environmental right , is a 
corollary right which ought to be protected by State in its parens pat riae role. 
The right to compensation for the loss and damage  arising out of  
environmental and climate change impact, is of much relevance today. 
2. The 27 th UN Climate Change Conference (COP 27) where India was  a
party also recognises loss and damage fund to respond to human cost of
climate change. Loss and Damage Tribunal is a step towards speedy remedy
in environmental loss and damage claims.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the  above objectives.
A.A. RAHIM. 

 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM   
  
          Section 17A of the Bill provides for establishment of the Loss and Damage 
Fund to provide financial assistance and compensation to affected persons and 
communities for loss and damage arising from environmental and climate change 
impacts. The said section also provides for the Central Government to provide for 
funds to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
 
         The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non -
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not 
possible to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved at this stage. 
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
__________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
__________ 
(Shri A.A. Rahim, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS―PMB(E)―047―10.02.2026. 