THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the long title of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words ‘‘age of six to fourteen
years’’, the words ‘‘age of six to seventeen years’’, shall be substituted.
3. Throughout the principal Act, for the words ‘‘elementary education’’, ‘‘age of six to
fourteen years’’, and ‘‘fourteen years’’, wherever they occur, the words ‘‘school education’’,
‘‘age of six to seventeen years’’ and ‘‘seventeen years’’ shall respectively, subject to
section 7 of this Act and such changes as the rules of grammar require, be substituted.
Bill No. XXXIII of 2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 22 ND  JULY, 2022
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of the long
title.
Substitution
of references
to certain
expressions
by certain
other
expressions.
35 of 2009.
5
10

2
4. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(a) clause (f) shall be omitted; and
(b) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(na) "school education" means the education from first class to twelfth
class;".
5. For section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"30. (1) No child shall be required to pass any Board examination till completion
of his education of class eighth.
(2) Every child completing his education in class eighth shall be awarded a
certificate, in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed.".
6. In clause ( o) of sub-section ( 2) of section 38 of the principal Act, for the words
"elementary education", the words "education of class eighth" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 30.
Examination
and
completion
certificate.
Amendment
of section 38.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Education has a very important role in the development of the nation. As a developing
nation, it is important that all children in the country get free school education till class
twelfth.
2. The Bill proposes amendments to the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009, to provide that every child be given the right to full time elementary,
secondary and higher secondary education in a formal school. Accordingly, it is proposed to
amend the definition of the "child" by enhancing their age to seventeen years for considering
them as a child and also providing them free school education up to class twelfth by suitably
proposing amendments to the Act.
3. Only free and compulsory education monitored and ensured by the system can
ensure the achievement of the purpose.
4. The proposed legislation, hence, is required to ensure free and compulsory education
up to the class twelfth to every male and female child of the age of six to seventeen years, and
thereby resulting in the progress of the nation.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
 DR.  V .  SIV ADASAN
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to extend the free and compulsory education from elementary
education to higher secondary education. The Bill, if enacted, would involve additional
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India and it is very difficult to estimate the
expenditure at this juncture.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009.
[35 OF 2009]
* * * * *
30. (1) No child shall be required to pass any Board examination till completion of
elementary education.
(2) Every child completing his elementary education shall be awarded a certificate, in
such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
38. * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(o) The form and manner of awarding certificate for completion of elementary education
under sub-section (2) of section 30;
* * * * *
5
Examination
and
completion
certificate.
Power of
appropriate
Government
to make
rules.

MGIPMRND—642RS(S3)—25.07.2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Dr. V .  Sivadasan, M.P.)