85 INTRODUCED ए RAJYA SABHA

XXXL of 2004

THE DISPLACED PERSONS CLAIMS AND OTHER LAWS REPEAL
BILL, 2004

A

BILL

to repeal the Displaced Persons Claim Act, 1950 and certain other enactments.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Displaced Persons Claims and other Laws Repeal Act, Short title.
2004.
2, The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby repealed. Repeal, of
enactments


— i,

Fd

|
|

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 2)

REPEAL OF ENACTMENTS

Sl. Name of the Act Year | Act No.
No.

1. | The Administration of Evacuee Property Act 1950 31
2. | The Displaced Persons (Claims) Act 1950 4
3, | The Evacuee Interest (Separation) Act 1951 4
4, | The Displaced Persons (Claims) Supplementary Act 1954 2
5. | ‘The Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act_| 1954 44



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Displaced Persons Claims Act, 1950, the Administration of Evacuee Property Act,
1950, the Evacuee Interest (Separation) Act, 1951, the Displaced Persons (Claims)
Supplementary Act, 1954 and the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation)
Act, 1954 were enacted, inter alia, to make provisions for the registration and verification of
claims of displaced persons in respect of immovable proverty in Pakistan, the administration
of evacuee property, providing for the separation of the interests of evacuees from those of
other persons in property in which such other persons are also interested, the payment of
compensation and rehabilitation grant to displaced persons and the disposal of certain
proceedings pending under the Displaced Persons (Claims) Act, 1950.

2. The major works of claims compensation and rehabilitation more or less had been
completed by the year end of 1970. Subsequently, the erstwhile Ministry of Labour and
Rehabilitation (Department of Rehabilitation) which was responsible for the aforesaid
rehabilitation work also concluded that only a limited number of acquired evacuee urban and
agricultural lands or properties had remained to be disposed of and the expenditure which
was being incurred for the purpose was out of proportion to the volume of work and the
receipts from their disposal. To effect economy in expenditure in the management of the
evacuee properties, the Central Government made administrative and financial arrangements
with the concerned State Government for the disposal of the residuary assets in the manner
consistent with the purposes of the aforesaid Acts and transferred the surplus evacuee
properties to the State Governments in various package deals. This arrangement virtually
put an end to the ownership of the Central Government on the undisposed evacuee properties.

3. Subsequent to the transfer of the ownership of the Central Government on the
undisposed evacuee properties to the State Governments concerned, it was reported by the
State Governments that a large number of claims under the aforesaid Acts are being continued
to be filed in the various courts under the aforesaid Acts. It has further been brought to the
notice of the Central Government that a number of persons unconnected with the claimants
posing as their legal heirs are presenting repeated demands for lands. Examinations have
revealed that in most of such cases the claimants under the temptation to grab more lands,
have managed to obtain bogus and excess allotments. It therefore, had become difficult for
the State Governments to retrieve the Government lands and properties worth crores of
rupees from the hands of unscrupulous persons.

4. In view of above, the concerned State Governments, therefore, recommended to
repeal the above Acts. Consequently, after consulting the State Governments, the Central
Government constituted a Core Group on the 7th February, 2003 to examine the proposal to
repeal of the aforesaid Acts. The said Core Group in March, 2003 recommended repeal of the
aforesaid Acts and rules made thereunder. The Central Government decidéd to accept the
recommendations of the concerned State Governments and the Core Group to repeal the
above Acts.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

SHIVRAJ ५. PATIL.
New Deut;

The 25th August, 2004.



RAJYASABHA

c
|
|

| |

ame oe
|
|
|
|

|
i BILL

to repeal the Displaced Persons Claim Act, 1950 and certain other enactments.

za Shivraj V. Patil, Home Minister)

MGIPMRND—2962RS—29-11 |-2004.