1
Bill No. XXXIII of 2021
THE UNIVERSAL HEALTH CARE BILL, 2021
A
BILL
to provide quality healthcare services to all citizens, regardless of their income status,
social status, gender, religion with the end goal of improving health outcomes; to
promote preventive healthcare over reactive healthcare and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-Second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER-1
PRELIMINARY
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Universal Healthcare Act, 2021.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021
5

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Committee" means the Pricing Strategy Committee appointed under
section 9;
(c) "healthcare services" means all types of medical services, including, but not
limited to preventive, promotive, palliative, curative and rehabilitative healthcare
services;
(d) "hospital" means any government clinic, dispensary, medical first-aid centre,
hospital, nursing home, medical consultancy centre, indoor treatment centre or a
research centre, where patients are treated and includes a place where medical
consultation is offered to a patient;
(e) "OPD" refers to the part of a hospital designed for the treatment of outpatients,
people with health problems who visit the hospital for diagnosis or treatment, but do
not at that time require hospitalisation or to be admitted for overnight care;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "treatment" means any consultation, prescription, or investigation leading
to diagnosis of disease, any type of treatment provided by any hospital and includes
replacement of human organs and any treatment for physical and mental well-being of
the patient;
CHAPTER II
R
IGHTS AND ENTITLEMENTS
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall include the primary healthcare services in the
Ayushman Bharat Insurance scheme or other such existing and future Government schemes,
if any.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take necessary steps to ensure that the primary
healthcare services, under the Ayushman Bharat Insurance scheme or other such existing
and future Government schemes, if any, are available to all.
(3) No person shall be deprived of Primary Healthcare Services on social or economic
grounds.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall include the OPD services in the existing and
future Government insurance schemes or programs, if any.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take necessary steps to ensure that the OPD
services, under the Ayushman Bharat Insurance scheme or other such existing and future
Government schemes, if any, are available to all.
(3) No person shall be deprived of OPD Services on social or economic grounds.
5. (1) The appropriate Government to ensure transparency shall mandate the hospitals
and clinics to document the treatment provided to the patients in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The patient or the caregiver shall have access to their treatment document at all
times during the treatment.
Explanation: for the purpose of this section, caregiver shall be mean—
(i) in the case of a minor patient, the biological parents;
(ii) in the case of a minor patient who is an orphan, the caretaker appointed by a
competent authority;
Inclusion of
Primary
Healthcare.
Inclusion of
Out Patient
Department
(OPD)
Services.
Right of
caregiver to
know about
the treatment
provided.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iii) in the case of an able adult patient, such person as may be authorised by the
patient;
(iv) in case of an adult who is incapable of authorising anyone, the person
responsible for admitting the patient in the hospital.
(3) The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to ensure transparency
in the medical treatment of the patient.
(4) Patient shall have the right to adequate and relevant information about the nature,
cause of illness, provisional or confirmed diagnosis, proposed investigations and management,
and possible complications to be explained at the level of his understanding in a language
known to him.
CHAPTER III
T
RANSPARENCY-STRENGTHENING GOVERNMENT INFRASTRUCTURE
6.  The appropriate Government, to ensure transparency shall create a public database
and mandate the public hospitals to update all hospital related resources on weekly basis in
such manner as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall enumerate the duties and responsibilities of
the doctors and health care workers, which shall be accessible to the public, as may be
prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to ensure that the
doctors and health care workers follow the prescribed duties.
(3) The appropriate Government shall conduct mandatory soft skills trainings including
ethics training for all the doctors and healthcare personnel.
(4) The appropriate Government shall take strict action against any doctor or healthcare
personnel not complying with duties and mandatory training.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall introduce a grievance redressal mechanism
for the patients and their caregivers.
(2) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Committee at appropriate
administrative levels, comprising of members from Civil Society and various inter-related
Government Ministries/Departments to resolve the grievances, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Committee shall ensure that a complaint is resolved within thirty days of its
receipt.
(4) The appropriate Government shall take strict action against any kind of gross
negligence by the doctor or healthcare personnel.
CHAPTER IV
E
STABLISHMENTS
9. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a
committee be known as Pricing Strategy Committee for carrying out the functions assigned
under this Act and to promote more private participation.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson;
(ii) one representative from each of the Union Ministries of Finance, Health and
Creation of a
National
Public
Information
Network of
Hospitals.
Public
Grievance
Mechanism.
Duties and
Responsibilities
of Doctors
and
Healthcare
Personnel.
5
Pricing
Strategy
Committee.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
Family Welfare, Minority Affairs, Social Justice and Empowerment, Tribal Affairs, as
member;
(iii) one representative of the life Insurance Corporation of India established
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, as member;
(iv) one representative of the National Commission for Women, as member;
(v) one representative of the National Human Rights Commission, as member;  and
(vi) one representative each from medical prefession, banking service and one
distinguished social worker, as member.
(3) The representatives under each category under clause ( 2) shall be constituted or
choice in full manner or may be precribed.
(4) The headquater of the Committee shall be at New Delhi.
(5) The Central Government shall prescribe the manner of working and submission of
reports by the Committee.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
10. (1) The Committee shall engage in consultation on a pricing strategy and shall
propose a scientifically derived, inclusive pricing model for the private hospitals to be included
in the Ayushman Bharat Scheme or similar existing or to be launched schemes and
programs.
(2) The Committee may appoint Sub-Committes, state-wise to fast-track enrolment of
private hospitals under the Ayushman Bharat Scheme or similar existing or to be launched
schemes and programs.
(3) The Committee shall periodically review its pricing strategy and shall fix an upper
limit on the price of the treatments in hospitals in case of exigencies.
CHAPTER V
D
UTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF STATE GOVERNMENTS
11. (1) The appropriate Government, shall conduct, sponsor, encourage, support or
promote on a regular and continuous basis information campaigns and sensitization
programmes to ensure that the rights recognized in this legislation are implemented, protected
and promoted and also to promote quality services in Government hospitals.
12. (1) The appropriate Government shall take necessary steps to improve the healthcare
infrastructure and address the gaps identified through the public information network.
(2) The designated in-charge of the hospital shall be responsible to address the gap
identified through the public information network.
(3) The appropriate Governments shall include primary healthcare and OPD services in
state specific healthcare insurance schemes including but not limited to the schemes
developed in alliance with the Ayushman Bharat Scheme.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
13. (1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by an etsablishment,
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was the appointed head or was
Functions of
the
Committee.
Raising
awareness.
Strengthening
Government
Health
Infrastructure.
Offences by
establishments.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
directly in charge of, and was responsible to the establishment for the conduct of its business,
as well as the establishment, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence.
14. (1) Whoever fails to produce any book, account or other document or to furnish
any statement, information or particulars, which, under this Act or any order, regulation or
direction made or given thereunder, which he is duty bound to produce or furnish or to
answer any question put in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any order, regulaton
or direction made or given thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
rupees twenty five thousand in respect of each offence, and in case of continued failure or
refusal, with further fine which may extend to rupees one thousand for each day of continued
failure or refusal after the date of original order imposing punishment of fine
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government, under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Penalty for
Failure to
Furnish
Information.
Rule making
clause.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 21 of the Indian Constitution protects the life and personal liberty of all the
citizens. It ensures that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to procedure established by law. However, the current healthcare in India reflects
the economic and social gap in accessing quality healthcare and draws attention to further
measures that are required to be taken by the central Government to assure health to all
citizens. The Government expenditure on helath is only 1.6 per cent of Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) and the public health infrastructure is inadequate and unequally distributed.
Out-of-pocket payments are the predominant mode for financing healthcare in the country.
This is grossly unfair and exposes a large number of households to catastrophic health
expenditure, which has often been a contributing factor for rural and urban indebtedness.
2. In a positive development in 2018, India’s National Health Protection Mission was
unravelled as a universal health care plan aimed at offering 500 million families living in
poverty up to Rupees 5 lakh of coverage each year. It could be the largest government-
funded scheme in the world and act as a pivotal step towards universal health coverage.
However, it does not cover the primary health care and OPD services. Thus, due to lack of
enforceability of Directive Principles, right to health remains unenforceable for citizens.
3. The right to health is also internationally recognised as a fundamental human right.
In 1946, the World Health Organisation stated in its Constitution that ‘‘the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of health is one of the fundamental rights of every human being
without distinction of race, religion, political belief, economic or social condition.’’ This right
is also included in the Universal Declaration of Human rights and in the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural rights, of which India is a signatory.
4. The ongoing pandemic has also highlighted the gaps in the current healthcare
model and the need for an accessible health care model.
5. It is important, as a nation, to prioritise health care for all,  and take preventive
measures instead of reactive measures. This can be done by a collaborative approach aligning
the existing government schemes/ policies, the interest of the payers and providers, along
with innovative partnerships. It will not only help us in mitigating the risks but will also act
as a foundation for stronger social returns and set us on a path to realise accessible healthcare
for all.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. FAUZIA KHAN
6

7
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Chapter III and V proposes a grievance redressal mechanism and appropriate actions
by the government. Clause 9 provides for establishing a pricing strategy committee, to
ensure the inclusive pricing to onbaord more private entities to the existing schemes. Clause
II provides for awareness raising programme. Further, such Bills, if enacted, by Parliament or
State Legislatures will involve expenditure recurring and non-recurring from the Consolidated
Fund of India as well as Consolidated Fund of the concerned State. However, it is not
possible to assess the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide quality healthcare services to all citizens, regardless of their income status,
social status, gender, religion with the  end goal of improving health outcomes; to
promote preventive healthcare over reactive healthcare and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1343RS—07-12-2021.