THE DRUGS (PRICE CONTROL) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Committee for fixing the prices of drugs and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drugs (Price Control) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "dealer" means a person engaged in the business of purchase or sale of
drugs, whether as a wholesaler or retailer and whether or not in conjunction with any
other business and includes his agent;
(b) "distributor" means a distributor of drugs or his agent and includes a stockist
appointed by a manufacturer or an importer for stocking  drugs for sale to a dealer; and
Bill No. XXXIX  of  2014
Short title
and
Commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

2
(c) "drug" includes—
(i) all medicines for internal or external use of human beings and all
substances intended to be used for, or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or
prevention of any disease or disorder in human beings including preparations
applied on human body for the purpose of repelling insects like mosquitoes;
(ii) such substances, intended to affect the structure or any function of
the human body or intended to be used for the destruction of vermin or insects
which cause diseases in human beings; and
(iii) formulations all systems of medicine like allopathy, homoeopathy,
ayurveda, unani and siddha.
3. (1) There shall be constituted a Committee to be known as the  Drugs (Price Control)
Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to fix the prices of drugs.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(i) the Minister of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India
(ii) three representatives of major hospitals including
Government run hospitals
(iii) two representatives of drugs industry
(iv) two representatives of Indian system of
medicine
(v) Secretary to the Government of  India, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare
(3) the terms and condition of the members appointed under sub-clause ( 2) (ii), (iii)
and (iv) shall be such as may be prescribed by rules.
(4) the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare shall provide the secretarial
assistance to the Committee.
4. The Committee shall—
(i) fix the prices of drugs after taking into consideration the costs of manufacturing
storage, packaging, import of formulation and distribution as well as profit of
manufacturer and such other factors as it may deem necessary;
(ii) promote the use of generic drugs; and
(iii) determine the standard of drugs.
5. No person or a manufacturer or a distributor or a dealer shall sell any drug to any
consumer at a price exceeding the price fixed by the Committee.
6. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees.
(2) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, the license of
such company shall be cancelled forthwith.
Explanation. —For the purpose of sub-section ( 2), "company", means any body
corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Constitution
of Drugs Price
Control
Committee.
Functions
of the
Committee.
Prohibition on
selling of drug
at a price
exceeding the
price fixed by
the Committee.
Power to
make rules.
Chairman, ex-officio;
Members
Members;
Members;
Member Secretary,
ex-officio
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT  OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Prices of drugs and medicines are on the rise. However, the Government controls the
prices of 348 drugs listed in the national list of essential medicines. Recently, the drug price
regulator, the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) had withdrawn guidelines
for price control of 108 life saving drugs thereby allowing pharmaceutical companies to raise
price as per their choice to secure windfall gain.
The prices of drugs are increased arbitrarily by manufacturers and traders. The poor
regulatory mechanism allows the manufacturing and marketing of spurious drugs in the
name of the generic version. People, especially poor people, are affected by the exorbitant
cost of drugs. They are not able to afford the medicines. At present there is no legislation to
put a check on the prices of drugs. Medical practitioners under the garb of money and costly
gifts from manufacturers generally prescribe costly medicines which common man cannot
afford. They should instead prescribe generic drugs which are cheaper and more affordable
and as effective as branded ones. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
SANJAY SINH
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Committee to be known as the Drugs
(Price Control) Committee to fix the prices of drugs. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Committee for fixing the prices of drugs and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr. Sanjay Sinh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3798RS(S3)—18-12-2014.