AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXXII of 2001

THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL

further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1, This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2001. Short title.
102 of 1956. 2. In the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), Amendment
5  insection 13,— of section 13.

(व) in sub-section (3), after the words “granted by medical institutions outside
India”, the words “before such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify” shall be inserted;

(09) in sub-section (4), the following provisos and Explanation shall be inserted
10 at the end, namely:—

‘Provided that after the commencement of the Indian Medical Council
(Amendment) Act, 2001, no such amendment shall be made in Part II of the Third
Schedule to include any primary medical qualification granted by any medical
institution outside India:

5 “Provided further that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply to
inclusion in Part II of the Third Schedule any primary medical qualification
granted by any medical institution outside India to any person whose name is
entered in the Indian Medical Register.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “primary medical
£#.९| qualification” means any minimum qualification sufficient for enrolment on any
State Medical Register or for entering the name in the Indian Medical Register.’


Amendment

of section 33.

2

(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—

“(4A) A person who is a citizen of India and obtains medical qualification
granted by any medical institution in any country outside India recognised for
enrolment as medical practitioner in that country after such date as may be
specified by the Central Government under sub-section (3), shall not be entitled
to be enrolled on any Medical Register maintained by a State Medical Council
or to have his name entered in the Indian Medical Register unless he qualified
the screening test in India prescribed for such purpose and such foreign medical
qualification after such person qualifies the said screening test shall be deemed
to be the recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act for that
person.

(4B) A person who is a citizen of India shall not, after such date as may be
specified by the Central Government under sub-section (3), be eligible to get
admission to obtain medical qualification granted by any medical institution in
any foreign country without obtaining an eligibility certificate issued to him by
the Council and in case any such person obtains such qualification without
obtaining such eligibility certificate, he shall not be eligible to appear in the
screening test referred to in sub-section (4A):

Provided that an Indian citizen who has acquired the medical qualification
from foreign medical institution or has obtained admission in foreign medical
institution before the commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment)
Act, 2001 shall not be required to obtain eligibility certificate under this sub-
section but, if he is qualified for admission to any medical course for recognised
medical qualification in any medical institution in India, he shall be required to
qualify only the screening test prescribed for enrolment on any State Medical
Register or for entering his name in the Indian Medical Register.

(4C) Nothing contained in sub-sections (4A) and (4B) shall apply to the
medical qualifications referred to in section 14 for the purposes of that section.”.

3. In section 33 of the principal Act, after clause (m), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—

“(ma) the modalities for conducting screening tests under sub-section (4A), and

under the proviso to sub-section (4B), and for issuing eligibility certificate under sub-
section (4B) of section 13;”.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 contains provisions in sections 12, 13 and 14
with a view to recognizing medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in foreign
countries.

2. Over a period of time it has come to the notice that a large number of private
agencies sponsor students for medical studies in institutions outside India for commercial
considerations. Such students also include the students who did not fulfil the minimuin
eligibility requirements for admission to medical courses in India. Serious aberrations have
been noticed in the standards of medical education in some of the foreign countries which
are not at par with the standards of medical education available in India. Due to lack of
uniformity in the standards of medical education in various foreign countries, it has been
decided that a provision should be made in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 to enable
the Medical Council of India to conduct a screening test in order to satisfy itself with regard
to the adequacy of knowledge and skills acquired by citizens of India who obtain medical
qualifications from universities or medical institutions outside India before they are granted
registration to practice medicine in India.

3. Further, issue of prior eligibility certificate by the Medical Council of India would
ensure that only those candidates who conform to the Council norms of admission to the
medical college in India would go for under-graduate medical education outside India.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI; C. P. THAKUR
The 2nd March, 2001.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 33 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
to insert therein clause (ma) which empowers the Medical Council of India, with the previous
sanction of the Central Government to make regulations to provide for the modalities for
conducting screening tests under sub-section (4A), and under the proviso to sub-section
(4B), and for issuing eligibility certificate under sub-section (4B) of section 13.

The matters in respect of which such regulations may be made relate to procedure and
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN Mepicat Councu. Act, 1956
(102 oF 1956)

* * * * *
13. (1) * * * * *

(3) The medical qualifications granted by medical institution outside India which are
included in Part Ii of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualifications for
the purposes of this Act, but no person possessing any such qualification shall be entitled
to enrolment on any State Medical Register unless he 1s a citizen of India and has undergone
such practical training after obtaining that qualification as may be required by the Rules or
regulations in force in the country granting the qualification, or if he has not undergone any
practical training in that country, he has undergone such practical training as may be
prescribed.

(4) The Central Government, after consulting the Council, may, by notificetion in the
Official Gazette, amend Part II of the Third Schedule so as to include therein any qualification
granted by a medical institution outside India which is not included in the Second Schedule.

* * * * *
33. The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, make

regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and, without prejudice to the
generality of this power, such regulations may provide for—

* * * * *

Recognition
of medical

uolificanons
granted by
certain
medical
institutions
whose
qualifications
are not
included in
the First
or Second
Schedule.

Power to
make
regulations.


RAJYA SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956

(Dr. C. P. Thakur, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—7096RS—08.03.2001.