Bill No XXXIV of 1972
a

THE ALL-INDIA SERVICES REGULATIONS
(INDEMNITY) BILL, 1972

AS INTRODUCED IN THE Ragya SaBua

A
BILL

to grant indemnity in respect of the failure to lay before Parliament
certain regulations made under the All-India Services Act, 1951, and
for certain other matters connected therewith,

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the All-India Services Regulations (Indem-
nity) Act, 1972.

5 2. The Central Government and all officers responsible for the laying

of any regulation made before the commencement of this Act under or

in pursuance of any rule made under the All-India Services Act, 1951,
are, and each of them is, hereby freed, discharged and indemnified from

and against all consequences, whatsoever, if any, incurred or to be in-

10 curred by them or the Central Government or any such officer by reason

of any omission in this behalf to lay such regulation before Parliament

and every such regulation shall for all purposes be deemed to have been

duly laid before Parliament and shall have effect and shall be deemed

always to have had effect accordingly,

1s 3. In section 3 of the All-India Services Act, 1951,—

(0 in sub-section (1), after the words “including the State of

Jammu and Kashmir”, the words “and by notification in the Official
Gazette” shall be inserted;

Short
title.

In-
demnity.

Amend-
ment or
section
3 of

Act 61
of 1951.


2

) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shalj be 7
(ii) for sub- nt,
stituted, namely:—
Central Government
४ ule made by the Cen under 4.
“(2) Every wy regulation made under or in pursuance o¢ thig

section and every : :
laid, as soon as may be after such +i

such rule, shall be Be
regulation is made, before each House of Parliament While ४ ;

in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com
prised in one session or in two or more successive S€Ssions an
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following Ps
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 7 e
in making any modification in such rule or regulation or ie
Houses agree that such rule or regulation should not be ma =
the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in s €,
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so i

ever, that any such modification or annulment shall be mie

Prejudice to the validity of anything previously done un der OUt I
rule or regulation.”. that

0


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

some of the rules made under
the All-India Servi
कं fal Gover ery 5
mpower bos has overnment to make regulations in moet हे
certain the ta हे ub-section (2) of section 3 of the ‘aid A relia at
only for the laying of rules before Parliament. Consaquenity हा अल
ily, ae

tions made up to the Ist July, 1967, were not laid before Parliament

As, however, the regulations form an integral part of th |; i
was felt that it would be appropriate to lay the regulations eto ५ ali .
ment in the same manner as the rules are laid. The Bill vail, ral
indemnify the Central Government and its officials from all oc —_
arising out of the omission to lay the regulations before aetna a

rovides that those regulations should, for all purposes, be deemed to
have been duly made and have effect accordingly. In addition, it seeks
ovide for the laying of regulations also before Parliament in future.

to pr
The Bill also seeks to provide that the period for which the rules and

regulations shall be laid before Parliament shall be thirty days and not
fourteen days as at present.

New DELHI;
The 22nd September, 1972.
RAM NIWAS MIRDHA.


ANNEXURE

Exrract FROM THE ALL-INDIA Services Act, 1951
(61 or 1951)

* * ‘

3. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Goy
ernments of the States concerned including the State of Jammy and
Kashmir make rules for the regulation of recruitment, and the Condition
of service of persons appointed, to an All-India Service. 7

(2) All rules made under this section shall be laid for no
fourteen days before Parliament as soon as possible after the

and shall be subject to such modifications, whether by way
amendment, as Parliament may make on a motion made
session in which they are so laid.

t less than
Y ate made,
of repeal or
during the

* * * हि


RATYA SABHA

A
BILL
to grant indemnity in respect of the failure to lay before Parliament certaj

made under the all-India Services Act, 1951, and for certain other matt
therewith.

DTegulatig
S COnnecy

(Shri Ram Niw
as Mirdha, Mini
of Home Affairs) peer