THE  UNORGANISED  LABOUR  AND  AGRICULTURAL
WORKERS   (WELFARE)  BILL,  2006
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the unorganised
labour and agricultural workers by setting up a Welfare Authority and a Welfare
Fund for the payment of minimum wages, for pension and provident fund facilities,
maternity and creche facilities along with medicare to the women workers and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Unorganised Labour and Agricultural Workers
(Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. XXXIV of 2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of State the Government of that
State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the Unorganised Labour and Agricultural Workers Welfare
Authority established under section 3;
(c) "employer" means any person who employs, whether directly or through any
other person, or contractor, whether on behalf of himself or on behalf of any other
person, one or more labourer or workers for any work or work connected with the
agricultural operations;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "unorganised labour" means those labourers who are not members of any
labour or trade union and hired to do any work by another person;
(f) "wages" means the remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of
money which shall, if the terms of the contract of employment, whether express or
implied, are fulfilled, be payable to a person in respect of the work done in such
employment;
(g) "Welfare Fund" means the Welfare Fund set up for the unorganized labour
and agricultural workers under this Act;
(h) "workers" means an agricultural worker who earns wages on daily or any
other basis working in the agricultural operations of other persons or employers.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as  may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish the Unorganised Labour and Agricultural Workers Welfare Authority
for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the Authority may
establish offices at other places in the Country as it may deem necessary.
(4) The  Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having the
background of labour related issues or of a farmer or of the judiciary;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having
such qualifications as may be prescribed;
(c) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by Lok Sabha and
one by the Rajya Sabha;
(d) three members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent
respectively:—
(i) the Ministry of Central Government dealing with Agriculture;
(ii) the Ministry of Central Government dealing with Labour and
Employment;
(iii) the Ministry of Central Government dealing with Finance;
(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
unorganised labour and agricultural workers;
(f) four members to be nominated by the State Governments to be rotated amongst
the States in alphabetical order.
Definition.
Establishment
of the
Unorganised
Labour and
Agricultural
Workers
Welfare
Authority.

3
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such officers and staff and with such
terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to promote and undertake by such measures
as it thinks fit or deem necessary, welfare measures for the unorganized labour and agricultural
workers.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the measures
referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) maintaining a district wise register of unorganized labour and agricultural
workers with such particulars and in such manner, as may be prescribed;
(b) maintaining land records from village or Panchayat level to district level;
(c) maintaining a district wise register of employers employing unorganized
labour and agricultural workers with such particulars and in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(d) availability of work round the year to the unorganized labour and agricultural
workers;
(e) payment of old age pension to the unorganised labour and agricultural workers;
(f) Provident Fund facility to the unorganised labour and agricultural workers;
(g) medical care, free of cost, both the indoor and outdoor patient facilities to
the unorganised labour and agricultural workers;
(h) maternity and creche facilities for the famale workers covered under this
Act;
(i) such other provisions as the Authority may deem necessary for the purposes
of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Welfare Fund known as the Unorganised Labour and Agricultural Workers
Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act with initial corpus of rupees one thousand crores to
be provided by the Central Government by due appropriation made by law by Parliament in this
behalf and thereafter the Central Government, State Governments and employers shall
contribute to the Welfare Fund to such extent and in such manner as may be prescribed.
 (2) Corporate houses, financial institutions both domestic and international, individuals
and bodies may also contribute through donations or otherwise to the Welfare Fund.
 (3) All moneys received in the Welfare Fund shall be utilised for the welfare of the
unorganised labour and agricultural workers by the Authority in such manner as the
Central Government may prescribe from time to time.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,—
 (a) no employer shall engage any unorganised labourer or agricultural worker,
as the case may be, unless he has registered himself with the Authority;
 (b) every employer shall pay a minimum of rupees one thousand five hundred
per month or rupees fifty per day to a labourer or worker covered under this Act
engaged by him for work and this rate of wages shall be subject to change in accordance
with the rise in price index;
 (c)  every day of the work done by the worker or labourer covered under this
Act, shall be counted for the purpose of calculating the total period of service rendered
by such worker or labourer in a month or a year.
Functions of
the Authority.
Unorganised
Labour and
Agricultural
Workers
Welfare Fund.
Miscella-
neous
provisions.

4
7. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act shall be guilty of  an offence
and punishable with simple imprisonment which shall not be less than six months but may
extend to two years and also with fine, which may extend to one lakh rupees.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order to give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty and
any such order shall be final.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty.
Savings.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Unorganised labour constitute the major chunk of the working classes in the country.
Our country is predominantly rural with nearly 80 per cent of its population living in the
rural areas. Therefore, agricultural workers constitute majority of the rural labour in the
country. The agricultural workers too are unorganised. It has been observed that the organised
labour through its bargaining power and means of strike and agitations, etc. through their
Unions manages to get its demands, whether reasonable or unreasonable, fulfilled but the
unorganised labour including the agriculture workers feel helpless even in getting its
reasonable demands like the minimum wages, availability of work round the year, pension,
provident fund, maternity benefit, creche, etc. fulfilled. They remain hand to mouth and
exploited throughout their lives. Their condition is becoming worse day by day and there is
no legal protection for the unorganised labour including agricultural workers.
Ours is a welfare state and considering the vast number of unorganised labour and
agricultural workers in the country and  their immense contribution to the national wealth
and resources, it is high time that these vital sections of the society are extended welfare
measures and given all possible  legal protection.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
SUSHMA   SWARAJ
————
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3) OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Copy of D.O. No. H-11015/03/05-RW dated 6th June, 2005 from Shri K. Chandra Sekhar
Rao, Minister of Labour and Employment to the Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha).
The President having been informed on the subject matter of the above mentioned Bill,
has accorded his recommendation under article 117(3) of the Constitution for consideration
of the Bill, in Rajya Sabha.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Unorganised Labour and
Agricultural Workers Welfare Authority. Clause 5 of the Bill  provides for the Unorganised
Labour and Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. Apart from one thousand crore rupees of initial corpus
of the welfare fund, it is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand crores may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees fifty crores may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
———
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the unorganised
labour and agricultural workers by setting up a Welfare Authority and a Welfare
Fund for the payment of minimum wages, for pension, and provident
fund facilities, maternity and creche facilities along with medicare
to the women workers and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
———
(Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—502RS(S-5)—12-05-2006.