Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
THE SOLAR POWER (DEVELOPMENT, PROMOTION AND
MANDATORY USE)
BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to provide for the development and promotion of solar power generation and mandatory
use of solar power in buildings with  a view to saving conventional energy and
protecting the environment and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Solar Power (Development, Promotion and Mandatory
Use)  Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means, in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government.
Bill No. XXXIX of  2017
5
Definitions
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 15TH DECEMBER, 2017

2
5
10
15
(b) ‘‘authority’’, means the National Solar Power Development Authority of
India, established under section 4 of this Act;
(c) “buildings” include all structures and installations notified by the appropriate
Government under this Act;
(d) ‘‘precribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) ‘‘solar photovoltaic modules, panels and solar thermal collectors’’ mean flat
or concentrating devices which collect, convert or store solar energy for use in the
form of heat or electricity.
3. It shall be obligatory for the owners, lessees, tenants, builders and promoters of
every building to install solar photovoltaic modules, panels and solar thermal collection on
the top in the land forming part of the property, for generating electricity in order to meet a
part of its total electricity requirement in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
4. Where any building has a solar capacity which exceeds its own requirments, such
excess electricity shall be transmitted to the grid and the owners, lessees, tenants or other
users of the building shall be entitled to such incentives as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government.
5. (1)  For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish an Authority, to be known as the National Solar Power Development
Authority of India, with its headquarters at New Delhi.
(2) The Authority may have such number of regional offices in any region or parts or
in the States as may be require.
6. (1) The Authority shall be headed by a Chairperson and five other members to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The terms and conditions of the service of the Chairperson and the members shall
be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such set up as may be prescribed.
(4) The Authority shall meet at such time and such places, and shall observe such
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.
7. The Authority shall permorm the following functions, namely to,—
(a) specify the categories and size of the buildings to be covered by the Act;
(b) recommend amendments to building bye-laws so as to make it obligatory for
the owners, contractors builders and promoters of all new buildings to install solar
photovoltaic modules, pannels and solar thermal collectors as specified in this Act;
(c) specify the minimum percentage of the total electricity requirements of a
building to be met through solar energy;
(d) specify the circumstances and technical grounds under which exemptions
may be granted from the provisions of this Act;
(e) recommend to the appropriate Government, the provisions for subsidies and
other incentives for the installation of solar energy systems in new buildings as well as
existing building; and
( f ) recommend appropriate concessions like subsidies, etc. for the solar energy
equipment, in order to promote awareness among the people about the availability of
solar thermal and photovoltaic products and the benefits arising from their use.
20
25
30
35
40
Functions of
the Authority.
Obligation for
the owners,
lessees,
tenants,
builders and
promoters of
buildings.
Transmission
of excess
electricity to
grid.
Establishment
of a National
Solar Power
Development
Authority of
India.
Composition
of the
Authority.

3
5
10
8. The Authority may, on an application made by an individual or establishment, grant
exemption from the provison of section 3 for reasons to be recorded in writing.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
provide requisite funds for the purposes of this Act, from time to time.
10. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act, shall be liable to be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine up to two lakh rupees.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
12. The appropriate Government state may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Authority to
grant
exemptions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Penalty.
Saving.
Power to
meke rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
For decades, the power generation in India has been dominated by thermal power.
Presently, out of the total power generation in the country about two-thirds of power is
produced by thermal plants, with coal-based power plants topping the list by a  sizeable
margin. The Renewable Energy Sources, including Small Hydro Projects, Biomass Gasifiers,
Biomass Power, Urban & Industrial Waste Power, Solar and Wind Energy hardly account for
17-18 per cent of total power genetation. Thus, the share of solar power in total power
generation is too little to be significant. India has high solar insolation, which is an ideal
condition for generation of solar power. This is particularly true about Gujarat and parts of
Rajasthan and Deccan Plateau. Still, the installed capacity of solar plants in the year 2014
stood at 2500 MW only.
The Government has identified the advantage, India's vast geography and favourable
geographical location offers. As a result the Solar Power capacity has more than quadrupled
in a short span of three years, reaching beyond 10 GW from a meagre 2500 MW in 2014. The
Government aims to further raise it to 22 GW by the end of current fiscal and to 100 GW by
the end of the year 2022.
While the new solar capacity is being generated mainly in commercial, institutional
sector, there is no denying the fact that roof top solar power generation in buildings such as
Government offices, schools, hospitals and other large institutions can be a significant
source of solar electricity. This requires an institutionalised mechanism which can tap this
endless source of energy at micro levels.
Towards this end, the Bill seeks to—
(i) Make it obligatory for the owners, lessees, tenants, builders and promoters of
every specified building to install solar photovoltaic modules and panels, on the
top or in the land forming part of the property, for generating electicity in order
to meet a part of its total electricity requirement in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(ii) provide for transmission of excess electricity to the grid and grant of suitable
incentives for such excess generation and transmission;
(iii) provide for establishment of a National Solar Power Development Authority of
India to regulate and promote roof-top solar power generation; and
(iv) p rovide that if a person fails to fulfil his obligation under the Bill, he shall be
liable to a fine of up to two lakh rupees or imprisonment up to three months.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NARAY AN LAL PANCHARIYA
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall establish the National Solar
Power Development Authority of India for development and promotion of the use of the
solar energy. Clause 7 of the Bill makes provision of subsidy and other incentives for
installation of solar energy systems in new buildings as well as existing buildings. Clause 9
makes provision for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. The recurring and non-recurring expenditure on this count cannot be estimated at this
stage. but has to be worked out by the Central Government while implementing the provisions
of the Bill.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to frame rules by notification
in the Official Gazette, to carry out the provision of the Bill.
The rules to be framed by the appropriate Government pertain to matters of
administrative detail, which cannot be laid down in the Bill itself.
The delegation is, therefore, normal in character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the development and promotion of solar power generation and mandatory
use of solar power in buildings with  a view to saving conventional energy and
protecting the environment and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2901RS(S3)—15.12.2017.