1
Short title and
commencement.
THE TEACHING OF SANSKRIT AS A COMPULSORY
LANGUAGE IN SCHOOLS BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for the teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory language in schools.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Teaching of Sanskrit as a Compulsory Language
in Schools Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. The Sanskrit language should be taught as a compulsory subject in every
school from first to tenth standard.
3. The Central and the State Governments shall equally share the expenditure
likely to be incurred on the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Teaching of
Sanskrit as a
Compulsory
language in
Schools.
Bill No. XXXI of  2012
Expenditure to
be shared by
Central and
State
Governments.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Sanskrit has been the language of India’s soul. It is also said to be the Mother
of all languages. Our Rishi Munis called in Devabhasha or the Language of the gods.
No one can truly understand and appreciate the spirit of Indian culture, if he does not
know the Sanskrit language as all the major ancient texts are written in this language.
Sri Aurobindo, while speaking of the importance of the Sanskrit language for India,
says: “It is of the utmost value to a nation, a human group-soul to preserve its
language and make it a strong and living cultural instrument. A nation, race or people
which loses its language cannot live its whole life or real life.”
Jawaharlal Nehru has also said “The past has gone and the present is with us
and we work for the future. But I have no doubt that whatever the shape the future
may take, one of the biggest, the strongest, and the most powerful and the most
valued of our legacies, will be the Sanskrit language.” Sanskrit is the only language
which was spoken all over India in the past and it is the only language which can still
unify the country.
The versatile literary creations in the Sanskrit language have evoked a deep
sense of awe and wonder among scholars of the world. All the profound spiritual
wisdom of India embodied in our ancient scriptures like the V edas, Upanishadas,
Bhagwad Gita, Puranas and Shastras are expressed in the Sanskrit language. No
wonder great Indian sages like Sri Aurobindo and Swami Vivekananda viewed Sanskrit
language as the most perfect medium for expressing spiritual and philosophical ideas.
But interestingly, even some of the modern scientists in the high-tech field of
computers, have discovered that Sanskrit is the best language for the latest generation
of Artificial Intelligence machine-systems. But the people of India  are turning away
from this treasure house of our ancient Indian culture and do not realize its value.
It is highly deplorable that such a language, which has a vast literature, is being
neglected in its own country. It is high time now to make sincere efforts to increase
awareness in the younger generation about the importance of  Sanskrit. Teaching of
Sanskrit as a compulsory language in every School will enable the younger generation
to enrich their personality and the noble traditions and thoughts of Indians and make
better citizens.
Hence this Bill.
PARSHOTTAM  KHODABHAI  RUPALA
2

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory
languages in schools.
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the total expenditure incurred on the
implementation of the provisions of this Bill shall be borne equally by the Central and
State Governments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. Although, the exact amount of expenditure cannot be
estimated at this stage, a recurring expenditure of twenty crore rupees per annum is
likely to be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
4

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory language in schools.
————
(Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3941RS(S3)—07-12-2012.