Bill No. XXXIX of  2022
Short title and
commencement.
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 62 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, for sub-section ( 5),
the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"(5). No person shall be allowed to vote at any election if such person is
convicted for any offence and is sentenced to imprisonment for more than seven
years:
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON 
26TH JULY, 2024
Amendment
of section 62.
43 of 1951.
5
10

2
Provided that a person who is alleged to have committed any offence and is
under lawful custody of the police and is under imprisonment for the period of
such trial, shall have the right to vote:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person
subjected to preventive detention under any law for the time being in force."
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The preamble of the Indian Constitution declares India to be a democratic State.
With a population of 1.4 billion, India is the largest democracy in the world. V oting right
is essential to the functioning of the democracy, envisioned by the Constituent
Assembly. The Supreme Court on various occasions specially in the landmark  judgement
of ‘Kesavananda Bharati case vs  UOI’ declared voting right as a part of the basic
structure of the Constitution of India. The right to vote is unconditionally essential to
a well-functioning democracy. Without the proper enforcement of this right, democracy
would be farce.
2. The conviction rate of under trial or accused persons is also very low in India.
The National Crime Record Bureau in its 2018 report titled ‘Prisoner Statistics India’ had
mentioned that out of a total of 4,66,084 prisoners, there were 3,23,537 under trials and
1,39,488 convicts lodged across 1,339 prisons across India. Thus, it shall be fair to state
that a blanket ban on the exercise of the right to vote for all prisoners is a dilution of the
strength of democracy and unnecessary curtailment of the fundamental rights of the
prisoners.
3. With the language of Section 62(5) of the Representation of the People Act,
1951 banning any person who is ‘confined’ in a prison from voting is not just ambiguous
but also unrequitedly expansive. This is for the very reason that under trial prisoners
are also “confined” on the basis of pre-supposition. While some under trials may afford
to procure bail, others with critical financial conditions may not be able to afford the
same. This brings out the issue of violation of Article 14 by Section 62(5) of RP Act.
A more shocking violation of equality happens, by the fact, that our legal system, while
not allowing a person to vote from prison allows a person to contest elections from the
same prison. Article 14 of the Indian Constitution is a guarantee of equality before law
and equal protection of laws. The Supreme Court of India in the case of Amita vs UOI,
(2005) 13 SCC 721 has expounded on the meaning of the two terms, while the former lays
down that no citizen shall be discriminated in the application of law, the latter puts an
obligation on the State to ensure that every individual is given equal respect and
concern which he is entitled to as a human being. The privileged, under privileged,
politicians, or common men, all are equal before the law.
4. It is pertinent to point out that a basic facet of natural justice and the Indian
criminal justice system is the presumption of innocence unless proven guilty. While the
law provides for curtailment of certain rights of criminals, curtailment of a critical right
of voting is against natural justice and also defeats the purpose and object of the
legislation. This deprivation of rights of innocent people cannot be justified.
Hence this Bill.
IRANNA  KADADI
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE CONSTITUTION  OF INDIA
(ACT NO. 43 OF 1951)
62. * * * * *
* * * * *
(5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison, whether
under a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the
lawful custody of the police:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected
to preventive detention under any law for the time being in force:
Provided further that by reason of the prohibition to vote under this
sub-section, a person whose name has been entered in the electoral roll shall not
cease to be an elector.
* * * * *
4
Right to vote.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Iranna Kadadi, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—166—31.07.2024