Bill No. XXXI of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD AUGUST, 2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE DOWNTRODDEN, BACKWARD AND OPPRESSED YOUTH
(DEVELOPMENT AND WELFARE) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive national policy
for ensuring overall development of the youth belonging to Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and those from Other Backward Classes and oppressed
categories from the religious and linguistic minorities and for their
welfare to be undertaken by the State and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Repulbic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Downtrodden, Backward and Oppressed Y outh
(Development and Welfare) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "backward" means those youth who belong to castes which have been
declared, by notification in the Official Gazette, as backward by the appropriate
Government from time to time;
5
10
Definitions.

2
National policy
for the
downtrodden,
backward and
oppressed
youth.
Appropriate
Government to
implement
national policy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(c) "downtrodden youth" means the youth belonging to Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes not provided with opportunities;
(d) "oppressed youth" means the youth who have been cruelly or unjustly
treated in the society due to faith or religion, caste or creed or language or have been
oppressed with poverty as such;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "youth" means any person who has attained the age of eighteen years but is
not above the age of thirty-five years.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a comprehensive
national policy for the overall development and welfare of the downtrodden, backward and
oppressed youth of the nation for implementation throughout the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of
Section 3, the national policy referred to therein may provide for;
(a) free higher education, including medical, technical and information technology;
(b) free coaching training for admission to management courses with assured
admission in management institutes of repute;
(c) books, stationery, equipments and educational gadgets free of cost;
(d) scholarships in deserving cases;
(e) free hostel facilities;
(f) free public transport facilities;
(g) monthly pocket expenses allowances at such rate as may be prescribed;
(h) free entertainment facilities;
(i) free access to all libraries and technical institutions;
(j) training in sports to every eligible youth covered under this Act and facilities
and appropriate incentives to participate in sports activities, events and tournaments
in and outside the country;
(k) provision for free of cost healthy and nutritious meals to all the youth
covered under this Act in the schools, colleges, universities, hostels and technical
institutions;
(l) free medical and healthcare;
(m) providing modern apprenticeship in business, trade, vocation etc., in
factories and commercial establishments;
(n) providing military training to physically fit youth covered under this Act
and those successfully completing training to be given preference for recruitment in
defence services;
(o) free of cost coaching and study material •for all India Services and other
competitive examinations which are conducted by Union Public Service Commission,
State Public Service Commissions and other examination bodies such as of  Railways,
Banks Staff Selection Commission and other bodies of the Government at the Centre,
States and Union Territories;
(p) such other facilities, incentives and welfare measures as may be prescribed
from time to time.
4. It shall be the duty of every appropriate Government to implement in letter and spirit
the national policy formulated under this Act.

3
5
10
15
20
25
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall provide gainful employment to the youth covered under
this Act as per their ability and qualification after completing their education or training,
as the case may be, and in case that Government fails to provide them employment, the youth
shall be paid unemployment allowance on monthly basis at such rate as may be prescribed
by the Central Government until they are given gainful employment.
6. (1)The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of expert committees in
the capital of every State and Union Territory and in every district as it may deem necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act comprising renowned educationists and
psychologists and others to recommend some trade or vacation related education or training
to be imparted to the youth covered under this Act after passing their Secondary or
Matriculation examination.
(2) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of youth hostels on the
lines of international youth hostels at conspicuous places in the country for the youth
covered under this Act as it may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The appropriate Government shall promote youth cooperatives at villages and
district levels for establishing their village industries ventures, dairy projects, food processing,
poultry, fair price shops, LPG distribution, etc. and provide requisite financial assistance and
guidance to them for procuring raw materials and promoting marketing, etc.
(4) The appropriate Government shall ensure the availability of requisite credit at
nominal rate of interest from the Banks and other Financial Institutions to the youth covered
under this Act for their self employment projects.
(5) The appropriate Government shall extend such welfare measures to the youth
covered under this Act as that Government may deem appropriate and necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
to carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Employment
and
unemployment
allowance.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to
make rules.
Miscellaneous
provisions.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The youth are always at the centre stage of socio-political activities in our nation.To
maintain this strength, a clear cut youth policy is required to rid the youth of problems
relating to education, poverty, nutrition, employment opportunities, self employment,
vocational training, health, sports, etc. The country at present has no institutional mechanism
to harness the potential of our youth and channelise their energy for the betterment of the
country. The plight of the youth belonging to downtrodden communities such as Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes ( OBCs) who have been oppressed
for centuries is even worse. Even today the downtrodden youth have to face social
ostracisation. Though thanks to the reservation policy propounded and given by the messiah
of the downtrodden Babasaheb B.R. Ambedkar, many of them have made some progress but
the downtrodden youth still require special attention because there is a need to instill a
sense of belonging among the downtrodden, backward and oppressed youth of the nation
by providing them all opportunities for their overall development so that they too contribute
to the progress of the country to their full potential. The facilities and opportunities should
be provided as a matter of right. Good education should be their right and it should not be a
privilege of the elite only. Employment needs to be guaranteed to them and if employment
opportunity is not provided they have to be given unemployment allowance. They have to
be linked directly with the production processes by eliminating the disparities between the
rural and urban downtrodden youth. For this a comprehensive national policy for the
downtrodden backward and oppressed youth should be in place to ensure their all round
development which is the need of the hour and an absolute necessity. The state has to
extend welfare measures for them and enable them to fight against fanaticism, fundamentalism
and separatism.
Hence this Bill.
AMAR SHANKAR SABLE
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a national policy for the downtrodden backward and
oppressed youth under which various facilities are to be provided to such youth. Clause 5
provides for employment opportunities and payment of unemployment allowance by the
Government. Clause 7 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible at present to quantify the funds that may
involve but it is estimated that a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty thousand crore may also
involve for creating assets and infrastructure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive national policy for
ensuring overall development of the youth belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and those from Other Backward Classes and oppressed
categories from the religious and linguistic minorities and for their
welfare to be undertaken by the State and for matter connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
.
————
(Shri Amar Shankar  Sable, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1459RS(S3)—06-08-2018.