Ag IntropuceD IN RasyA SABHA

Bill No. XXXII of 2000

THE PREVENTION OF COMMUNALISATION OF EDUCATION AND
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2000
A
BILL

to prevent the Central and State Governments from prescribing syllabi for the schools and
educational institutions containing communal bias or agenda and nominating persons
with communal background to the apex bodies connected with education like NCERT,
UGC, governing bodies of Universities, Centres promoting art, cultute, history, science
and such other bodies and for matters connected therewith.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-First year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Communalisation of Education and
Educational Institutions Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.

Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.


Definitions.

Prohibition of
prescribing
syllabus
containing
communal
material for
educational
institution,

Prohibition of
nomination of
person with
communal
background to
educational
bodies.

Power to
confiscate
syllabus book
having
communal
bias or
agenda.

Power to make

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;

B "ed se tional institutions" include all the educational institutions right from
the preparatory level to > university level whether run with Government funds or by
private individuals or bodis

(c) "educational bodies" include all the bodies such as Boards, councils, registries,
Commissions and Akademies etc. directly or indirectly connected with education;

(व) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no educational body authorised for prescribing syllabus for various classes, courses; and
degrees shall approve any syllabus which contains communal bias or agenda or propose to
change the historical facts being taught in any educational institutions.

4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, no Minister of the appropriate Government shall nominate any person having
communal or criminal background to any educational body in any capacity whatsoever,
either under his discretionary powers or under any authority conferred upon him by any law
for the time being in force.

(2) Any nomination made in contravention of sub-section (/) shall be oid ab-initio.

5. (1) Any book prescribed for the syllabus of any educational institution containing
communal bias or agenda fr an attempt to change the historical facts therein shall be
confiscated by the district administration through the local police and destroyed in such
manner.as may be prescribed.

(2) The appropriate Government shall withdraw the book from the syllabus which
has been confiscated under sub-section (/) with immediate effect.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Of late, reports are emanating from the media that Central and some State
Governments are changing or have changed the syllabus of schools and colleges on
communal lines toeing the agenda of the communal organisations supporting the
Government concerned which has vitiated the atmosphere in educational institutions and
is creating communal tension in the temples of education. Similarly Ministers at the Central
and State levels are nominating persons with communal background and in a particular
case a killer, to higher educational bodies like NCERT, UGC etc. which has sent shock
waves amongst the secular society. The Cultural and historical bodies are being reconstituted
by nominating persons with the comnunal background and who are supporters of
fundamentalists organisation. These actions are being seen as attempts to communalise
education and educational institutions which has to be stopped in order to save the
democracy in the country.

Hence this Bill.

EDUA


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of Legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
to prevent the Central and State Governments from prescribing syllabi for the schools
and educational institutions containing communal bias or agenda and nominating
persons with communal background to the apex bodies connected with education like
NCERT, UGC, governing bodies of Universities, Centres promoting art, culture, history,
science and such other bodies and for matters connected therewith.

(Eduardo Faleiro, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—1518RS—26-06-2000.