THE  SUPREME  COURT  (ESTABLISHMENT  OF  A  PERMANENT
BENCH  AT  VISAKHAPATNAM)  BILL,  2015
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent bench of the
Supreme Court at Visakhapatnam.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court (Establishment of a Permanent Bench
at Visakhapatnam) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be established a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at Visakhapatnam
with such number of Judges as the Chief Justice of India, may with the approval of the
President decide, to exercise,  jurisdiction in respect of cases arising in the States of
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh and
Maharashtra and such other territory as may be notified by the Central Government with the
approval of the Chief Justice:
Provided that the number of judges at the bench at Visakhapatnam shall not be less
than seven.
Bill No. XXXIII of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015
Short title and
commencement.
Establishment
of a
permanent
bench of
Supreme
Court at
Visakhapatnam.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The pursuit of justice before law is a costly endeavaour which has been made more
expensive by inordinate delays. The logistical problems also aggravate litigation costs and
further delays.
The rate of pending court cases in the country has crossed many millions and there is
a severe backlog of court cases in the beleaguered legal system.
Article 130 of the Constitution of India provides that the Supreme Court shall sit in
Delhi or in such other place or places as the Chief Justice of India may with the approval of
the President appoint.
Hence, the Bill seeks to establish a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court at
Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh. There is already infrastructure and other facilities available
at Visakhapatnam. This will provide an effective mechanism to make the judicial procedure
for justice people-friendly and efficient.
DR.  T.  SUBBARAMI  REDDY
2

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be a permanent bench of the
Supreme Court at Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India to the tune of rupees ten crore
per annum.
However, a non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is
likely to be involved.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent bench of the
Supreme Court at Visakhapatnam.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3378RS(S3)—07-12-2015.