THE  SMALL TRADERS (PROTECTION AND OTHER WELFARE
MEASURES)  BILL,  2008
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of traders who are frequently affected by any criminal act or
natural calamity and lose their crops, livestock due to such calamities, by paying
them adequate compensation and for welfare measures such as old age pension,
removal of indebtedness, remunerative prices for their produce to be undertaken by
the State and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (I) This Act may be called the Small Traders (Protection and Other Welfare Measures)
Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008
Bill No. XXXII of 2008
5

2
SERVER5\BILL_ 2008/RS/4755RS
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "criminal act" means cheating, kidnapping, abduction, murder, unexpected
mishappening (Chinati) and such other act as may be notified by the appropriate
Government;
(c) "fund" means the Traders Welfare Fund established under section 5;
(d) "natural calamity" includes drought, floods, cyclones, tsunami, earthquakes,
hailstorms, extreme cold conditions, and such other conditions as may be notified by
the appropriate Government from time to time;
(e) "old age" means where the traders has attained the age of sixty years or more;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this Act;
(g) "scheme" means the Traders Credit Scheme framed under section 8;
(h) "traders" means a person who owns trade or business like small shops, and
includes hawkers, street vendors etc.
3. (I) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every trader who loses his crop, livestock, movable or immovable property due to any natural
calamity or criminal act shall be paid adequate compensation by the appropriate Government
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) The amount of compensation, payable to traders affected by any natural calamity
or criminal act shall be such as may be specified by the Central Government from time to
time, by notification in the Official Gazette and while specifying the amount of compensation,
the total loss suffered by a trader due to the natural calamity or criminal act shall be taken
into account.
(3) Every claimant for payment of compensation under this Act shall apply to the
officer so appointed by the appropriate Government for the purpose in the prescribed form
giving such information as may be prescribed:
Provided that a village panchayat may apply for claiming compensation for all the
affected traders of the village and it shall be deemed that each trader has applied for the
compensation under this Act.
(4) Every claim for compensation under this Act shall be finalised and the payment
shall be made within thirty days of filing of the claim.
4. (I) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
it shall be mandatory for all the public, private and cooperative sector banks and financial
institutions to provide loans on easy terms with nominal or without interest to the traders
affected by natural calamity or criminal act to restart the business operations and allied
activities and to withstand the severity of the calamity and its aftermath.
(2) The banks and financial institutions referred to in sub-section (1) shall also not
recover the earlier loan given to the traders by them who have been affected by any natural
calamity or criminal act for at least one year after the calamity and the traders shall not be
denied fresh loans on this ground.
5. (I) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a fund to be known as the Traders Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus of the fund established under sub-section (1) shall be five
thousand crore rupees of which four thousand crore rupees shall be provided by the Central
Government, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this behalf and one thousand
crore rupees shall be provided by the State Governments in proportion to their traders
population for the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Compensa-
tion to
traders.
Financial
institutions
to provide
loans.
Establish-
ment of
Traders
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) After the initial constitution of the fund, money shall be provided to the fund by the
Central and State Governments in such proportions and in such manner as may be prescribed
from time to time.
(4) The fund shall also consist of money received from general public, body corporate,
financial institutions, domestic and foreign, as donations, gifts, etc.
(5) The fund shall be utilised for the welfare of traders in such manner as may be
prescribed.
6. (I) The appropriate Government shall take such appropriate measures as it may deem
necessary and expedient for the removal of indebtedness amongst the traders.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) the appropriate Government shall, endeavour
to provide compulsory insurance for the traders.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, on an application made in the prescribed
form and after making proper scrutiny of eligibility etc. of the applicant pay old age pension
to every old trader which shall not be less than two thousand rupees per month from the date
of commencement of this Act:
Provided that the old age pension shall be subject to revision on the basis of prevailing
price index.
(2) The old age pension payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid to the traders by
the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Any trader who is in receipt of any pension from the appropriate Government
other than the one under this Act or is having adequate source of income shall forfeit his
right to claim old age pension under this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government shall in consultation with the Government of the States,
frame a scheme to be known as the "Traders Credit Scheme" to be executed by banks and
financial institutions.
(2) The Scheme shall provide for,—
(a) the terms and conditions for extending credit to traders;
(b) the extent to which the credit can be given and settling of previous loans
taken, if any;
(c) the nominal interest that may be charged on traders credit;
(d) the concessions which are to be given in respect of the credit in case of
natural calamity;
(e) such other things which the Central Government may deem necessary for the
purposes of this Act.
(3) The Central Government shall issue such guidelines to the banks and financial
institutions as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The Central Government shall, after the due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide adequate funds at the disposal of the States for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force in any part of the country dealing with the welfare of
traders.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Measures for
removal of
indebtedness.
Old age
pension to
traders.
Traders
Credit
Scheme.
Adequate
funds to be
provided by
the Central
Government.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT  OF   OBJECTS   AND   REASONS
Ours is a vast country and so is the number of traders who constitute a major chunk of
our total population. Due to its vastness, natural calamities or criminal activities do occur in
one or the other part of the country almost round the year. For instance, the whole of
Rajasthan, parts of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, etc. are drought-prone. Every year, half of Bihar is flooded and the other, half
faces drought. Similarly, in Southern States, coastal areas are lashed with cyclones or even
by tsunami, whereas other parts face drought conditions. Many parts of the country face
earthquake, hailstorm, cloud bursts, and other natural calamities. Traders are hounded by
the moneylenders to get back their money taken by the traders. But natural calamity dashes
their hopes and with this, many of them end their lives. Due to increase in life expectancy, the
number of old traders is increasing very fast and most of them are not supported by their
children due to various reasons, compelling them to lead a miserable life.
Since ours is a welfare State, the Government is duty bound to provide social security
to the traders by giving them old age pension credit and come to their rescue at times of
distress by giving them adequate compensation, if they are affected by natural calamity and
by taking other welfare measures.
Hence this Bill.
BANW ARI LAL KANCHHAL
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for compensation to traders affected by any natural
calamity or criminal act. Clause 5 establishes the Traders Welfare Fund. Clause 7 provides
for old age pension to traders and Clause 9 provides that Central Government shall provide
requisite and adequate funds to States for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees five thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum. A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore may also
involve.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of traders who are frequently affected by any criminal act or
natural calamity and lose their crops, livestock due to such calamities, by paying them
adequate compensation and for welfare measures such as old age pension, removal of
indebtedness, remunerative prices for their produce to be undertaken by the State and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Banwari Lal Kanchhal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4755RS—29.12.2008.