AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A  SABHA
ON THE 17TH FEBRUARY, 2006.
THE  CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2004
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After article 262 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“262A. Nothing in article 262 shall prevent the Central Government from making
any provision for equal distribution of inter-State rivers waters amongst all riparian
States through which such inter-State rivers flow, as per the requirement of water for
drinking as well as irrigation purposes of each of the States and in order to achieve this
object the Central Government may, if it deem necessary to do so, nationalize all the
inter-State rivers to bring them under its overall control”.
Bill No.  XXXIII of  2004
Short title,
and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
262A.
Equal
distribution
of inter-State
river water
amongst the
riparian
States.
5
10

2
SERVER 1 BILL 2004/RAJYA  SABHA/5392RS
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Recently, dispute on sharing of inter-State river water took a new dimension when
Punjab terminated all the agreements pertaining to sharing of inter-State river water through
a legislation and restored the monopoly of Punjab on such water. The issue was referred to
the Supreme Court by the President of India for opinion.  Inter-State river water disputes are
not new. There is a long standing Cauvery river water dispute amongst Karnataka and other
riparian States like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Pondicherry. Such a dispute has
been existing among Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Delhi, U.P. etc., for quite long. These
disputes have arisen because some States want to monopolies the inter State river water.
This has led to tension many a times between the States and has also resulted in hatred
amongst the people of the States. Hence, it has become necessary to equally distribute the
inter-State rivers water amongst all the States through which such river flows. The water
could be distributed as per the requirements of each State for drinking and irrigation purposes.
For this, if need be, the inter-State rivers could also be nationalized.
Hence this Bill.
ALLADI  P.  RAJKUMAR

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5392RS(S-1)—17-02-2006.