INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

On ०१ May 20035

_

Bill No. XXXIX of 2003
ernie ee

THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
1 follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003.
} (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
| S inthe Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
1 any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the commencement of that provision
| 2. In section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),

? 57 of 1955. |७ in sub-sectin (/),—

Short title and
commencement,

Amendment
of section 2.


BY

(A for clauses (6) and (2) and the proviso to clause (2), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—

‘(6) "illegal migrant" means a foreigner who has entered into India—

() without a valid passport or other travel documents and such

other document or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law ins

that behalf; or

(ii) with a valid passport or other travel documents and such other
document or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that
behalf but remains therein beyond the permitted period of time;';

(ii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

‘(ee) “overseas citizen of India" means a person of Indian origin being a
citizen of a specified country, or an Indian citizen, who is registered as an overseas
citizen of India by the Central Government under sub-section (/) of section 7A;';

(iii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

(gg) "specified country" means a country specified in the Fourth |
Schedule;'.

Substitution 3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
of new section

for section 3

° Citizenship by "3, (1) Except as provided in sub-section (2), every person born in India—
birth,

*(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the Ist day of July,

1987; Qo

(6) on or after the 1st day of July, 1987, but before the commencement of

the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 and either of whose parents is a citizen
of India at the time of his birth;

(c) on or after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act,
2003, where—

(i) both of his parents are citizens of India; or

(ii) one of whose parents is a citizen of India and the other is not an
illegal migrant at the time ofhis birth, .

shall be a citizen of India by birth.

(2) A person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section if at the time 20
of his birth—

(a) either his father or mother possesses such immunity from suits and
legal process as is accorded to an envoy of a foreign sovereign power accredited

to the President of India and he or she, as the case may be, is not a citizen of
India; or

(4) his father or mother is an enemy alien and the birth occurs in a place
then under occupation by the enemy.".

_ 4. In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following sub-sections
of section 4 shall be substituted, namely;—

"(1) A person born outside India shall be a citizen of India by descent,— uo

(०) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 10th day of
December, 1992, ifhis father is a citizen of India at the time of his birth; or

|
4
|
|



4

(5) on or after the 10th day of December,
citizen of India at the time of his birth:

992, if either of his parents is a

Provided that if the father of a person referred to in clause (a) was a citize

dia by descent only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue
= this section unless—

(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its
occurrence or the commencement of this Act, whiche later, or, with
the permission of the Central Government, after the expiry of the said
period; or

Jo (6) his father is, atthe time of his birth, in service under a Government
in India:

हर Provided further that if either of the parents of a person referred to in
clause (0) was a citizen of India by descent only, that person shall not be
a citizen of India by virtue of this section, unless—

Ss (a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one
year of its occurrence or on or after the 10th day of December, 1992,
whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central Government,
after the expiry of the said period; or

(6) either of his parents is, at the time of his birth, in service
0 under a Government in India:

Provided also that on or after the commencement of the
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003, a person shall not be a citizen
of India by virtue of this section, unless his birth is registered at an
Indian consulate in such form and in such manner, as may be
as prescribed,—

(i) within one year of its occurrence or the
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003,
whichever is later; or

(ii) with the permission of the Central Government, after
30 the expiry of the said period:

Provided also that no such birth shall be registered
unless the parents of such person declare, in such form and in
such manner as may be prescribed, that the minor does not
hold the passport of another country.

3s (JA) A minor who is a citizen of India by virtue of this section shall not cease to
bea citizen of India if within six months of attaining full age he makes an application for
registration as on overseas citizen of India under this Act and until such application is
disposed of by the Central Government.".

5. In section 5 of the principal Act—
५० (a) for sub-section (/), the following shall be substituted, namely:—

"(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such other conditions
and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Central Government may, on application
made in this behalf, register as a citizen of India any person not being an illegal
migrant who is not already such citizen by virtue of the Constitution or of any

Us other provision of this Act if he belongs to any of the following categories,
namely:—

(a) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in India for
seven years before making an application for registration;

Amendment
of section 5.



Amendment
of section 6.

Insertion of
heading and
new sections
7A, 7B, 72
and 7D.
Registration
of overseas
citizens.

FI)

(b)a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in any country
or place outside undivided India;

(c) a person who is married to a citizen of India and is ordinarily
resident in India for seven years before making an application for
registration;

(d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India;

(e) a person of full age and capacity whose parents are registered as
citizens of India under clause (a) of this sub-section or sub-section (J) of
section 6;

(/) a person of full age and capacity who, or either of his parents,
was earlier citizen of independent India, and has been residing in India for
one year immediately before making an application for registration;

(g) a person of full age and capacity who has been registered as an
overseas citizen of India for five years, and who has been residing in India
for two years before making an application for registration.

Explanation |,—For the purposes of clauses (a) and (2), an applicant shall be

deemed to be ordinarily resident in India if—

(7) he has resided in India throughout the period of twelve months
immediately before making an application for registration; and

(ii) he has resided in India during the eight years immediately preceding
the said period of twelve months for a period of not less than six years.

Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall be deemed

to be of Indian origin if he, or either of his parents, was born in undivided India or in
such other territory which became part of India after the 15th day of August, 1947.";

(6) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

"(6) Lf the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances exist which
render it necessary to grant exemption from the residential requirement under
clause (c) of sub-section (/) to any person or a class of persons, it may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, grant such exemption.”

6. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words "who is not a
citizen of a country specified in the First Schedule", the words "not being an illegal migrant"
shall be substituted.

7. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following heading and sections shall be
inserted, namely:~

“OveERSEAS CITIZENSHIP

7A. (7) The Central Government may, subject to such conditions and restrictions

including the condition of reciprocity as may be prescribed, on an application made in
this behalf, register any person as an overseas citizen of India if—

(a) that person is of Indian origin of full age and capacity who is a citizen
of a specified country; or

(6) that person is of full age and capacity who has obtained the citizenship
of a specified country on or after the commencement of the Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 2003 and who was a citizen of India immediately before and
such commencment; or

(c) that person is a minor ofa person mentioned in clause (a) or clause (6):

Provided that in case ofa person mentioned in clause (0), such application
shall be made within a period of six months from the date on which he has
obtained the citizenship of a specified country

<

oO

Qo

20

५४7

43 of

43 of

43 6


w

हि The person registered as an overseas citizen of India under sub-section (7)
shall on taking the oath of allegiance specified in the Second Schedule be an overseas
citizen of India as from the date on which he is so registered.

(3) No person who has been deprived of his Indian citizenship under this Act
sr shall be registered as an overseas citizen of India under sub-section (7) except by an
order of the Central Government.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and sections 7B, 7C and 7D, the
expression "person of Indian origin" shall mean a citizen of another country who,—
(i) was eligible to become a citizen of India at the time of the commencement
lo of the Constitution;
(ii) belonged to a territory that became part of India after the 15th day of
August, 1947; and
(iii) the children and grand-children of a person covered under clauses (/)
and (ii), but does not include a person who is or had been at any time a citizen of

is Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify.

7B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, an overseas citizen‘of India shall be entitled to such rights [other than the
rights specified under sub-section (2)] as the Central Government may, by notification
20 in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
(2) An overseas citizen of India shall not be entitled to the rights conferred on a
citizen of India—
(a) under article 16 of the Constitution with regard to equality of
opportunity in matters of public-employment;
Qs’ (b) under article 58 of the Constitution for election as President,
(c) under article 66 of the Constitution for election of Vice-President;
(व) under article 124 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the
Supreme Court;
(e) under article 217 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the
3० High Court;

43 of 1950 (f under section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 in regard
to registration as a voter;
43 of 1951 (g) under sections 3 and 4 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the House of the People or of
3s the Council of States, as the case may be;

(h) under sections 5, 5A and 6 of the Representation of the People Act,
43 of 1951 1951 with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the Legislative Assembly
ora Legislative Council, as the case may be, of a State;

(i for appointment to public services and posts in connection with the
Yo affairs of the Union or of any State except for appointment in such services and
posts as the Central Government may by special order in that behalf specify

(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (/) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament. पु

7C. (J) If any overseas citizen of India of full age and capacity makes in the

4 sprescribed manner a declaration renouncing his overseas citizenship of India, the

declaration shall be registered by the Central Government, and; upon such registration,
that person shall cease to be an overseas citizen of India.

Conferment
of rights on
overseas
citizens of
India.

Renunciation
of overseas
citizenship.



a 9

(2) Where a person ceases to be an overseas citizen of India under sub-section
(/), every minor child of that person registered as an overseas citizen of India, shall
thereupon cease to be an overseas citizen of India

Cancellation 7D. The Central Government may, by order, cancel the registration granted under
of registration sub-section (/) of section 7A if it is satisfied that—

as overseas

citizen of (a) the registration as an overseas citizen of India was obtained by means
India

of fraud, false representation or the concealment of any material fact; or

(0) the overseas citizen of India has shown himself by any act or speech to
be disloyal or disaffected towards the Constitution of India as by law established;
or

(c) the overseas citizen of India has, during any war in which India may be
engaged, unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy or been engaged in,
or associated with, any business or commercial activity that was to his knowledge
carried on in such manner as to assist an enemy in that war; or

(d) the overseas citizen of India has, within five years after registration
under sub-section (/) of section 7A has been sentenced to imprisonment for a
term of not less than two years; or

(e) it is necessary so to do in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country,
or in the interests of the general public.’.

Amendment 8. In section 8 of the principal Act,—

ही section 8 हु के as हे
(a) in sub-section (/), the words "who is also a citizen or national of another

country" shall be omitted;

(6) in the proviso to sub-section (2), after the word "declaration", the words “in
the prescribed form and manner" shall be inserted;

(c) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.

Amendment 9. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
of section 9: . पु . हि ४ पु
(a) in sub-section (/), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,

namely:—

“Provided further that after the commencement of the Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 2003, any citizen of India who voluntarily acquires the
citizenship of a specified country shall not cease to be a citizen of India, if within
six months thereof he makes an application for registration as an overseas citizen
of India under sub-section (/) of section 7A, until such application is disposed
of by the Central Government.";

(0) in sub-section (2) for the word "person", the words "citizen of India" shall be

substituted,
Omission of 10. Sections |] and 12 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
sections 11
and 12.
Amendment 11. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words and figures "sections 5 and 6", the
of section 14. words, figures and letter "sections 5, 6 and 7A" shall be substituted.
Insertion of 12. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
new section —_ pamely:—
14a
Issue of "14A. (1) The Central Government may compulsorily register every citizen of
national India and issue national identity card to him,

identity cards.
(2) The procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of
India, the form and manner of making application, the documents and other evidence

s

lo

rs

as

3०

us



7

by which such application shall be accompanied and the fees payable in respect of
ational identity card and other details shall be such as

लक कल आम iil

such application, the form of
may be prescribed.”

13. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, Insertion of
F |? > iS

डॉ namely:- new section

, 158

"15A. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Central Government, Review.
may within thirty days from the date of such order, make an application for review of
such order:
Provided that the Central Government may entertain application after the expiry
to of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by
sufficient cause from making the application in time.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (/), the Central Government
shall, make such order as it deems fit, and the decision of the Central Government on

such review shall be final.”.

Amendment

sa 14. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
of section 17

(a) for the words "six months", the words "five years" shall be substituted;

(6) for the words "with fine", the words "with fine which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

la MB: satan tebe eins

Amendment

15. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
of section 18

ao (i) in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —

"(aa) the form and manner in which a declaration under sub-section
(7) of section 4 shall be made;";

(0) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —

aS "(ia) the procedure to be followed in compulsory enrolment of a
citizen of India, the form and manner for making applications, the documents
and other evidence by which such application shall be accompanied and >
the fees payable in respect of such application, the form of national citizenship
identity card and other details, under sub-section (2) of section 14A;";

|
|

30 (ii) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

"Provided that any rule made in respect of a matter specified in clause (ia)
of sub-section (2) may provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.".

3s" 16. The First Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of
First
Schedule
17. For the Second Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substitution
| substituted, namely:— of Second
H Schedule by a
H “THE SECOND SCHEDULE new
| [See sections 5(2), 6(2) and 7A(2)] Schedule
| 40 OATH OF ALLEGIANCE
I

1, AB. ..do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will bear true faith and allegiance
to the Constitution of India as by law established, and that I will faithfully observe the laws
of India and fulfil my duties as a citizen of India.

ie



=|
of Third
Schedule.

७ Insertion of
new Fourth
Schedule.

i]

I, A/B.. .......do solemnly affirm ( or swear) that I will bear true faith and allegiance
to the Constitution of India as by law established, and that | will faithfully observe the laws
of India and fulfil my duties as an overseas citizen of India."

18. In the Third Schedule to the principal Act,—-

(a) in the opening portion, the words "who is not a citizen of a country specified
in the First Schedule" shall be omitted;

(8) in clause (0), for the words "he has renounced the citizenship of that country
in accordance with the law therein in force in that behalf and has notified such
renunciation to the Central Government", the words "he undertakes to renounce the
citizenship of that country in the event of his application for Indian citizenship being
accepted" shall be substituted;

(c) in clause (d),—

(2) for the words "twelve years", the words "fourteen years" shall be
substituted;

(ii) for the words "nine years", the words "eleven years" shall be
substituted;

(d) in the proviso, in clause (ii), for the words "thirteen years", the words "fifteen
years" shall be substituted.

19. After the Third Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be
inserted, namely:—

"THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
_ [See section 2(/)(gg)]
1. Australia.
2. Canada.
3. Finland.
4. Treland.
5. Italy.
6. Netherlands.
7. United Kingdom.
8. United States of America.".

ioe

2o

ay

|
|;
i
|
|



|
|

Act, 1955 which provides for the acquisition of ¢ ship, after the
stration, naturalisation and in.

The Citize:
mencement of the Constitution by birth, descent,
poration of territory under certain circumstances, and also provides for the termination
and deprivation of citizenship, was among those 109 Ceniral Acts identified for a review by
the Commission on Review of Administrative Laws constituted by the Central Government
under the Chairmanship of Shri P.C. Jain in 1998. Subsequently, the High Level Committee
on Indian Diaspora constituted by the Central Government, inter alia, recommended the
amendment of this Act to provide for the grant of dual citizenship to persons of Indian
origin belonging to certain specified countries. The Central Government has accordingly
decided to make provisions for the grant of dual citizenship and has taken the opportunity
of introducing a scheme for the compulsory registration of every citizen of India, and for
this purpose to issue national identity cards.

2. The above objects are proposed to be achieved, inter alia, by amending provisions
of the Citizenship Act so as to—

(6) make acquisition of Indian citizenship by registration and naturalisation
more stringent;

(ii) prevent illegal migrants from becoming eligible for Indian citizenship;

(iii) simplify the procedure to facilitate the Te-acquisition of Indian citizenship by
persons of full age who are children of Indian citizens, and former citizens of indepen-
dent India;

(iv) provide for the grant of overseas citizenship of India to persons of Indian
origin belonging to specified countries, and Indian citizens who choose to acquire
the citizenship of any of these countries at a later date;

(v) provide for the compulsory registration and issue of a national identity card
to all citizens of India;

(vi) enhance the penalty for violation of its provisions, as well as the rules
framed under it; and

(vii) to omit all provisions recognizing, or relating to the Commonwealth citi-
zenship from the Act.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Dest, L.K. ADVANI.
The 7th May, 2003.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 of the Citizenship Act, 1955(hereafter
referred to as the Act) relating to citizenship by descent. The said amendment, inter alia,
empowers the Central Government to lay down, by rules, the form and manner in which
registration of birth at an Indian consulate shall be made and the form and manner of
declaration by parents for registration of births of children at such consulates.

2, Clause 5 seeks to amend section 5 of the Act relating to citizenship by registration.
The proposed sub-section (1) of section 5 empowers the Central Government to make rules
laying down the conditions and restrictions to register as a citizen of India any person who
is not an illegal migrant.

3. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 7A, 7B, 7C and 7D in the Act
relating to overseas citizenship of India. Sub-section (1) of proposed new section 7A em-
powers the Central Government to prescribe, by rules, the conditions and restrictions for
making application by certain categories of persons for registration as “overseas citizen of
India”. .

4. Proposed new section 7C empowers the Central Government to make rules relating
to the manner of declaration of renouncing overseas citizenship of India.

5. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend section 8 of the Act relating to renunciation of
citizenship, inter alia, to empower the Central Government to lay down by rules, the form
and manner of making declarations by children on attaining full age for resumption of
Indian citizenship.

6, Clause’ 12 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 14A in the Act relating to issue
of national identity cards to all citizens of India. Under new section 14A the Central
Government may make rules to lay down the procedure for compulsory registration of
citizens of India, the form and manner in which such applications may be made and the
documents, other particulars and fee which may accompany such applications.

7, The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the aforesaid provisions
are generally matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not possible to provide
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

10

|



4
4
ql
a

ANNEXURE,
HE Ciizensuip Act, 1955
(57 oF 1955)

2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

Interpretation

(a) “a Government in India” means the Central Government or a State Govern-
ment;

(2) “citizen” in relation to a country specified in the First Schedule, means a
person who under the citizenship or nationality law for the time being in force in
that country, is a citizen or national of that country;

(०) “citizenship or nationality law”, in relation toa country specified in the First
Schedule, means an enactment of the legislature of that country which at the
request of the Government of that country, the Central Government may, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, have declared to be an enactment making provi-

sion for the citizenship or nationality of that country:

Provided that no such notification shall be issued in relation to the Union of
South Africa except with the previous approval of both Houses of Parliament;

(“Indian consulate” means the office of any consular officer of the Govern-
ment of India where a register of births is kept, or where there is no such office,

such office as may be prescribed;

(2) “minor” means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;

(/) “person” does not include any company or association or body of individu-
als, whether incorporated or not;

(g ) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(A) “undivided India” means India as defined in the Government of India Act,
1935 as originally enacted.

ACQUSITION OF CITIZENSHIP
3. (7) except as provided in sub-section (2), every person born in India, -

(a) on or after the 26th day of January.

, 1950, but before the commencement of
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1986; .

(4) on or after such commencement and either of whose parents is a citizen of
India at the time of his birth;

shall be a citizen of India by birth.
(2) A person shall not be such a citizen by virtue of this section if at the time of his

birth —

(a) his father possesses such immunity from suits and legal process as is
accorded to any envoy of a foreign sovereign power accredited to the President of
India and is not a citizen of India; or

Citizenship by
birth



“| by
descent.

Citizenship by
registration.

12

(0) his father is an enemy alien and the birth occurs in a place then under
occupation by the enemy.
4, (1) A person born outside India,—

(a) on or after the 26th January, 1950 but before the commencement of the

Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1992, shall be a citizen of India by descent if his
father is a citizen of India at the time of his birth; or

(b) on or after such commencement, shall be a citizen of India by descent if
either of his parents is a citizen of India at the time of his birth:

Provided that if the father of such a person referred to in clause (a) was a citizen
of India by descent only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of
this section unless—

(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its
occurrence or the commencement of this Act, whichever is later, or, with the
permission of the Central Government, after the expiry of the said period; or

(8) his father is, at the time of his birth, in service under a Government in
India:
Provided further that if either of the parents of such a person referred to in
clause (b) was a citizen of India by descent only, that person shall not be a citizen
of India by virtue of this section unless -

(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its
occurrence or the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1992,
whichever is later, or with the permission of the Central Government, after the
expiry of the said period; or

(6) either of his parents is, at the time of his birth, in service under a Gov-
ernment in India.

5. (J) Subject to the provisions of this section and such condition and restrictions
as may be prescribed, the prescribed authority may, on application made in this behalf,
register as a citizen of India any person who is not already such citizen by virtue of the
Constitution or by virtue of any of the other provisions of this Act and belongs to any
of the following categories:—

(a) persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in India and have
been resident for five years immediately before making an application for regis-
tration;

(b) persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in any country or place
outside undivided India;

(c) persons who are, or have been, married to citizens of India and are ordinarily
resident in India and have been so resident for five years immediately before
making भी application for registration;

(व) minor children of persons who are citizens of India; and

(e) persons of full age and capacity who are citizens of a country specified in
the First Schedule:

Provided that in prescribing the conditions and restrictions subject to which
persons of any such country may be registered as citizens of India under this
clause, the Central Government shall have due regard to the conditions subject to
which citizens of India may, by law or practice of that country, become citizens of
that country by registration.

39 of 1992.

39 of 1992.

a

E
|
|
i



992

13

Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub Section, a person shall be deemed
in if he, or either of } 3 parents, was born in undivided India.

to be of Indian orig

6. (1) Where an application is made in the prescribed manner by any person of full
age and capacity who is not a citizen of a country specified in the First Schedule for the
grant of a certificate of naturalisation to him, the Central Government may, if satisfied
that the applicant is qualified for naturalisation under the provisions of the Third
Schedule, grant to him a certificate of naturalisation:

Provided that, if in the opinion of the Central Government, the applicant is a person
who has rendered distinguished service to the cause of science, philosophy, art, litera-
ture, world peace or human Progress generally, it may waive all or any of the conditions
specified in the Third Schedule.

* * * * *

TERMINATION OF CITIZENSHIP

8. (/) Ifany citizen of India of full age and capacity, who is also a citizen or national
of another country, makes in the prescribed manner a declaration renouncing his Indian
citizenship the declaration shall be registered by the prescribed authority; and, upon
such registration, that Person shall cease to be a citizen of India:

Provided that if any such declaration is made during any war in which India may be
engaged, registration thereof shall be withheld until the Central Government otherwise
directs,

(2) Where a person ceases to be a citizen of India under sub-section (1) every minor
child of that person shall thereupon cease to be a citizen of India:

Provided that any such child may, within one year after attaining full age, make a
declaration that he wishes to Tesume Indian citizenship and shall thereupon again
become a citizen of India,

(3) For the Purposes of this section, any woman who is, or has been, married shall
be deemed to be of full age.

9. (7) Any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registration or otherwise voluntar-
ily acquires, or has at any time between the 26th January, 1950 and the commencement
of this Act voluntarily acquired, the citizenship of another country shall, upon such
acquisition or, as the case may be, such commencement, cease to be a citizen of India:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a citizen of India who,
during any war in which India may be engaged, voluntarily acquires the citizenship of
another country, until-the Central Government otherwise directs.

(2) If any question arises as to whether, when or how any person has acquired the
citizenship of another country, it shall be determined by such authority, in such manner,
and having regard to such rules of evidence, as may be prescribed in this behalf.

* * * * *
SUPPLEMENTAL

11. Every person who is a citizen of a Commonwealth country specified in the First
Schedule shall, by virtue of that citizenship, have the status of a Commonwealth citizen
in India.

Citizenship by
aaturalisation

Renunciation
of citizenship

Termination
of citizenship.

Common
wealth
citizenship.



Power to
confer rights
of Indian
citizen on
citizens of
certain
countries.

Disposal of
application
under sections
5 and 6.

Offences.

Power to make
rules.

14

12. (/) The Central Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, make
provisions on a basis of reciprocity for the conferment of all or any of the rights of
citizen of India on the citizens of any county specified in the First Schedule.

(2) Any order made under sub-section (/) shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any law other than the Constitution of India
or this Act.

+ * * * *

14. (1) The prescribed authority or the Central Government may in its discretion,
grant or refuse an application under section 5 or section 6 and shall not be required to
assign reasons for such grant or refusal.

(2) Subject to the provisions of section 15 the decision of the prescribed
authority or the Central Government on any such application as aforesaid shall be
final and shall not be called in question in any court.

* * * * *

17. Any person who, for the purpose of procuring anything to be done or not to be
done under this Act, knowingly makes any representation which is false in a material
particular shall be punishable with’ imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.

18. (1)* के * * *

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for: —

* a * * *

(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Government may provide that
breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.



THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(1)(b) and 5(1)(०)]

wise

“ommonwealth countr

A. The following

: 1. United Kingdom.

| 2. Canada.

3. Commonwealth of Australia.

4. New Zealand.

5. Union.of South Africa.

6. Pakistan.

7. Ceylon.

8. Federation of Rhodesia and Nayasaland.

9. Ghana.

ee i
et oe

10. Federation of Malaya.
11. Singapore.

‘ne मम

B. The Republic of Ireland.

Explanation:— In this Schedule, ‘‘United Kingdom’’ means the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, and includes the Channel Islands, the Isle of man and all
Colonies; and ‘Commonwealth of Australia’ includes the territories of Papua and the terri-

tory of Norfolk Island.



THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 5(2) and 6(2)}

OATH OF ALLEGIANCE

LAB... . do solemnly affirm (or swear) that | will bear true faith and allegiance
to the Constitution of India as by law established, and that I will faithfully observe the laws
of India and fulfil my duties as a citizen of India.



eee

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See sections 6(1)]
INS FOR NATURALISATION

QUALIFICS

The qualifications for naturalisation of a person who is noi a citizen of acountry specified
in the First Schedule are—

(a) that he is not a subject or citizen of any country where citizens of India are prevented
by law or practice of that country from becoming subjects or citizens of that country by
naturalisation;

(b) that ifhe is a citizen of any country, he has renounced the citizenship of that country
in accordance with the law therein in force in that behalf and has notified such renunciation
to the Central Government;

(c) that he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in India or
partly the one and partly the other, throughout the period of twelve months immediately
preceding the date of the application;

(d) that during the twelve years immediately preceding the said period of twelve months,
he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in India, or partly the one
and partly the other, for periods amounting in the aggregate to not less than nine years;

(e) that he is of a good character;

(0 that he has an adequate knowledge of a language specified in the Bighth Schedule to
the Constitution; and

(g) that in the event of a certificate of naturalisation being granted to him, he intends to
reside in India, or to enter into or continue in, service under a Government in India or under
an international organization of which India is a member or under a society, company cr body
of persons established in India:

Provided that the Central Government may, if in the special circumstances of any particular

case it thinks fit,—

(i) allow a continuous period of twelve months ending not more than six months before
the date of the application to be reckoned, for the purposes of clause (c) above, as it had
immediately preceded that date;

(ii) allow periods of residence or service earlier than thirteen years before the date of the
application to be reckoned in computing the aggregate mentioned in clause (d) above.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955

(Shri L.K. Advani, Deputy Prime Minister)

MGIPMRND—1034RS—8-5-2003.