AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. XXXIX of 2024 
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
 to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya  Sanhita, 2023. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth year of t he Republic of India as 
follows:—
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (Amendment) Act,
2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
45 of 2023. 2. In section 63 of the Bharatiya Nyaya  Sanhita 2023, for Exception 2, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
Amendment of 
section 63. 
10 
"Exception 2.—The fact of a subsisting marriage of the accused and the
victim shall not be treated as a mitigating factor for the offence under this
section."

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 63 of the Bharatiya Nyaya  Sanhita 2023, the offence of 
rape provides for an exception —'Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man 
with his own wife, the wife not being under  eighteen years of age, is not rape ’. 
The 42nd Report of the Law Commission (1971) suggested the removal of this 
exception. The Indian Penal Code, 1860 was amended in the year 1983 to 
criminalise spousal rape during the period of judicial separation, as suggested 
by the 84 th Law Commission Report. However, the exception of martial rape 
still remained. 
Article 2 of the Declaration of the Elimination of Violence against 
Women includes marital rape unequivocally in the definition of violence 
against women. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) Committee also suggested that 
India should 'widen the definition of rape in its Penal Code to reflect the 
realities of sexual abuse experienced by women and to remove the exception of 
marital rape from the definition of rape'. Inspired by this, the Justice Verma 
Committee recommended deleting the exception. Apart from being a moral 
obligation, incorporation of such international treaties is prescribed in Article 
253 of the Constitution of India. In addition, article 51 requires that the State 
should endeavour to promote international peace and security, maintain good 
relations with other nations, and respect international law. Under both these 
articles, it is a mandate that the Legislature removes this exception. 
The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 
(PWDVA) did not criminalise marital rape but recognised it as a form of 
domestic violence, providing a first step towards criminalisation. The marital 
rape exception is antithetical to the Right to Life and Personal Liberty provided 
under article 21 of the Indian Constitution , which states that 'No person shall 
be deprived of his life and personal liberty except according to the procedure 
established by law'. Through the course of time, the Supreme Court has 
expanded the Right to Life beyond a mere literal protection of life and liberty. 
It includes a dignified life, safe living conditions, a woman's right to her 
reproductive choices, and privacy. Thus, there is a need to remove the 
exception of marital rape from the offence of rape. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 DEREK O' BRIEN 

3 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BHARATIYA NYAYA  SANHITA, 2023 
(45 OF 2023) 
 *         *  * *  * *  *          *    
63. *              *            *           *              *
Exception 2.–– Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his
own wife, the wife not being under eighteen years of age, is not
rape.
 *         *  * *  * *  *          

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 
(Shri Derek O' Brien, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—033—10.02.2025