THE DALIT, BACKWARD AND OPPRESSED YOUTH
(DEVELOPMENT AND WELFARE) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive national policy
for ensuring overall development of the dalit youth belonging to Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and those from other Backward Classes and oppressed
categories from the religious and linguistic minorities and for their
welfare to be undertaken by the State and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dalit Backward and Oppressed Youth (Development
and Welfare) Act, 2010.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH AUGUST, 2010
Bill No. XXXII of 2010

2
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "backward" means those youth who belong to castes which have been
declared, by notification in the Official Gazette, as backward by the appropriate
Government from time to time;
(c) "dalit youth" means the youth belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes;
(d) "oppressed youth" means the youth who have been cruelly or unjustly
treated in the society due to faith or religion, caste or creed or language or have been
oppressed with poverty as such;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "youth" means any person who has attained the age of eighteen years but is
not above the age of thirty-five years.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a comprehensive
national policy for the overall development and welfare of the dalit, backward and oppressed
youth of the nation for implementation throughout the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of
Section 3, the national policy referred to therein may provide for;
(a) free higher education, including medical, technical and information
technology;
(b) free coaching training for admission to management courses with assured
admission in management institutes of repute;
(c) books, stationery, equipment and educational, gadgets free of cost;
(d) scholarships in deserving cases;
(e) hostel facilities free of cost;
(f) free public transport facilities;
(g) monthly pocket expenses allowances at such rate as may be prescribed;
(h) free entertainment facilities;
(i) free access to all libraries and technical institutions;
(j) training in sports to every eligible youth covered under this Act and facilities
and appropriate incentives to participate in sports activities, events and tournaments
in and outside the country;
(k) provision for free of cost healthy and nutritious meals to all the student
youth covered under this Act in the schools, colleges, universities, hostels and technical
institutions;
(l) free medical and healthcare;
(m) providing modern apprenticeship in business, trade, vocation etc., in factories
and commercial establishments;
(n) providing military training to physically fit youth covered under this Act and
those successfully completing training to be given preference for recruitment in defence
services;
(o) free of cost coaching and study material for all India Services and other
competitive examinations which are conducted by UPSC, State Public Service
Definitions
National
policy for the
dalit backward
and oppressed
youth.

3
Commissions and other examination bodies such as of Railways, Banks Staff Selection
Commission and other bodies of the Government at the Centre, States and Union
Territories;
(p) such other facilities, incentives and welfare measures as may be prescribed
from time to time.
4. It shall be the duty of every appropriate Government to implement in letter and
spirit the national policy formulated under this Act.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force the
appropriate Government shall provide gainful employment to the youth covered under this
Act as per their ability and qualification after completing their education or training, as the
case may be, and in case that Government fails to provide them employment, the youth shall
be paid unemployment allowance on monthly basis at such rate as may be prescribed by the
Central Government until they are given gainful employment.
6.  (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of expert committees in
the capital of every State and Union Territories and in every district as it may deem necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act comprising renowned educationists and
psychologists and others to recommend some trade or vacation related education or training
to be imparted to the youth covered under this Act after passing their Secondary or
Matriculation examination.
(2) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of youth hostels on the
lines of international youth hostels at conspicuous places in the country for the youth
covered under this Act as it may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The appropriate Government shall promote youth cooperatives at villages and
district levels for establishing their village industries ventures, dairy projects, food
processing, poultry, fair price shops, LPG distribution, etc. and provide requisite financial
assistance and guidance to them for procuring raw materials and promoting marketing, etc.
(4) The appropriate Government shall ensure the availability of requisite credit at
nominal rate of interest from the Banks and other Financial Institutions to the youth covered
under this Act for their self employment projects.
(5) The appropriate Government shall extend such welfare measures to the youth
covered under this Act as that Government may deem appropriate and necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
national
policy.
Employment
and
unemployment
allowance.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to
make rules.

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The youth are the strength of a strong nation and are capable of substantially
influencing polity. In the recent times, the youth have transformed some monarchies into
Republics by overthrowing monarchial power. As such, the youth are always at the centre
Stage of socio-political activities of every country and similar is the position in our nation.
To maintain this strength a clear cut youth policy is required to rid the youth of problems
relating to education, poverty, nutrition, employment opportunities, self employment,
vocational training, health, sports, etc. The country at present has no institutional mechanism
to harness the potential of our youth and channelise their energy for the betterment of the
country. The plight of the youth belonging to dalit Communities such as Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes (OBCs) who have been oppressed for
centuries is even worse. Even today the dalit youth have to face social ostracisation though
thanks to the reservation policy propounded and given by the messiah of the dalits
Babasaheb B.R. Ambedkar many of them have made some progress but the dalit youth still
require special attention because there is a need to instill a sense of belonging among the
dalit, backward and oppressed youth of the nation by providing them all opportunities for
their overall development so that they too contribute to the progress of the country to their
full potential. The facilities and opportunities should be provided as a matter of right. Good
education should be their right and it should not be a privilege of the elite only. Employment
needs to be guaranteed to them and if employment opportunity is not provided they have
to be given unemployment allowance. They have to be linked directly with the production
processes by eliminating the disparities between the rural and urban dalit youth. For this a
comprehensive national policy for the dalit backward and oppressed youth should be in
place to ensure their all round development which is the need of the hour and an absolute
necessity. The state has to extend welfare measures for them and enable them to fight
against fanaticism, fundamentalism and separatism.
Hence this Bill.
AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a national policy for the dalit, backward and oppressed
youth under which various facilities are to be provided to such youth. Clause 5 provides for
employment opportunities and payment of unemployment allowance by the Government.
Clause 7 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds to carry
out the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible at present to quantify the funds that may
involve but it is estimated that a sum of rupee thirty thousand crores may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupee twenty thousand crores may also
involve for creating assets and infrastructure.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3868RS(S3)—13-08-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive national policy
for ensuring overall development of the dalit youth belonging to Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and those from other Backward Classes and oppressed
categories from the religious and linguistic minorities and for their
welfare to be undertaken by the State and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)