AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXXIV of 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

5 2. In Part III of the Constitution, after article 28 and before the heading “Cultural
and Educational Rights”, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

“284A. The State shall have equal respect for all religions.”.

3. In Part III of the Constitution, after article 35, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—

10 “35A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—

(a) Parliament may, by law, provide that any association or body of individuals
be banned, if it, by words, either spoken or writeen, or by signs or by visible
representations or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote disharmony or feellings
of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different classes of citizens of India—

15 (i on ground of religion; or
(ii) on grounds of race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or
community;,

(b) the law referred to in clause (a) may make provisions for the forfeiture of

Short title and
commence-
ment.

Insertion of
new article
28A.

State to have
equal respect
for all
religions.

Insertion of
new article
35A.
Legislation to
declare certain
associations as
banned on
certain
grounds.


Amendment of
article 102.

Amendment of
article 191.

Amendment of
article 226.

Amendment of

Schedule.

2

property, movable or immovable, of the banned association or union and such other
incidental or‘consequential provisions as Parliament may think fit;

(c) the Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have jurisdiction
in respect of any matter arising under the law referred to in clause (a).”.

4. In article 102 of the Constitution, in clause (7), after sub-clause (d), the following
sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

“(da) if he, after making and subscribing the oath or affirmation in accordance
with the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule for election to Parliament,
makes use of religion, including religious symbols, for the purposes of the said
election;

(db) if he promotes or attempts to promote feelings of enmity or hatred or ill-
will between different classes of citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste,
community or language;”.

5. In article 191 of the Constitution, in clause (/), after sub-clause (d), the following
sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

“(da) if hé, after making and subscribing the oath or affirmation in accordance with
the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule for election to the Legislature of a
State, makes use of religion, including religious symbols, for the purposes of the said
election;

(db) if he promotes or attempts to promote feelings of enmity or hatred or ill-will
between different clases of citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community
or language;”.

6. In article 226 of the Constitution, in clause (/), after the word and figures “article
32”, the words, brackets, letters and figures but subject to the provisions of clause (c) of
article 35A,” shall be inserted.

7. In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 257 and before the
Explanation, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—

“258. The Religious Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988 (Central Act 41
of 1988).”.

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Constitution provided for the establishment of a secular State for the governance
of the country. This principle was reaffirmed by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976, by which the word ‘secular’ was incorporated in the Preamble to the Constitution.

2. Despite the safeguards provided in the Constitution, communalism is taking roots
and unless effective measures are urgently taken to curb it, it may become a threat to the
secular and democratic ideals on which our society is based.

3. It has, therefore, become necessary to further amend the Constitution—
(a) to provide that the State shall have respect for all religions;

(b) to confer power on Parliament to ban any association or body of individuals
if it promotes or attempts to promote disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-
will between different classes of citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, place
of birth, residence, language, caste or community;

(c) to provide in articles 102 and 191 that making use of religion, including
religious symbols, for the purpose of getting elected to Parliament or to State
Legislature or promoting or attempting to promote feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-
will between different classes of citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste,
community or language would be a ground for disqualification;

(d) to amend the Ninth Schedule to include therein the Religious Institutions
(Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988;

(०) to make certain consegential amendments in article 226.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

EDUARDO FALERIO


Power of High
Courts to issue
certain writs.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *

226. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 32 every High Court shall have power,
throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any
person or authority, including in appropriate cases, ay Government, within those territo-
Ties directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus,
prohibition, guo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of
the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Eduardo Falerio, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2109RS—5.8.1998.