AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XXXIV of 2025 
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT 
 BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act,
2025. 
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 Amendment of  
section 29. 
2. In section 29 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), for the words “National Board”, the word “Board”
shall be substituted.
53 of 1972. 
Amendment of 
section 33. 
3. In section 33 of the Principal Act, after the words “as per the guidelines
issued by the Central Government”, the words “after ratification by the
Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States” shall be inserted.
5 
Amendment of 
section 43. 
4. In section 43 of the Principal Act, in the proviso to sub -section (2), for the
words “Central Government”, the words “State Government” shall be
substituted.
Amendment of 
section 62. 
Declaration of 
certain wild 
animal species as 
vermin. 
5. For section 62 of the Principal Act, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“62. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, is 
satisfied that any wild animal species, not specified in Schedule I, has 
become a threat to human life or property, or is causing substantial 
damage to crops, livestock, or other means of livelihood, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare such wild animal species 
as vermin for such specified area and for such period as may be 
specified in the notification; 
         Provided that during the period for which such notification is in 
force, the provisions of this Act shall not apply to the specified wild 
animal species within the area so specified: 
         Provided further that the Central or the State Government, as 
the case may be, issuing such notification shall periodically review 
the situation and may, by a subsequent notification in the Official 
Gazette, withdraw the declaration if i
t is satisfied that the 
circumstances warranting such declaration no longer exists.” 
10 
1
5 
20 
25 
Insertion of new 
section 62A. 
Special provision 
for declaration of 
individual 
Schedule I 
animal as vermin 
in exceptional 
cases. 
6. After section 62 of the Principal Act, the following new sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
“62AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and in 
addition to the powers conferred upon the Chief Wild Life Warden 
under clause (a)  of sub -section (1) of section 11, where the  State 
Government is satisfied that an individual wild animal belonging to 
any of the species specified in Schedule I is, due to repeated and 
verifiable intrusion into human habitation, posing a persistent and 
grave threat to human life, or has caused loss of life or serious injury 
to any person, it may, by order in writing, declare such individual wild 
animal as vermin for the purposes of this Act and may also authorize 
any person to capture or destroy such animal in such manner as may 
be prescribed; 
         Provided that such order shall apply only to the specific 
individual wild animal identified through physical markings, 
tracking, or other reliable means, and shall not extend to the species 
as a whole. 
30 
35 
40 
Wildlife Conflict 
Mitigation Fund 
and special 
measures for 
States facing 
acute human-
wildlife conflict. 
62AB. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be called the Wildlife Conflict Mitigation 
Fund for the purpose of supporting proactive and reactive measures to 
reduce human-wildlife conflict and there shall be credited thereto such 
sums of money, as the Central Government may consider necessary, 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf.  
(2) The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government and
managed by the Central Government in consultation with the State
Governments, in such manner as may be prescribed.
45 
50 

3 
5 
1
0 
15 
(3) Where a State Government, based on the data and recorded fatalities or
property damage, is satisfied that it is facing acute human-wildlife conflict
scenarios, it may submit a detailed proposal to the Central Government
seeking special financial assistance to effectively tackle and manage such
scenarios.
(4) Upon due consideration and verification of the detailed proposal
received from the State Government under sub -section (3), the Central
Government shall allocate appropriate funds from the Wildlife Conflict
Mitigation Fund to the concerned State Government,  for the following
purposes, but not limited to –
(a) implementation of scientific and eco -sensitive fencing and
boundary protection measures;
(b) payment of compensation to affected persons or families ;
(c) translocation, rescue, and rehabilitation operations ;
(d) community-based conflict mitigation and sensitisation
programmes; and
(e) such other measures as may be prescribed for reducing human -
wildlife conflict."

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 [Act No. 53 of 1972], was enacted as a 
seminal legislative instrument to safeguard wild animals, birds, and plants, and to 
promote ecological and environmental security across the nation. Over the decades, 
it has played a pivotal role in the preservation of India’s biodiversity. However, the 
evolving dynamics of human habitation, expanding forest cover, etc. have given 
rise to significant challenges. In particular, States with dense forests and adjoining 
human settlements, such as Kerala, are facing a mounting crisis owing to the 
frequent and often fatal encounters between humans and wildlife, which necessitate 
a calibrated legislative response that upholds both ecological protection and human 
safety. 
 Official data paints a sobering picture. In the past five years alone, elephants 
have caused 2,869 human deaths nationwide, while tigers were responsible for 378 
fatalities. These figures exclude those resulting from attacks by other species such 
as wild boars. In Kerala, 555 human lives were lost to wildlife encounters between 
2019–20 and 2023– 24. Additionally, the State recorded 4,527 cases of human 
injuries arising from such conflicts between 2020 and 2024. The staggering toll on 
human life and liveliho ods underscores the urgent necessity for a responsive and 
decentralised legal framework that empowers State authorities to act swiftly and 
effectively. 
The crisis is exacerbated by a parallel trend - the steady expansion of forest 
cover across the country.  According to the India State of Forest Report (ISFR), 
India’s forest cover has grown from 6,92,027 sq. km . in 2011 to 7,15,343 sq. km. 
in 2023, registering an increase of 23,316 sq. km . over a decade. Kerala alone 
witnessed an increase from 19,278 sq. km. in 2015 to 21,253 sq. km. in 2021. This 
growth has also intensified the interface between wild habitats and human 
habitations, particularly in geographies like Kerala where human settlements 
closely adjoin forested tracts, making this boundary increasingly vol atile and 
dangerous. 
 Many amendments have been incorporated into the parent Act by the  Wild 
Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2022.  Clause 11 of the Amendment Act altered 
section 29 to eliminate the requirement for State Governments to consult their State 
Boards for Wildlife before authorising interventions within sanctuaries, replacing 
it with mandatory consultation with the National Board for Wildlife. Clause 27 of 
the Amendment Act, meanwhile, conferred exclusive powers upon the Central 
Government to regulate the transfer of captive elephants, despite the fact that such 
transfers require local contextual understanding. 
These amendments apparently constrain the States’ ability to exercise 
administrative discretion in matters that are inherently local, eco logical, and 
situational—thus severely impairing their capacity to respond to human- animal 
conflict in real time.   
Under the existing framework, only the Central Government has the authority 
to declare animals as vermin under section 62, regardless of the  severity of the 
threat posed in a particular State. This Bill proposes to empower the Central and 
State Governments to declare wild animal species, other than those listed in 
Schedule I, as vermin for specified periods and areas. It also seeks to introduc e a 
new provision to enable the identification and destruction of individual Schedule I 
animals that pose a persistent and grave threat to human life. These measures are 
proposed with robust safeguards and accountability mechanisms to ensure they are 
exercised judiciously and only in exceptional circumstances. 
Further, this Bill calls for the institutionalisation of financial assistance from 
the Central Government to support States facing acute human- wildlife conflict. 
This includes provisions for a dedicat ed Wildlife Conflict Mitigation Fund to 
finance scientific fencing, translocation and community awareness programmes, 
and compensation schemes. 

5 
This Bill, therefore, aims to: 
• Uphold the primacy of cooperative federalism in wildlife
governance by  enhanc ing the decision -making authority of State 
Governments and State Boards; 
• Empower States to respond swiftly to escalating human -wildlife
conflict; 
• Ensure equitable treatment of all States under the law by
providing clear and uniform provisions for declaring vermin; 
• Decentralise wildlife conflict resolution by empowering States to
declare non-Schedule I species as vermin in specified contexts; 
• Introduce a speedy legal mechanism for States to act against
individual Schedule I animals that endanger human lives; 
• Provide institutional and financial support through Central
assistance for mitigation and management efforts for States experiencing 
acute human-animal conflict situations; 
• To vest State Governments with the authority to regulate the
transfer of captive elephants; and 
• Restore the balance between ecological protection and th e
imperatives of human safety and livelihood protection. 
 This Bill, thus, endeavours to harmonise the goals of wildlife conservation 
with the constitutional princ iples of federal governance and the pressing need for 
human safety. It is not an antithesis to conservation, but rather, it affirms that 
conservation is most meaningful when it ensures the protection of both wildlife and 
human lives and livelihoods. 
 The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 
     JOHN BRITTAS. 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
     Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a dedicated Wildlife Conflict 
Mitigation Fund, to support scientific and eco- sensitive fencing and boundary 
protection measures; compensation to affected persons or families; translocation, 
rescue, and rehabilitation operations; communi ty-based conflict mitigation and 
sensitisation programmes; and such other measures as may be prescribed for 
reducing human- wildlife conflict, to which the Central Government shall credit 
such sums of money, as it may consider necessary, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf. 
     The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the actual 
recurring or non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved.  

7 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972 
(53 OF 1972) 
*                   *            *          *                 *  
29. No person shall destroy, exploit or remove any wild life including forest produce
from a sanctuary or destroy or damage or divert the habitat of any wild animal b y
any act whatsoever or divert, stop or enhance the flow of water into or outside the
sanctuary, except under and in accordance with a permit granted by the Chief Wild
Life Warden, and no such permit shall be granted unless the State Government
being satisfied in consultation with the National Board that such removal of wild
life from the sanctuary or the change i n the flow of water into or outside the
sanctuary is necessary for the improvement and better management of wild life
therein, authorises the issue of such permit:
Destruction, etc., 
in a sanctuary 
prohibited 
without a permit. 
*                               *                               *                            *                             *
2 of 2007. 
33. The Chief Wild Life Warden shall be the authority who shall control, manage and
protect all sanctuaries in accordance with such management plans for the sanctuary
approved by him as per the guidelines issued by the Central Government and in
case the sanctu ary also falls under the Scheduled Areas or areas where th e
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006   is applicable, in accordance with the management plan for such
sanctuary prepared after due consul tation with the Gram Sabha concerned and for
that purpose, within the limits of any sanctuary,—
*                               *                               *                            *                             *
Control of 
sanctuaries. 
43. (1) No person having in his possession captive animal, animal article, trophy or
uncured trophy in respect of which he has a certificate of ownership shall transfer
by way of sale or offer for sale or by any other mode of consideration of commercial
nature, such animal or article or trophy or uncured trophy.
(2) Where a person transfers or transports from the State in which he resides t o
another State or acquires by transfer from outside the State, any such animal, animal 
article, trophy or uncured trophy i
n respect of which he has a certificate of
ownership, he shall, within thirty days of the transfer or transport, report the transfer 
or transport to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer within whose
jurisdiction the transfer or transport is effected.
Provided that the transfer or transport of a captive elephant for a religious or any 
other purpose by a person having a valid certificate of ownership shall be subject to 
such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
*                   *            *          *                 * 
Regulation of 
transfer of 
animal, etc. 
62. The Central Government may, by notification, declare any wild animal specified in
Schedule II to be vermin for any area and for such period as may be specified therein 
and so long as such notification is in force, such wild animal shall be deemed not 
to be included in Schedule II for such area and for such period as specifi ed in the 
notification. 
*                   *            *          *                 *  
Declaration of 
certain wild 
animals to be 
vermin. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
____________ 
(Dr. John Brittas, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–317–08.12.2025 