Bill No.  XXXI  of  2016
THE SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for the segregation and re-cycling of municipal solid waste, use of  re-cyclable
waste in waste-energy plants for generation of energy and transportation of
non-recyclable waste into landfills and for matters connected therewith
 or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Solid Waste Management Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “large manufacturing facility” means any manufacturing facility with an
investment of more than rupees twenty crore;
Short title,
extent and
Commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH AUGUST, 2016

2
(c) “municipal authority” means Municipal corporation, Municipal committee,
Municipality, Nagar Palika, Nagar Nigam, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council including
Notified Area Committee or any other local body constituted under the relevent statutes
and entrusted with the responsibility of management and handling of municipal solid
wastes;
(d) “segregation” means separation of municipal solid wastes into organic,
inorganic, bio-degradable, non-biodegradable, recyclable and non-recyclable waste
and hazardous wastes;
(e) “waste-energy plants” means plants where solid waste is treated using
different techniques to produce any form of energy; and
(f) “waste generating unit” means any entity, household or large manufacturing
facility where waste is generated and which require waste disposal.
3. (1) The appropriate Govt. shall ensure that every waste generating unit within its
jurisdiction segregates waste before its disposal.
(2) In case of large manufacturing facility, the owner or the in-charge of the
facility shall, as the case may be—
(a) ensure that the waste is segregated, re-used and re-cycled at source;
and
(b) undertake transportation of re-cyclable waste to waste-energy plants and
the non-recyclable and non-biodegradable waste to the notified landfills, as the case
may be.
(3) The appropriate govt. shall ensure that the waste generating units are liable
to pay for the waste generated by them that is sent to the landfills on the basis of the
weight of the waste in such manner as may be prescribed.
4.  Every appropriate Govt. shall ensure that it is the duty of the Municipal authority
to —
(a) collect the segregated waste from the waste generating units;
(b) ensure that the segregated waste collected and transported is not mixed
with any other waste or any material, to the extent that mixing would hamper its
re-use, re-cycle, further treatment or its use in waste-energy plants;
(c) undertake treatment of organic waste through bio-degradation such as
vermin composting, mechanical composting, by window method or any other suitable
method as approved by the Central Pollution Control Board or the State Pollution
Control Board, as the case may be; and
(d) transport the non-recyclable waste, non-biodegradable waste to the notified
landfills.
5. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend up to three months and fine which may extend up to rupees
twenty thousand.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
Duty of waste
generating unit
and large
manufacturing
facility.
Duty of the
municipal
authority.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is estimated that more than ten lakh tonnes of waste is generated in our country. The
waste is largely composed of metals, plastics, paper, food, glass and presently majority of the
waste is sent to the landfills with only a portion being used in waste-energy plants or
recycled or reused. Waste can instead be used as an alternative to the depleting petroleum
products and it would also keep the environment safe and clean.
The Bill seeks to ensure that waste from landfills is segregated and recycled, reused as
input to waste-energy projects. Non-recyclable wastes and hazardous wastes can be dumped
in the notified landfills. Proper handling and disposal of municipal waste could result in
generating employment and serve as an opportunity for entrepreneurs in the waste-energy
sector. In various countries there are laws for proper disposal of wastes.
Hence this Bill.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain steps to be taken by the municipal authorities
for collection of segregated municipal solid waste, transportation of recyclable waste to
waste-energy plants and non-recyclable wastes to the notified landfills. Clause 6 provides
that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act. This Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees four hundred crore
per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislation power is of a normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the segregation and re-cycling of municipal solid waste, use of  re-cyclable
waste in waste-energy plants for generation of energy and transportation of
non-recyclable waste into landfills and for matters connected therewith
 or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2256RS(S3)—05.08.2016.