1
THE CONSUMER GOODS (RIGHT TO FREE RETURN) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for consumers the right to free return of consumer goods,
within a stipulated time and for all matters connected
therewith and incidental
thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called ‘the Consumer Goods (Right to Free Return) Act, 2015’;
(2) It extends to the whole of India;
(3) It shall be come into force on such date, as the appropriate Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for coming
into force of different provisions of this Act;
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a state, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "consumer" means any person who buys any goods for a consideration
which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any
Bill No. XXXI  of  2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 7TH AUGUST, 2015

2
system of deferred payment and includes any user of such goods other than the
person who buys such goods for consideration paid or promised or partly paid or
partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment when such use is made with
the approval of such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods
for resale or for any commercial purpose;
(c) ‘‘consumer goods’’ means products that are purchased for consumption by
an average consumer;
(d) ‘‘durable goods’’ means goods which are consumed and used or disposed
after serving its usefulness for a period of time, which is more that two years, like
refrigerator, laptops, television sets etc.;
(e) ‘‘manufacturer’’ would have the same meaning as given in section 2(j) of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986;
(f) “retailer” or “retail supplier” means any person who does the sale of goods
from individuals or business to the end-user or final consumer and also includes
online retail shops;
(g) “semi durable goods” means those products which are neither perishing nor
lasting, like cloths, preserved foods, furniture etc.;
CHAPTER II
P
ROCURING RECEIPT AND EXCHANGE OF CONTRACT
3.(1) the appropriate Government shall make it mandatory for all retailers to give a
receipt for every durable and semi durable consumer goods purchase by the consumers and
such receipt of purchase shall act as contract between the retail supplier and the consumer,
wherein the production of this receipt shall be a pre-requisite for every claim made under the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every receipt given to the consumer shall have consumer guarantees specified on
it as under:—
(a) that goods are of acceptable quality;
(b) that goods will be reasonably fit for use;
(c) that the description of goods is accurate and it would match any sample or
demonstration model;
(d) that the goods will satisfy any extra promises made about them;
(e) that there is a ‘right to free return’ of the goods within fifteen days of its purchase;
CHAPTER III
T
HE RIGHT TO FREE RETURN
4. Every consumer shall have the right to return free any, semi durable or durable
goods purchased, within fifteen days of the purchase in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that every such return of goods shall be done in their original condition, with
no alteration to its size or shape, along with its original packing and the receipt of the
purchase.
5. The Appropriate Government shall ensure that all retail shops shall,—
(a) remove all signs that say ‘no refund’ or ‘no replacement’ from product covers
and the retail shops; and
(b) display a board mentioning the right of consumers for free return of goods
purchased by them.
68 of 1986.
Receipt to act
as a guarantee
contract.
Right to free
return valid till
fifteen days
from purchase.
Removal of no
replacement
and no refund
signs and
display of right
of consumers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. A receipt of the purchase of goods shall be considered as guarantee itself and the
retail supplier shall not ask for any further payment from the consumer for receiving any
guarantees;
7. If a consumer returns the defective goods to the retailer, the retailer shall have the
right to claim them against the wholesaler  or the manufacturer, from whom he received the
goods.
CHAPTER IV
G
RIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
8. A consumer may in case of any grievance under this Act move the 'Consumer
Disputes Redressal Forum' or the 'State Consumer Protection Council' or the 'Central Consumer
Protection Council' established under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 for redressal.
9. The Central Consumer Protection Council established under CPA 1986 and the
agencies appointed by it shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions and rules
made under this Act.
10. The Central Consumer Protection Council shall publish on its website this Act and
rules made thereunder and also the details of complaints received by the authorities in
District, State and Central level, on different products, under the purview of this Act, including
details of:—
(a) the products returned;
(b) the refund sought;
(c) tracking the progress of each complaint with time line for completion; and
(d) the complaint resolved;
11. The appropriate Government will from time to time, provide, after due appropriation
made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
12. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the appropriate
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
13. The appropriate Government, may be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
No payable
payment for
receiving
guarantee.
Right of
retailer to
make claim
against
defective
goods.
Right of
Consumers to
move to court.
Law enforcing
agency.
Details
disclosed
online for
transparency.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
68 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is widely considered to be a benevolent social
legislation that provides for the protection of consumer rights. The fact was amended a
number of times, the last being in 2002. The Principal Act, introduced in 1986 and subsequently
amended, established consumer dispute resolution mechanisms and provides to control the
trade of spurious goods and services through the authorities established. It does not confer
on the consumer a positive right which he can enforce himself. In the context of increasing
influx of imported goods to the country and the new trend of online shopping, it is necessary
that the consumers are empowered to refuse a goods that does not satisfy the needs,
without approaching forums or courts.
The Bill makes it the right of a consumer to return any purchased product within a
stipulated time for genuine reasons. It seeks to provide the consumer a right to return any
purchased durable or semi-durable goods within fifteen days of purchase. It also provides
that there should be a centralized database on complaints received and resolved by consumer
protection councils and forums on goods purchased, so that before buying any product the
consumer can make an informed choice to any terms agreed by both parties, retail supplier
and consumer. The Bill seeks to provide additional statutory provisions for the benefit of the
consumer.
The enforcement of the Act would be the responsibility of the authorities established
under the Consumer Protection Act 1986. This will ensure that there is no burden on the
Central or State Governments for establishing additional authorities for monitoring and
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Hence, this Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 11 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the appropriate Government to provide
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted will involve direct
or indirect expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is difficult to
quantify the expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of this Bill gives power to the appropriate Government to make necessary
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for consumers the right to free return of consumer goods,
within a stipulated time and for all matters connected
therewith and incidental
thereto.
—————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2151RS(S3)—07.08.2015.