1
Bill No. XXXIII of 2019
THE MANGROVE FORESTS (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for the protection, development and afforestation of Mangroves which are
essential natural barriers against rising tides of various natures of vengeful sea when
it roars ashore, by establiahing a National Board for development of  Mangrove
forests in the coastal areas of the country, proper use of dry wood of Mangroves
etc. and for matters conneted therewith and incidental thereof.
BE it enacted by  Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mangroves Forests (Special Provisions) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "board" means the National Board for Mangrove Forests established under
section 3;
(c) "mangrove" include small shrubby, highly specialized plant which stick it
out at the muddy edges of coast absorbing the corrosive action of salt water, filtering
mud and sediment and putting away more carbon dioxide from atmosphere;
(d) "prescribed" means precscribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the official Gazette, establish a Board to be
called "the National Board for Mangrove Forests";
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of properties, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name, sue or be sued;
(3) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Aurangabad in the State of Maharashtra
and its regional offices shall be located in the capital of coastal states with their respective
territorial jurisidiction;
(4) The Board shall consists of a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson and such
other members as may be prescribed;
(5) The Central Goverment shall provide to the Board such number of officers and
staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board.
(6) The Salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
and qualifications of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, Members, officers and staff
of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed;
(7) The procedure to be followed by the Board for its meeting shall be such, as may
be prescribed.
4. ( 1) The Board shall formulate a scheme for the protection, development and
afforestation of mangroves alongwith guidelines to cut and use mangroves for development
projects, etc. in the coastal areas of the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generally of the foregoing provision, such a scheme
shall also provide for,—
(i) educating people about the importance of mangroves in the coatal areas and
the proper and judicious use of dry of mangrove branches and roots;
(ii) guidelines for development projects in and around mangrove forests;
(iii) protection of species of marine mega fauna and dwellings for oysters,
algae, barnacles, sponges, shrimps, mud oysters etc., several species of birds, reptiles
and fish, winter migrant birds and nesting species;
(iv) involvement of locals of coastal areas including fishermen, boatmen etc.,
village Panchayats of coastal villages and Non-government Organisations in
protecting and afforestation of mangroves;
(v) identifying news areas in coastal States where mangrove forests can be
developed and steps for plantation of different species of mangroves in such area;
(vi) making recommendations to the appropriate Government for substantially
increasing areas of mangrove forests in coastal areas;
(vii) such other measures as the Board may deem necessary for the purpose of
this Act.
Definitions.
Establishment
of the Board.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the scheme prepared
by the Board in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. Whoever destroys or causes harm to the mangrove forest in any manner without
the permission of the Board shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall be liable
for imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees, depending on the severity of the offence committed by such
offender.
7. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company or body
corporate, every person who at the time of the offence was committed, was incharge of, and
was responsible to the Company, for the conduct of the business of the Company, as well
as the Company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing in this section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment proided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
8. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may consider necessary to
the Board for the effective implementation of the provisions of the act.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide to the Board by way of grants such sums of money as the Board
may require for the efficient implementation of this Act.
10. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time, as may be prescribed,
its Annual Report, giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous financial
year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the Annual Report to be laid before each
House  of Parliament.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Appropriate
Government to
implement the
scheme of the
Board.
Penalty.
Offence by
Companies.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Annual
Report.
Power  to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mangroves, usually consist of small, shrubby, highly specialized plants. They stick it
out at the muddy edges of the Coast, absorbing the corrosive action of salt water which can
peel the skin of our body if we immersed in it for to long, filtering mud and sediments and
putting away more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere into “long term storage” than any of
the world forest. The NASA world’s best space agency has called them the best carbon
scrubbers. Mangroves are technical marvels as their roots grow upwards, sticking out into
the air from the mud which enables them to breahe and deal with the low oxygen levels in the
cloying mud. They have sophisticated salt filtering system that can remove excess salt from
the water and which we could potentially adapt for desalination plants. They filter out heavy
metals from the mud and deposit rich sediments. Their extensive root system slows down
the tumult of the sea preventing the sort of erosion that we  recently saw in Kerala.
Mangrove forests grow in warm tropical and subtropical areas like estuaries and
marine coastlines. According to one report the total area in India under Mangroves is 4921
Sq. Kms., a little over 3  percent of the world total. Our largest and most famous mangrove
forest is, of course, the Sunderbans spanning both India and Bangladesh and which has
been declared a World Heritage site and biosphere reserve by the UNESCO. It is the largest
delta clothed in mangrove forests and vast saline mudflats in the world. It is home to the
fiercest and the largest number of Royal Bengal Tigers in the world. It is also a haven for
more than 250 species of birds, reptiles and over 120 species of fish and its beehives have
tempted honey gatherers to rise their lives. It serves as a flood barrier to Kolkata, protecting
the city from the ravages of cyclonic activity which is all too common in this area. Our
second largest Mangrove habitat is Bhitarkanika on the Odisha Coast, an important Ramsar
Wetland featuring saltwater crocodiles and the largest known nesting area for olive Ridley
sea turtles. Over 220 species of birds have been recorded here including 57 winter migrants
and over 80 nesting species.
On our western coast financial capital of the Nation Mumbai too has Mangroves
protecting it from tidal surges. Unfortunately some of them have been put on death row.
According to one report, between 1972 and 1975 over 200 kms. of the Maharasthra coast was
covered with mangroves and by 2001 there was just 118 kms left. Now, about 13.36 hactare
of mangrove in the Thane creek is under threat due to the Bullet Train project. Some 30,000
mangrove trees are to be cut though the Government says that five times of the numbers
shall be planted but  mangroves can not simply be planted and ignored.
Surely, the mangroves must be amongst the most remarkable and valuable plants in
the world which thrive in a hostile environment and a very good counselor, sooth the
seething temper of a vengeful sea when it roars ashore seeking what we robbed from it.
Mangroves extensive root system slow down the tumult of the sea. Their greatest recent
accomplishment was the taming of the boxing day Tsunami in 2004 which killed so many
people on unprotected coastlines. The mangroves on our eastern shores behaved rather like
a car’s impact absorbing bumpers and crumble zones, swallowing the massive energy and
impact of the waves.
But unfortunately we are destroying the mangrove forests. They need to be protected
and developed on a very large scale. For this purpose a National Board is proposed to be
established under this Bill to exclusively deal with mangroves in Coastal areas.
Hence this Bill.
RAJ  KUMAR  DHOOT

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Board for Mangrove
Forests. Clause 9 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds
for effective implementation of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to quantify the exact amount at this juncture
but it is estimated that a sum of rupee-fifty thousand crore will involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
An expenditure of rupee sixty thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring
expenditure for creating various assets.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislation power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection, development and afforestation of Mangroves which are
essential natural barriers against rising tides of various natures of vengeful sea when
it roars ashore, by establiahing a National Board for development of Mangrove
forests in the coastal areas of the country, proper use of dry wood of
Mangroves etc. and for matters conneted therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4317RS(S3)—11-12-2019.