1
THE CONSUMER PRODUCTS SAFETY AUTHORITY BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Consumer Products Safety Authority as an independent
authority to protect the consumer from unsafe and hazardous products; to cons-
tantly monitor safety of various consumer products; to make mandatory for consu-
mers, retailers, distributors and manufacturers to report product related accidents
and injuries; to direct the distributors and manufacturers to recall the defective
products and to prevent supply of defective and spurious products in the market and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Products Safety Authority Act, 2009.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
extent and
commen-
cement.
Bill No. XXXI of 2009
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2009

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Consumer Products Safety Authority established
under section 3.
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(c) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them
in that Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be constituted an Authority, to be known as the
Consumer Products Safety Authority to perform the functions assigned to it, by or under
this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the
said name, sue or  be sued.
(3) The Authority shall consist of:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person active in the field of consumer
related matters.
(b) not more than nine members, ex officio, to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst the officers, not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to
the Government of India, representing the Ministries or Departments of the
Government of India dealing with Agriculture and Cooperation, Law and Justice,
Textiles, communication and IT, Commerce & Technology, Food Processing
Industries, Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, Chemical and Fertilizers,
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises;
(c) The Chief Secretary or his nominee of any five States to be nominated by
rotation in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) five representatives of traders/manufacturers to be appointed by the Central
Government, on case-to-case basis, wherever necessary; and
(e) such other representatives as the Central Government may co-opt for
functional purposes.
(4) The Chairperson and the members referred to in clause ( a) and (b) shall be
appointed by the Central Government and shall be whole-time members of the Authority.
(5) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government
may decide.
4. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member if, he—
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a
body corporate owned or controlled by the Government; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government such financial or other interest
in the Authority as is likely to affect Prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions
as a member.
Definitions.
Constitution of
Authority
Disqualifications
for office of
member.

3
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 6, every whole-time member shall hold
office for a period of five years from the date on which he assumes office or till he attains the
age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier:
Provided that the Central Government may—
(a) terminate the appointment of any whole-time member, after giving him notice
of a period of not less than three months or, in lieu thereof, on payment of an amount
equal to his salary and allowances, if any, for a period of three months;
(b) terminate at any time the appointment of any member, who is a servant of the
Government.
(2) The salary and allowances and other conditions of service of the chairperson and
other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The other conditions of service of the members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) Any member may resign his office by giving notice in writing for such period as
may be prescribed, to the Central Government and, on such resignation being notified in the
Official Gazette.
6. Any person ceasing to be a member shall, unless disqualified under section 4, be
eligible for re-appointment.
7. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum
at such meetings), as may be provided by rules.
(2) If for any reason, the Chairperson, is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority,
any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside at the
meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided
by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality
of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence the Person Presiding shall have and exercise a
second or casting vote.
8. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalidated merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority;
or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure adopted by the Authority not affecting the
merits of the case.
9. (1) For the purpose of enabling it to efficiently discharge its functions under this
Act, the Authority shall appoint such number of officers and other employees as it may
consider necessary:
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers, as may be specified, shall
be subject to the approval of the Central Government.
(2) Terms and conditions of service and salaries and allowances of officers and
employees of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
10. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall have powers to
develop and manage activities for safety of consumers from unsafe and hazardous products
in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1)
the Authority may,—
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
members.
Eligibility of
member for
reappointment.
Meetings of
Authority.
Vacancies etc.
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Authority.
Appointments
of Officers
and other
employees of
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.

4
(a) Monitor safety of all consumer products available in the market;
(b) make it mandatory for the manufactures and traders to report immediately
any complaint pertaining to safety of a product;
(c) direct the manufacturers and distributors to recall the defective products;
(d) direct the manufacture to rectify the defect or replace it within a time frame;
(e) direct the manufacture to put in place measures for quick traceability of
defective products;
(f) provide a twenty four hour toll free hotline for consumers to report product
related accidents and injuries to the Authority;
(g) Suo motu take up safety aspect of any consumer product; and
(h) cause the collection and analysis of product-related accidents and injuries.
11. The Authority may with the previous approval of the Central Government determine
and charge fee or rent, not being statutory levy under any other Act, in such manner as may
be provided by rules.
12. The Authority shall establish its own fund and all receipts of the Authority shall be
credited thereto and all payment by the Authority shall be made therefrom and shall have
power to spend from the fund subject to the provisions of this Act.
13. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial year,
prepare and submit to the Central Government in such form as may be prescribed, a report
giving an account of its activities during that financial year and the report shall also give an
account of the activities which are likely to be undertaken by the Authority during the next
financial year.
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is submitted.
14. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Athority shall, in
the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on
questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given opportunity to express
its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue directions to the Authority
regarding the discharge of any functions by it under the clauses of sub-section (2) of section
10 and the Authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.
15. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adquate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
16. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall
be punishable with imprisonment, which may extend to three years or with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
17. (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act
or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Authority to
establish its
fund.
Submission of
annual report.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Authority to
charge fee.
Penalty.
Offences by
companies.

5
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any Director,
manager, Secretary or other Officer of the company, such Director, Manager, Secretary or
other Officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation:— For the purpose of this section:—
(i) “company” means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this Act shall as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
19. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereuneder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law, for the time being in force.
20. The Central Government may, by notification in Official gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.

6
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In 1986, the Consumer Protection Act was enacted in order to protect the rights of
consumers buying products from market. Since then the Act has come a long way in protecting
the consumers in various eventualities against marketing of unsafe and hazardous goods.
But the Consumer Protection Act does not cover the product related injuries and accidents
nor it provides for recall of goods found to be unsafe. The product related accidents and
injuries do take place in the country. But, as of now generally these matters are dealt with in
a casual manner and sorted out locally without much involvement of any Government
agency or manufactures. At present there is no mechanism in place for reporting of product
related accidents and injuries to any agencies. There is no system of collecting and analysing
product related accidents to assess their safety. In many countries there are independent
regulatory authority and commissions, which constantly monitor products safety. These
authorities provide a toll free twenty-four hour hotline for consumer to report product
related accidents and injuries. In the United States of America there is a Consumer Product
Safety Commission which mandates the retailers, distributors and manufacturers to report
immediately any complaint or information pertaining to safety of the product that they
manufacture or sale. It also directs the manufacturers for recall of unsafe product. Similarly,
in Europe, there are the General Product Safety Regulations, which place an obligation on
manufacturers to not only provide safe goods but also monitor the safety of their products
released into the market and withdraw those found to be unsafe. These regulations have
also put in place measures to ensure quick traceability of the product and report to the
competent authority any information that comes to their knowledge pertaining to the safety.
Similar laws are there in Canada and Australia also.
There is a major gap in the area of consumer safety in our country and many a time
consumer safety is compromised. In the expanding globalization, our consumer protection
laws also need to be of global standard. It is, therefore, proposed to establish an authority
to monitor the safety of consumer products which will inter alia also direct for recall of the
defective product.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the Consumer Products Safety
Authority. Clause 9 provides for appointment of officers and employees of the Authority.
Clause 15 provides that the Central Government shall provide funds for the purposes of the
Act. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure of Rupees one hundred crore from the
Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore will also be
involved.

8
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Consumer Products Safety Authority as an independent
authority to protect the consumer from unsafe and hazardous products; to constantly
monitor safety of various consumer products; to make mandatory for consumers,
retailers, distributors and manufacturers to report product related accidents and injuries;
to direct the distributors and manufacturers to recall the defective products and to
prevent supply of defective and spurious products in the market and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND— 5143RS(S-5)—4-12-2009.