Short title
and
commencement.
Amendmnt of
Section 46.
Bill No. XXXII of 2015
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISA TION (AMENDMENT)
BILL,  2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment)
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, but not later than six months from the date of assent to this
Act.
2. In the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act, in section, 46, after sub-section (3), the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub-sections (1) to (3), the Central Government
shall grant the successor State of Andhra Pradesh the special status for ten years.”
3. In the Thirteenth Scheduled of the principal Act under the sub-heading
‘Infrastructure’ (i) after entry 6, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“Notwithstanding anything in entry 6, the Government of India shall make the
existing V isakhapatnam, Vijayawada and Tirupati airports to be of international
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015
Amendment
of Thirteenth
Schedule of
Act 6 of 2014.
6 of 2014
5
10

standards within five years from the date of commencemnt of this Act.”
(ii) after entry 8, the following shall be inserted namely:—
“Notwithstanding anything in entry 8, the Government of India shall create
the new railway zone within one year from the date of commencement of this
Act.”
(iii) after entry 9, the following shall be inserted namely:—
“Notwithstanding anything in entry 9, the Government of India shall get the
process of improving road connectivity implemented in the backward regions
of the successor State of Telangana within five years from the date of
commencement of this Act.”
(iv) after entry 10, the following shall be inserted namely:—
“Notwithstanding anything in entry 10, the Government of India shall establish
a Rail Coach Factory in the successor State of Telangana and improve rail
connectivity in the State within two years from the date of commencement of
this Act.”
2
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After reorganisation of the State of Andhra Pradesh, the successor States namely,
Telengana and Andhra Pradesh are facing difficulties in generating finance and creating
infrastructure. While the State of Telengana is facing power crisis, the State of
Andhra Pradesh is facing financial crunch and under-development in the matter of
infrastructure. Hence, there is an urgent need to expedite the process of development
in both the States.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall grant special status to
the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. Clause 3 provide for expeditious implementation of
various projects and infrastructure development within a stipulated period. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve annual recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crore.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2014
(6 OF 2014)
* * * * * *
46 (3). The Central Government shall, while considering the special development package
for the successor State of Andhra Pradesh, provide adequate incentives, in particular for
Rayalaseema and north coastal regions of that State.
* * * * * *
THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE
Education
* * * * * *
Infrastructure
* * * * * *
6. The Government of India shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine
the feasibility of expanding the existing Visakhapatnam, Vijayawada and Tirupati airports to
international standards and take an expeditious decision thereon;
7. * * * * * *
8. Indian Railways shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine establishing
a new railway zone in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh and take an expeditious decision
thereon;
9. NHAI shall take necessary steps to improve road connectivity in the backward
regions of the successor State of Telangana;
10. The Indian Railways shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine the
feasibility of establishing a Rail Coach Factory in the successor State of Telangana and
improve rail connectivity in the State and take an expeditious decision thereon;
* * * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
————
(Dr . T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3376RS(S3)—07-12-2015.