Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXXIX of 2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
 THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL,  2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In clause (1) of article 275 of the Constitution, before the existing first proviso, the
following provisos shall be added, namely:—
“Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as
Grants in aid of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be
necessary to enable that State to meet the costs of implementation of various welfare
schemes or developmental works undertaken by the State in the larger public interest
and if that State is unable to implement such schemes or works, as the case may be,
due to severe financial crisis being experienced by the State:
Provided further that a sum of rupees fourteen thousand crores shall be allocated
as grants in aid of the revenues of the State of Orissa as one time grant and rupees five
thousand crores per annum as recurring expenditure and such amount shall be
charged on and paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
Amendment
of article
275.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Orissa is one of the economically, educationally, industrially and socially backward
and underdeveloped State of the Indian Union mainly due to consistent neglect by the
Centre. Moreover, nature too has not been kind to the State as many areas are drought prone
in the State. KBK districts have become synonymous with drought, hunger and backwardness.
The coastal areas are vulnerable to cyclones or super cyclone or even Tsunami. The State is
inhabitated by tribals and poor people and it is faced with numerous problems such as severe
unemployment, lack of industrial development due to poor infrastructure, lack of healthcare
facilities resulting in steep increase of various diseases mainly the vector borne diseases like
malaria etc., waterborne diseases, T.B., Cancer,  AIDS and other diseases. The road network
is in bad shape. There is lack of educational facilities. This has resulted in severe poverty in
the State. Frequent cyclones and super cyclone of the recent past had hit the economy of the
State very hard. Present State Government is doing its level best to turn around the economy
of the state and bring prosperity there but this will require huge Central assistance.
The Chief Minister of Orissa had recently demanded a Special Economic Package of
rupees 13096/- crores for the implementation of various development projects and welfare
schemes for the people of Orissa. Thereafter, special funds to the tune of five thousand crore
rupees will be required every year. Article 275 of the Constitution provides for payment of
grants in aid of the revenues of various States who are in need of financial assistance for
various purposes. To enable the Centre to release funds to Orissa amendment of this article
has become necessary.
Hence this Bill.
B. J. PANDA
2

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for grants in aid of the revenues of the State facing severe
financial crisis. It also provides for one time grant in aid of rupees fourteen thousand crores
and five thousand crores rupees as recurring annual expenditure. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve this expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri B. J. Panda, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—510RS(S-5)—12.05.2006.