 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE  5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XXXII of 2025 
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows: — 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It sha
ll come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
section 135. 
2. In section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 for sub-section (1), the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Every company having net worth of rupees one hundred 
crore or more, or turnover of rupees five hundred crore or more or a 
net profit of rupees three crore or more during the immediately 
preceding financial year  shall constitute a Corporate Social 
Responsibility Committee of the Board consisting of three or more 
directors, out of which at least one director shall be an independent 
director and one among the other directors shall have  extensive 
experience in plan ning and implementing Corporate Social 
Responsibility projects. 
       Provided that where a company is not required to appoint an 
independent director under sub-section (4) of section 149, it shall have 
in its Corporate Social Responsibility Committee tw o or more 
directors.” 
5 
1
0 
1
5 
18 of 2013. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In India, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs introduced Corporate Social 
Responsibility ( CSR) as a mandatory compliance for large companies under the 
Companies Act, 2013. Thus, it is a statutory obligation for companies to engage in CSR 
activities, which will help them to achieve sustainable development goals and transform 
societal conditions. As of now, it is stipulated in the Companies Act, 2013 that all firms 
with net worth of rupees 500 crore or higher, or turnover of  rupees 1,000 crore or above 
that, or a net profit of  rupees 5 crore or more during the immediately preceding financial 
year,  are required to compulsorily spend 2 per cent. of their average annual profit of the 
preceding three years on CSR activities.  
Ever since the Government has made CSR mandatory for companies belonging 
to a certain category, there has been substantial investment in community development, 
education and health. The spending on CSR by the firms indeed plays a vital role in 
social and economic transformation especially when the Government is retreating from 
social sector spending. Therefore, there is a need to increase the magnitude of CSR 
operations in order to reach more people and communities. This can be attained through 
the expansion of the scope of the CSR into more companies with medium size. Hence, 
the proposed bill provides for lowering the limits of the mandatory conditions for CSR 
in order to reach out to smaller companies. If CSR is mandatory for all firms with net 
worth of rupees 100 crore or more, or turnover of rupees 500 crore or more or a net 
profit of rupees 3 crore or more, a large number of companies will be automatically 
included under the purview of CSR funding. This would result in more social sector 
funding from the private sector.   
Besides, the existing CSR law stipulates the formation of a CSR Committee at the 
board level, with three or more directors with an independent director. However, there 
is no provision for including a director with deep knowledge and expertise in the idea 
and practice of CSR. The proposed Bill aims to fill this gap with the appointment of a 
director with extensive experience in CSR activities.               
Hence, this Bill. 
  SANDOSH KUMAR P. 

4 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013 
(18 OF 2013) 
       *   *           *     *              *    
Corporate Social 
Responsibility.
135. (1) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or
more, or turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of rupees 
five crore or more during the immediately preceding financial year shall constitute 
a Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the Board consisting of three or 
more directors, out of which at least one director shall be an independent director: 
Provided that where a company is not required to appoint an independent 
director under sub- section (4) of section 149, it shall have in its Corporate Social 
Responsibility Committee two or more directors.
 *   *           *    *            *

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013. 
___________ 
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–337–08.12.2025 