THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“16 A. Every citizen, who has attained the age of eighteen years shall have the
right to work as per his physical condition, education and other qualifications with
such wages, as may be prescribed and in the event of failure of the State to provide any
employment, he or she shall be provided with an unemployment allowance at such rate
not being less than rupees two thousand per month, as may be prescribed by the law
enacted by Parliament”.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Insertion of
new article
16A.
Bill No. XXXIV of 2009
Right to work
and
Unemployment
Allowances.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
3. Article 39 of the Constitution, shall be renumbered as 39(1) thereof and after article
as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2).  The State shall with a view to achieve the objectives enshrined in clause (1)
endeavour to generate employment in both the public and private sectors and provide
necessary facilities and funds for self-employment to the youth”.
Amendment of
article 39.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ours is a vast and over-populated nation where the problem of unemployment has
assumed alarming proportions. As a result, the vast majority of people are deprived of access
to the means of production of wealth and their living standard remains comparatively very
low forcing them to live in abject poverty and below the poverty line. It is true that human
beings do not live by bread alone but it is also equally true that they cannot live without
bread. But the growing unemployment has taken the bread out of the reach of common man
and more so from the youth. Unemployment has rendered even the educated youth indigent
and they are in the grip of frustration. Taking advantage of this, anti-social and anti-national
elements are luring the youth to the path of crime and violence. It is also leading to brain
drain. The slowdown in the world economy has made the situation from bad to worse.
Though there are many employment generated schemes being implemented by the
Government at the Centre and States but they are touching only the fringe of the problem of
providing gainful means of livelihood to large sections of people in the country. Though our
Constitution guarantees Fundamental Rights to the citizens, but the basic human
requirement right to work does not find place in the list of Fundamental Rights. Of course, in
article 39 of the Constitution, there is a directive pertaining to employment generation but it
is not forceable though it is desirable that the State should undertake constructive employ-
ment generation schemes and extend necessary facilities for self-employment.
It is appropriate and high time to make right to work a fundamental right because it is
more fundamental for all the citizens as right to life and liberty is meaningful only with right
to livelihood. This Bill seeks to include the basic right to work in the list of fundamental right
and also provide for unemployment allowance in case, the State fails to provide gainful
employment to the citizens. This will certainly benefit millions of unemployed youths in the
country.
Hence this Bill.
GIREESH  KUMAR  SANGHI
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for unemployment allowance to be paid to unemployed.
This Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees twenty thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION  OF INDIA
*****
39. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—
(a) that the citizens men and women equally, have the right to an adequate
means of livelihood;
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community
are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration
of wealth and means of production to the common detriment;
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender age
of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to
enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;
(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy
manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are
protected against exploitation and against moral and material abandonment.
*****
Certain
principles of
policy to be
followed by
the State.
5

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND— 2314RS(S5)—03-05-2010.