THE PREVENTION OF HEINOUS CRIME AND BARBAROUS
CRUELTY AGAINST WOMEN BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to prevent barbarous cruelty against girls or women such as battering, killing by
strangulating after committing rape, chopping the body or burning the girls
or women alive and heinous crimes against the girls or women such as
committing gang rape, publicly stripping and parading naked or
raping pregnant woman resulting in her death or miscarriage
or forcing the girls and women into prostitution
by providing deterrent punishment including
capital punishment and for matters
connected therewith and
incidental thereto
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Heinous Crime and Barbarous Cruelty
against Women Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
Bill No. XXXIII  of 2006
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
Definitions.
5
10

(b) "barbarous cruelty" includes,—
(i) committing rape on a girl or woman, as the case may be, and then killing
her by battering, strangulating or by any other means;
(ii) after killing a girl or woman, as the case may be, disposing off her body
by chopping into pieces or by burning or throwing at secluded place or nullah,
river, canal or by burying;
(iii) burning an alive girl or woman, as the case may be, leading to her
death;
(iv) killing a girl or woman, as the case may be, by way of gang rape;
(c) “heinous crime” includes,—
(i) committing gang rape on a girl or woman;
(ii) publicly stripping or parading naked in full public view of a girl or
woman;
(iii) committing rape on a pregnant woman resulting in her death or
miscarriage;
(iv) forcing a girl or woman into prostitution;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “special court” means a special court established under section 4.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any
other law for the time being in force, whoever commits heinous crime or barbarous cruelty
against any girl or woman, as the case may be, shall be punished with death.
(2) The offences under this Act shall be tried by Special Courts.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court in the case of a State and the Chief Justice of India in other cases, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute such number of Special Courts preferably to
be presided over by women Judges as it may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.
   (2) The set up of a Special Court constituted under sub-section (1) shall be such as
may be prescribed.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  an
offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force no
court other than a High Court or the Supreme Court of India shall have the authority to grant
anticipatory bail to any person accused of committing an offence under this Act.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the official Gazette make such provisions, not incon-
sistent with the provisions of this Act as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
remove the difficulty.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but, save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force relating to cruelty against women.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
2
Penalty for
heinous
crime or
barbarous
cruelty
against
women.
Constitution
of Special
Courts.
Offence to
be cogni-
zable and
non-bailable.
Bar on
granting
anticipatory
bail.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Girls and women are vulnerable to exploitation and atrocities in the society. Sex starved
maniacs sexually abuse them whenever they get an opportunity and commit rape on them.
However in many cases after committing rape on the hapless girl or woman she is killed
brutally. She is battered, stabbed or strangulated. Many a time one comes across horrifying
news of chopping the body of a hapless girl or woman into pieces, stacked into a gunny bag,
etc. and thrown in the nearby jungle, nullah, river etc. so as to eliminate the evidence. Many
a time gangrape is committed on a woman and thereafter, she is killed and her body is
disposed off. Many a time the girls and women are stripped and paraded naked in the full
public view to take revenge. Similarly, barbarous atrocities are committed on a pregnant
woman when she is raped resulting in her death or miscarriage. Many a time the woman is
burnt alive for dowry or other reasons. The girls and women are forced into prostitution. This
heinous and barbarous cruelty against the girls and women needs to be prevented by
providing capital punishment. It is also necessary that such offences should be tried by
Special Courts headed by women judges which showed also be made cognizable and non-
bailable. It will certainly have the desired results.
Hence this Bill.
SUSHMA  SWARAJ

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the Constitution of special Courts. The Bill if enacted
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees fifty crores may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees twenty crores may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of Legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to prevent barbarous cruelty against girls or women such as battering, killing by strangu-
lating after committing rape, chopping the body or burning the girls or women alive
and heinous crimes against the girls or women such as committing gang rape, publicly
stripping and parading naked or raping pregnant woman resulting in her death or
miscarriage or forcing the girls and women into prostitution by providing deterrent
punishment including capital punishment and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—500RS(S-5)—12-05-2006.