THE PREVENTION OF DEATHS DUE TO HEAT AND
COLD WA VES BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of human deaths caused by heat stroke during summer
and chilling cold during winter seasons by declaring heatwave and coldwave
as national calamity and for making provisions for advance preparedness to
face these natural calamities immediately on predictions of meteorological
department making provision for providing woolens, setting up night shelters,
community bonfires etc. during winters and for drinking water, ORS packets,
Mango panna, cooling space and shades at conspicuous places, free ration and
other needs for the poor homeless workers and daily wage earners during summer
and for payment of compensation to the kins of those losing lives in heat or cold
wave, as the case may be, by the Central and the State Governments and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Deaths Due to Heat and Cold Waves
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. XXXIV of 2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2015

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The natural calamity of severe heat wave or cold wave in which people lose their
lives are hereby declared respectively to be National calamity and shall be dealt with by the
appropriate Government accordingly.
4. (1) The Central and regional Meteorological centres shall inform the appropriate
Government about prediction detailing the likely occurance of severe heat or cold wave, as
the case may be, in their areas natural calamity with such, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of the prediction of the Meteorological Centre under sub-section ( 1),
the appropriate Government shall alert its Ministries or departments dealing with agriculture,
drinking water, social justice, food and others as it may deem necessary to be ready with
their action plans to face the natural calamity and disaster which may likely be caused by
such natural calamity.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up at conspicuous places within its
territorial jurisdiction:—
(a) night shelters for the homeless people with such amenities and facilities for
the summer, rainy and winter seasons as may be prescribed.
(b) cooling spaces, shades in the fields for the agricultural workers, near the site
of construction for construction workers, near roads and highways for the workers
engaged in construction of roads or highways and at such other places as the
appropriate Government may deem necessary for the daily wage earners, rickshaw or
cart pullers, porters, roadside mechanics etc. with facility of drinking water, ORS
packets, mango panna etc. in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Department of Health of the appropriate Government to
announce and implement guidelines on dealing with cold wave or heat wave patients, as the
case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
agricultural workers, construction workers and workers who work in the open including
porters, cart pullers, rickshaw pullers etc. shall be allowed rest between 12 Noon and 3 PM
during summer season in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall prepare within six months of the commencement
of this Act, a long term action plan in order to increase preparedness, information sharing
and response coordination between various Ministries and Departments of such Government
to reduce the health impacts particularly deaths due to extreme heat or cold, as the case may
be, on vulnerable population with in its territorial jurisdiction.
(2) While implementing the long term action plan prepared under sub-section (1) the
apropriate Government shall make use of Short Message service (SMS) e-Mail, Radio,
Television, Mobile apps and services of village Panchayats to alert the people about extreme
heat and cold conditions, as the case may be.
7. Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 5 of this Act shall
be punished with imprisonment for one month and also with fine which may extend to two
lakh rupees.
8. The appropriate Government  shall pay to the nearest kin of the victim of heat wave
or cold wave, as the case may be, who lose his life, a compensation of minimum of three lakhs
rupees in such manner as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Declaration
of heat wave
and cold wave
as national
calamity.
Meteorological
Centres to
inform the
appropriate
Government
about
prediction of
heat or cold
wave.
Setting up of
night shelters,
cooling spaces
and shades
etc. by
appropriate
Government.
Long term
plan to
prevent deaths
due to cold
and heat
waves.
Penalty.
Compensation
to the kin of
the victims.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide adequate funds for currying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being inforce or in any other instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this
Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
3

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Every year our Nation faces extreme weather conditions in the form of heatwave, rains
and cold wave in which many people, particularly the poorer ones lose their lives. For
instance in the heatwave of this year 2015 death toll crossed the 2000 mark in May itself.
This has become the fifth deadliest ever heatwave in the world and the second deadliest in
India according to an International database of disasters. The deadliest heatwave on record
in India was in 1998 which killed 2541 people. The most lethal heatwave in the globe was the
one that crippled Europe in 2003 killing 71,310 people. In the list of top ten deadliest disasters
Indian heatwaves figure four times-1998, 2002, 2003 and 2015. Unsurprisingly, six of the top
ten heatwaves in terms of deaths have occurrede in the 21st Century which has also recorded
eight of the ten warmest years ever since records of global temperatures have started being
kept. 2014 was tied as the warmest year on record with 1998 whereas the first quarter of 2015
was declared warmest on record. Unfortunately the poor who are poorly fed and have no
option but to work in the scorching heat and chilling cold to get two square meals are
vulnerable to these extreme weather conditions and lose their lives. The death tolls from
heatwaves are very difficult to estimate since excess heat is typically not listed as the
primary cause of death in cases where the victim has a pre-existing condition such as heart
or lung disease. This means that in most of the cases especially in India the actual death toll
will be much higher in all the listed events including the spell of heatwave of 2015.
It is only after Prime Minister’s appeal to take precautions against the heatwave that
killed nearly 2300 people in the month of May across the Country particularly in Telengana,
Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and other parts of the Country that the National Disaster
Management Authority (NDMA) has started working on it. There is need to declare heatwave
and coldwave as National calamity. Immediate as well as long term action plans to increase
preparedness, information sharing through varius means, increasing communication on
prevention methods, access to potable drinking water and cooling space etc. are required to
prevent deaths due to heatwave and availability to rain baseraas, woolens, medicines and
food for the poorest of the poor may prevent deaths during chilling winters. This is the
minimum which has to be done for the poorest of the poor in a welfare State like ours.
Hence this Bill.
RAJ KUMAR DHOOT

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for miscellaneous provisions for setting up of night
shelters, cooling spaces and shades etc. by the Government. Clause 8 provides for
compensation to the kin of the victims. Clause 9 makes it mandatory for the Central
Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
sum of rupees ten thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty five thousand crore may
also involve for creating assets throughout the Country.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
Bill
to provide for the prevention of human deaths caused by heat stroke during summer
and chilling cold during winter seasons by declaring heatwave and coldwave as
national calamity and for making provisions for advance preparedness to face
these natural calamities immediately on predictions of meteorological department
making provision for providing woolens, setting up night shelters, community
bonfires etc. during winters and for drinking water, ORS packets, Mango panna,
cooling space and shades at conspicuous places, free ration and other needs for
the poor homeless workers and daily wage earners during summer and for payment
of compensation to the kins of those losing lives in heat or cold wave, as the case
may be, by the Central and the State Governments and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3851RS(S3)—18-12-2015.