THE PREVENTION OF PUSHING AND FORCING GIRL CHILD INTO
FLESH TRADE AND IMMORAL TRAFFIC BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for deterrent punishment for pushing or forcing the girl child into flesh trade or
prostitution and for immoral traffic of a girl child and for hiring or taking possession of
a girl child prostitute by her client for promiscuous sexual activities and for the proper
rehabilitation and welfare measures to be initiated by the State for such hapless girl
child and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Pushing and Forcing Girl Child into
Flesh Trade and Immoral Traffic Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
Commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
Bill NO. XXXII of 2006
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) “girl child”  means a female human who is below the age of eighteen years;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3.  (1) The pushing, forcing, abetting, procuring a girl child into flesh trade or prostitution
or immoral traffic, by whatever name called, is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal code or the Immoral Traffic
(Prevention) Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force, whoever,—
(a) abets or induces, by whatever means or in any manner whatsoever, a girl
child to flesh trade or prostitution, notwithstanding the family or near or dear relation
of such girl child with the accused or under any prevailing custom, shall be punished
with imprisonment which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten years
and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(b) pushes or forces a girl child to flesh trade or prostitution shall be punished
with death;
(c) owns or runs a brothel having girl child prostitute, such owner or manager
shall be punished with life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees;
(d) indulges in the immoral traffic of a girl child or for any unlawful or immoral
purpose shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years and
also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees;
(e) hires, procures or obtains possession of a girl child for promiscuous sexual
intercourse with her shall be punished with life imprisonment and also with fine which
shall not be less than five lakh rupees but may extend to ten lakh rupees.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
6. (1) The offences under this Act shall be tried by Special Courts.
(2) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Special Courts,
as it may deem necessary for the purposes of sub-section (1) and for the quick disposal
of cases under this Act.
7. The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate rehabilitation
and welfare measures for such girl child rescued from flesh trade or prostitution or
who may by rendered out of profession after the commencement of this Act and these
measures shall include free medical care, shelter, food, clothing and other necessities of
day-to-day living, free education including vocational education, gainful employment,
marriage and such other measures as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate necessary funds, from time to time, for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
45 of 1860.
104 of 1956.
Prohibition of
pushing or
forcing girl
child into flesh
trade or
prostitution.
Penalty.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
2 of 1974
45 of 1860.
104 of 1956.
Special Courts
to try the
offences.
Rehabilitation
and other
welfare
measures.
Central Govt.
to provide
necessary
funds.
5
45 of 1860.
104 of 1956.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding
any thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but
save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to make
rules.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In many cases the girls are kidnapped and forced into prostitution. They are also
procured from the unsuspecting poverty-stricken parents for this purpose. This is very rampant
in tribal and rural areas. Recently media reported that pimps have become active in drought
affected areas luring the girls of such families into their net where hapless farmers took the
extreme step of committing suicide. Even innocent girls from the neighbouring countries are
also procured by anti social elements for this purpose.
The greed for more money is also pushing more and more adolescent girls into flesh
trade as they fetch handsome amount from the prospective clients. These days when adventure
tourism is gaining momentum the tourists who indulge in promiscuous sex for fun and joy
prefer the girl child prostitutes. The professional pimps, anti social elements, criminal gangs,
brothels' owners, call girl racketeers, tour operators, hoteliers and others are very active to
mint money from the rich and neo rich prospective clients. As a first step to lure, the
unsuspecting girls are promised a decent and comfortable life generally to provide a good
employment or career in modeling or even a role in films. Once the girl is convinced the next
step begins to tell her to have fun and enjoyment in five star hotels and earn handsomely
which most of girls cannot reject because the temptation is raised to new heights. Once the
girl takes the fatal step she lands into the world of prostitution. The deadly AIDS and other
sexually transmitted diseases have endangered the lives of such hapless girls.
This alarming situation has to be tackled very effectively to save the girl child by
dealing heavily with those who push or force the girl child into flesh trade or prostitution by
providing deterrent punishment to the extent of death sentence to such defaulters. Deterrent
punishment is also required for those who hire or obtain the girl child for sex, abet, lure or
coerce a girl child to become prostitute irrespective of her relation with the girl child. There
should be special Courts to quickly try the cases. Time has come to save the unsuspecting
girl child from this immoral profession and from AIDS and other dangerous diseases.
Hence this Bill.
SUSHMA SWARAJ
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 provides that offences under this Bill shall be tried by Special Courts.
Clause 7 provides for rehabilitation and other welfare measures. Clause 8 provides that
Central Government shall provide adequate funds for the purpose of the Bill. The Bill if
enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
sum of rupees five hundred crores may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees two hundred crores may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for deterrent punishment for pushing or forcing the girl child into flesh trade or
prostitution and for immoral traffic of a girl child and for hiring or taking possession of a
girl child prostitute by her client for promiscuous sexual activities and for the proper
rehabilitation and welfare measures to be initiated by the State for such hapless girl child
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Sushma Swaraj, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—498RS(S5)—12.05.2006.