1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In section 304 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the
Penal Code), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—
“Provided that if death is caused to a girl or a woman,  the accused committing
such homicide shall be punished with imprisonment for whole life and shall also be
liable for fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.”
Short title and
commencement..
Amendment
of section 304.
45 of 1860.
Bill No. XXXI of 2006
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
5

2
3. In sub-section (2) of section 304B of the Penal Code, for the words “seven years”
the words “ten years” shall be substituted.
4. In section 312 of the Penal Code, before the Explanation the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that if the miscarriage is of a female foetus caused after a sex
determination test, the person or the pregnant woman, as the case may be, causing
miscarriage of such female foetus shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which
shall not be less than seven years but may extend to imprisonment for life and shall
also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.”
5.  In section 313 of the Penal Code, the following proviso shall be added,
namely:—
“(2) Provided if a miscarriage of a female foetus is caused after pre-natal sex
determination test, the accused shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall also
be liable to fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
6. In section 314 of the Penal Code,—
(i) for the words “imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years and shall also be liable to fine” the words “rigorous imprisonment which
shall not be less than ten years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to two
lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
(ii) before the Explanation the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that if the miscarriage is caused after conducting a pre-natal
sex determination test of the foetus confirming it to be a female foetus, the
person causing the miscarriage shall be punished with regorous imprisonment
for life and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.”
7. Section 315 of the Penal Code shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after the sub-section (1) as so re-numbered the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(2) If the offence referred to in sub-section (1) is committed after conducting a pre
natal sex determination test confirming a female foetus, the person committing such an
offence shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine
which may extend to two lakh rupees.
8. Section 316 of the Penal Code shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after the sub-section (1) as so re-numbered the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(2) If the offence referred to in sub-section (1) is committed after conducting a sex
determination test confirming that the quick unborn child is female child, the person doing
such as act shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.”
9. Section 317 of the Penal Code shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after the sub-section (1) as so re-numbered the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(2) If the child so exposed or abandoned is a girl child, the person doing so shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for term which may extend to ten years and shall also
be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.”
10. Section 318 of the Penal Code shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after the sub-section (1) as so re-numbered the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(2) If the child whose dead body is so disposed of is of a girl child the person committing
such offence shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.”
Amendment
of section
304B.
Amendment
of section
312.
Amendment
of section 313.
Amendment
of section 314.
Amendment
of section 315.
Amendment
of section 316.
Amendment
of section 317.
Amendment
of section 318.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
11. In section 376 of the Penal Code, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) whoever commits rape on
a woman when she is under ten years of age shall be punished withdeath.
(4) Whoever commits incestuous rape on a woman shall be punished with death.”
Amendment
of section 376.
5

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country, on the one hand the progress and prosperity is hampered by the booming
population and on the other dwindling sex ratio, that is of lesser female population, is also a
cause of concern. The latest census of 2001 has revealed a disturbing trend of fast declining
sex ratio of below 900 females per thousand males in many of the States including Haryana,
Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat and others. This is happening mainly due to premature
and induced abortions of female foetus after sex determination tests which are being carried
out on a very large scale in the country. Though sex determination is illegal, much of it is
attributable to male preference in the families. Although abortions for containing family size
is legal, but abortions in very large numbers are carried out to destroy female foetus after
illegal pre natal sex determination tests only to avert birth of female child. This alarming
situation has started showing ugly  trends in some States where people are purchasing their
brides from other States. This trend may result in social chaos in the near future so it has to
be effectively curbed so as to correct the declining sex ratio by providing deterrent provisions
in the Indian Penal Code.
Similarly, there has been unprecedented increase in the rape cases committed on women
and girls which is the worst kind of criminal offence against women and humanity. It becomes
more heinous once it is committed on minor girls. Such beasts do not deserve any leniency
and must be hanged to death. Similarly, our heads bow in shame when we come across
incestuous rapes committed on women and girls by none other than the trusted relatives.
What can be more shameful than a father committing rape of his own daughter or a brother
raping his sister. Such relatives must not be spared and must be hanged to death. This will
have a deterrent effect on the society.
Hence this Bill.
PREMA CARIAPPA

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
* * * * *
304B. Dowry death—(1) Where the death of woman is caused by any burns or bodily
injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circusmtances within seven years of  her marriage
and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her
husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry,
such death shall be called “dowry death”, and such husband or relative shall be deemed to
have caused her death.
Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section, “dowry” shall have the same
meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imrprisonment for life.
314. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage—Whoever, with
intent to cause the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any act which causes the death of
such women, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine,
If act done without woman's consent—and if the act is done without the consent of
the woman, shall be punished either with
 imprisonment for life, or with the punishment
above mentioned.
Explanation.—It is not essential to this offence that the offender should know that the
act is likely to cause death.)
* * * * *
5

6
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code 1860.
————
(Shrimati Prema Cariappa, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—6592RS(S3)—21-03-2006.