AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XXXIX of 2025 
THE NATIONAL URBAN EMPLOYMENT 
GUARANTEE BILL, 2025 
___________________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
C
HAPTER II 
GUARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT IN URBAN AREAS 
3. Guarantee of Employment.
C
HAPTER III 
NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME AND UNEMPLOYMENT 
ALLOWANCE 
4. Employment Guarantee Scheme for urban areas.
5. Conditions for providing guaranteed employment.
6. Preference in employment opportunities.
7. Wage rate.
8. Social Security.
9. Payment of unemployment allowance.
10. Non-disbursement of unemployment allowance in certai
n
ci
rcumstances.
11. Disentitlement to receive unemployment allowance in certain
circumstances.
C
HAPTER IV 
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES 
12. Central Employment Guarantee Council.
13. Functions and duties of the Central Council.
14. State Employment Guarantee Council.
15. Functions and duties of the State Council.
16. Principal authorities for planning and implementation of scheme.
17. Programme In-charge.
18. District Programme Coordinator.
19. Programme Officer.

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
20. Responsibilities of the State Governments.
21. Recommendation of Projects.
22. Grievance redressal mechanism.
CH
APTER V 
FINANCE AND AUDIT 
23. Sharing of financial responsibilities.
24. Funding Pattern.
25. Transparency and Accountability.
26. Audit of Accounts.
C
HAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
27. Penalty for non-compliance.
28. Power to delegate.
29. Power of Central Government to give directions.
30. Power to amend Schedules.
31. Protection of action taken in good faith.
32. Power to make rules.
33. Laying of rules and schemes.
34. Power to remove difficulties.
TH
E  FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XXXIX of 2025 
THE NATIONAL URBAN EMPLOYMENT 
GUARANTEE BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for enhancement of livelihood security to individuals in urban 
areas of the country by formulation of an Employment Guarantee  
Scheme aimed at providing guaranteed wage employment in  
every financial year to every adult in the urban areas  
covered thereunder who volunteers to do skilled or 
 unskilled work and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 
10 
1. (1) This Act may be called National Urban Employment Guarantee Act,
2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be
appointed for different States or for different areas in a State and an y
r
eference in any such provision to the commencement of the Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision in suc h
S
tate or, as the case may be, in such area:
Provided that this Act shall be applicable to the whole of India  within 
a period of five years from the date of enactment of this Act. 
Short titl e and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 
(a) "adult" means a person who has completed eighteen years of 
age; 
(b) "applicant" means any adult who has applied for employment 
under the scheme; 
(c) "Central Council" means the Central Employment Guarantee 
Council constituted under section 12; 
(d) "District Programme Coordinator" means an officer 
designated as such by the  State Government under sub section (1) of 
section 18 for implementation of the scheme in a district; 
(e) “household” means the members of a family related to each 
other by blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together 
and sharing meals or holding a common ration card; 
(f) “implementing agency” includes any department of the 
Central Government or a State Government, any urban local authority 
or Government undertaking or non -governmental organisation 
authorised by the Central Government or the S tate Government to 
undertake the implementation of any work taken up under a Scheme; 
(g)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(h)"Programme In-charge" means the officer designated as such 
by the State Government under sub section (1) of section 17; 
(i) "Programme Officer" means the person appointed by the 
Programme In-charge at the Urban Local Body under sub -section (1) 
of section 19; 
(j)"project" means any work taken up under a Scheme for the 
purpose of providing employment to the applicants; 
(k)"Scheme" means the Employment Guarantee Scheme notified 
by the State Government under sub- section (1) of section 4; 
(l) "skilled work" means any work that requires specific level of 
training or skills as notified by the urban local body; 
(m)"State Council" means the State Employment Guarantee 
Council constituted under sub-section (1) of section 14; 
(n)"unskilled work" means any physical work which any adult 
person is capable of doing without any skill or special training; 
(o) "urban area" means any area in a State which is covered by 
any urban local body of that State; 
(p) "Urban Local Body" means the body that administers or 
governs a city or a town such as Municipal corporation, 
Municipalities, Cantonment Boards or notified Town Area 
Committees; 
(q) "wage rate" means the wage rate to be determined by the 
Central Council for the States in consultation with their Governments 
as provided under section 7; and 
(r) "ward" means territorial constituencies in the municipal area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
   CHAPTER II 
GUARANTEE OF EMPLOYMENT IN URBAN AREAS 
45  
Guarantee of 
Employment. 
 
 
 
 
3. (1) The State Government shall, in such  urban areas in the State, as 
may be notified by the Central Government  it in the Official Gazette, 
provide to every adult, skilled and unskilled work for not less than 
  

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
ninety days in a financial year depending on the applicant's skill, 
qualifications, experience, aptitude etc. in accordance with the Scheme 
made under this Act.  
(2) Every adult who has done the work given to him under the Scheme 
shall be entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily 
wages shall be made  on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a 
fortnight after the date on which such work was done. 
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case 
may be, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, 
make provisions for securing work to ever y adult under a Scheme for 
any period beyond the period guaranteed under sub -section (1), as 
may be expedient. 
  
 
15 
 CHAPTER III 
NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME AND UNEMPLOYMENT 
ALLOWANCE 
  
  
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
4. (1) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, every 
State Government shall, within six months from the date of 
commencement of this Act, by notification  in the Official Gazette, 
formulate an Employment Guarantee Scheme, for providing not less than 
ninety days of guaranteed employment in a financial year to every adult, in 
the urban areas covered under the Scheme as notified, who is willing to do 
unskilled or skilled work and applies for such work in the prescribed form 
and manner, subject to the conditions laid down by or under this Act and in 
the Scheme. 
(2) The State Government shall publish a summary of the Scheme made by 
it in at least two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular 
language circulating in the area or areas to which such Scheme shall apply. 
(3) The Scheme made under sub-section (1) shall provide for the minimum 
features specified in the First Schedule. 
 Employment 
Guarantee 
Scheme for 
urban areas. 
  
 
 
 
 
35 
5. (1) The State Government may, without prejudice to the conditions 
specified in the Second Schedule, specify in the Scheme the conditions for 
providing guaranteed employment under this Act. 
(2) Every adult employed under the Scheme made under this Act shall be 
entitled to such facilities not less than the minimum facilities specified in 
the Second Schedule. 
 Conditions for 
providing 
guaranteed 
employment. 
  6. First preference in the employment opportunities  under this Act shall be 
given to women, and persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Minorities. 
 Preference in 
employment 
opportunities. 
 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
7. The Central Council , constituted under section 12,  shall determine the 
wage rate for a State, after consultation with the Government of the  
concerned State: 
Provided that the wage rate  may be  determined using a scientific 
methodology, in such manner as may be prescribed,  taking into account 
various input factors and may be  revised every year to keep up with 
inflation: 
Provided further that different rates of wages may be specified for 
different areas:  
Provided also that the wage rate shall not be less than rupees six 
hundred and fifty per day. 
 Wage rate. 
  8. The Central Government shall take all necessary measures to act upon the 
recommendation received from the Central Council, as mandated under 
 Social Security. 

4 
 
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 13 within thirty days of its receipt 
and provide social security to all jo b holders working under the scheme 
guaranteed under this Act. 
Payment of 
unemployment 
allowance. 
 9. (1) If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is not provided 
such employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application 
seeking employment or from the date on which the employment has 
been sought in the case of an advance application, whichever is later, 
his shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance in accordance 
with this section. 
(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be 
prescribed by the State Government and subject to the provisions of 
this Act and the Scheme and the economic capacity of the State  
Government, the unemployment allowance payable under sub- section 
(1) shall be paid to the applicant at such rate as may be specified by 
the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, in 
consultation with the Central and State Councils: 
Provided that such allowance shall  not be less than one -fourth of 
the wage rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not 
less than one -half of the wage rate for the remaining period of the 
financial year. 
(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance 
to the applicant during any financial year shall cease as soon as:— 
(a) the applicant is directed by the Urban Local Body to report 
for work; or 
(b) the period for which employment is sought comes to an end 
and the applicant had not turned up for employment; or 
(c) the applicant  has earned as much from the wages and 
unemployment allowance taken together which is equal to the wage 
for the length of employment he had sought during the financial year. 
(4) The unemployment allowance payable to the applicant shall be 
sanctioned by the Programme In-Charge and disbursed by the Programme 
Officer.  
(5) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (1) shall 
be made or offered not later than fifteen days from the date on which it 
became due for payment. 
(6) The State Government may prescribe the procedure for payment of 
unemployment allowance under this Act. 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
Non-disbursement 
of unemployment 
allowance in 
certain 
circumstances. 
 10. (1) If the Programme Officer is not in the position to disburse the 
unemployment allowance in time or at all for any reason beyond his 
control, he shall report the matter to Programme In- Charge along with the 
reasons therefor in writing through a notice which  shall be displayed on 
the notice board of the Urban Local Body.  
(2) Every case of non -payment or delayed payment of unemployment 
allowance shall be reported in the annual report submitted by the 
Programme In-Charge to the State Government along with the  reasons for 
such non-payment or delayed payment. 
(3) The State Government shall take all measures to make the payment of  
unemployment allowance reported under sub- section (1) to the concerned 
applicant as expeditiously as possible. 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
Disentitlement to 
receive 
unemployment 
allowance in certain 
circumstances. 
 
 
 
 
11. An applicant who— 
(a) does not accept the employment provided under a Scheme; 
(b) does not report for work, or communicate the reason thereof, within 
50  

5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
fifteen days of being notified by the implementing agency to report for the 
work; or 
(c) continuously remains absent from work,  without obtaining a 
permission from the concerned implementing agency for a period of more 
than three weeks or remains absent for a total period of more than three 
weeks in any month, 
shall not be eligible to claim the unemployment allowance payable unde r 
this Act but shall be eligible to seek employment under any Scheme at any 
time. 
 10  CHAPTER IV 
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING AUTHORITIES 
  
  
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
12. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette  specify, there shall be constituted a 
Central Employment Guarantee Council to discharge the functions, 
and perform the duties, assigned to it by or under this Act. 
(2) The headquarters of the Central Council shall be at New Delhi. 
(3) The Central Council shall consist of the following members to be 
appointed by the Central Government  in such manner as may be 
prescribed:— 
(a) a Chairperson; 
(b) five representatives of the Union Ministries including two 
from Niti Aayog not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India as may be determined by the Central 
Government – Members ex-officio; 
(c) one representative from each State Government as 
nominated by the concerned State Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed – Members; 
(d) fifteen non -official members representing Urban Local 
Bodies, organisations of workers and disadvantaged groups: 
Provided that not less than one -third of the non- official 
members appointed under this clause shall be women: 
Provided further that not less than one -third of the non -
official members shall be belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes and Minorities; 
(e) a Member- Secretary not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India. 
(4) The salary and allowances and other  terms and conditions  of 
service of the Chairperson and members of the Central Council shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Council shall meet once in every three months.  
(6) The Chairperson of the Central Council shall address the media and 
public after every meeting of the Central Council and disclose the matters 
discussed. 
(7)  The Central Government  shall appoint such number of officers 
and staff to the Central Council, a s may be necessary for the efficient 
discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(8) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, 
and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so 
appointed under sub-section (7), shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 Central 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Council. 

6 
 
Functions and 
duties of the 
Central Council. 
 13. (1) The Central Council shall perform and discharge the following 
functions and duties:— 
(a) advise the Central Government on the ways to provide social 
security to the workers employed under the Scheme for the length of 
their employment within thirty  days from the commencement  of this 
Act; 
(b) develop a scientific methodology to determine the  wage rate 
for skilled and unskilled works for all States for each financial year  
after consultation with the Governments  of the States, which shall be 
reviewed every year; 
(c) establish a central evaluation and monitoring system and 
review it periodically; 
(d) monitor the implementation of this Act; 
(e) advise the Central Government on all matters concerning the 
implementation of this Act; 
(f) promote the widest possible dissemination of information 
about the Scheme made under this Act; 
(g) prepare annual reports to be laid before Parliament by the 
Central Government on the implementation of this Act; 
(h) advise the Central Government on ways to improve the skill 
of workers through training and certifications, and; 
(i) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the 
Central Government. 
(2) The Central Council shall have the power to undertake evaluation of 
the various Scheme made under this Act and for that purpose collect or 
cause to be collected statistics pertaining to the urban economy and the 
implementation of the Scheme and recommend changes, as may be 
deemed necessary, to the State Governments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
State 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Council. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14. 
 
(1) For the purposes of regular monitoring and reviewing the 
implementation of this Act at the State level, every State Government, 
shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a State Council 
to be known as the "(name of the State) Employment  Guarantee 
Council". 
(2) The State Council shall consist of  a Chairperson and such number 
of official members, as may be appointed by the State Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed and with  not more than fifteen 
non-official members, to be nominated by the State Government, from 
Urban Local Bodies, organisations of workers and disadvantaged 
groups, in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that not less than one -third of the non- official members 
nominated under this sub-section shall be women: 
Provided further  that not less than one third of the non -official 
members shall be belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes, the Other Backward Classes and Minorities. 
(3) The salary and allowances and other terms and conditions  of 
service of the Chairperson and members of the State Council shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
(4) The procedure with regard to transaction of business of the State 
Council including the frequency and place of its meetings, quorum  at such 
meetings etc. shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
(5)  The State Government  shall appoint such number of officers and 
staff to the State Council, as may be necessary for the efficient 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(6) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, 
and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so 
appointed under sub-section (5), shall be such as may be prescribed. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
15. (1) The State Council shall perform and discharge the following functions 
and duties:— 
(a) establish an evaluation and monitoring system and review it 
periodically; 
(b) monitor the implementation of this Act; 
(c) advise the State Government on all matters concerning the 
implementation of this Act; 
(d) promote the widest possible dissemination of information 
about the Schemes made under this Act; 
(e) prepare annual reports to be laid before the State legislature 
by the State Government on the implementation of this Act; 
(f) advise the State Government on ways to improve the workers 
skills through training and certifications; 
(g) advise the State Government on wage rate for different kind 
of works, and; 
(h) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the 
State Government. 
(2) The State Council shall have the power to undertake evaluation of the 
various Scheme made under this Act and for that purpose collect or cause 
to be collected statistics pertaining to  the urban economy and the 
implementation of the Scheme and Programmes in the State. 
 Functions and 
duties of the 
State Council. 
  
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
16. (1) The Urban Local Bodies shall be the principal authorities for planning 
and implementation of the Scheme made under this Act. 
(2) The functions of the Urban Local Bodies shall be to:— 
(a) publish skilled and unskilled job requirements for the period 
of not less than ninety  days on the notice board of the Urban Local 
Body and their respective website, if applicable;  
(b) help register and approve micro, small and medium 
enterprises to be part of the scheme;  
(c) get police verification of all the applicants who get employed 
under the scheme; 
(d) link unskilled workers with the e-shram portal; 
(e) carry out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the 
State Council, from time to time. 
(3) The Urban Local Bodies shall ensure that the works taken up under the 
Scheme shall meet the required technical standards and measurements. 
 Principal 
authorities for 
planning and 
implementation 
of schemes. 
  
 
 
 
45 
17. (1) The Municipal Commissioner or the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Urban Local Body or an officer of appropriate rank, as the State 
Government may decide, shall be designated as the Programme In-Charge. 
(2) The role of Programme In-Charge shall be as follows:—  
(a) appoint the programme officer(s); 
(b) finalise and approve ward wise projects to be taken up under a 
programme under the Scheme; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programme  
In-Charge. 

8 
 
(c) finalise and approve micro, small and medium enterprises that 
would be a part of the scheme; 
(d) finalise and app rove schools that would be a part of the  
scheme; 
(e) supervise and monitor the projects taken up at the ward  level 
and the area that comes under his/her jurisdiction;  
(f) carry out such other functions as may be assigned to him/her by 
the State Council, from time to time. 
(3) The Programme In -Charge shall prepare in the month of December 
every year, a budget for the next financial year containing the details of 
anticipated demand of the scheme and funds required for different works. 
(4) The State Government shall delegate such administrative and financial 
powers to the Programme In -Charge as may be required to enable him/her 
to carry out the functions assigned under this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
District 
Programme 
Coordinator. 
 18. (1) The Collector of the district or any other district level officer of 
appropriate rank, as the State Government may decide, shall be designated 
as the District Programme Coordinator for the implementation of the 
Scheme in the district. 
(2) The District Pr ogramme Coordinator shall be responsible for the 
implementation of the Scheme in the district in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. 
(3) The role of District Programme Coordinator shall be to:—  
(a) accord necessary sanction and administrative clearances, 
wherever necessary, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) coordinate with the Programme In -Charge and Programme 
Officers functioning within his jurisdiction and the implementing 
agencies to ensure that the applicants are provided employment as per 
their entitlements under this Act; 
(c) review and monitor the performance of the Programme In -
Charge and the Programme Officers; 
(d) conduct periodic inspection of the works in progress;  
(e) redress the grievances of the applicants; 
(f) present a status report on the functioning of all the Urban Local 
Bodies in the district under this Act  to the State Council in every one 
hundred and eighty days.  
(g) ensure that regular social audits of all works within the 
jurisdiction of the Urban Local Body are carried out by the Programme 
In-Charge, in such form and manner as may be prescribed and that  
prompt action is taken on the objections raised in the social audit; 
(4) The State Government shall delegate such administrative and financial 
powers to the District Programme Coordinator as may be required to 
enable him to carry out the functions assigned under this Act. 
(5) The Programme Officer appointed under sub- section (1) of section 19 
and all other officers of the State Government and local authorities and 
bodies functioning within the district shall be responsible to assist the 
District Programm e Coordinator in carrying out his  functions under this 
Act. 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
Programme 
Officer. 
 
 
 
 
 
19. (1) The Programme In -Charge shall appoint a person, who is not 
below the rank of a  Block Development Officer, with such 
qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed by the State 
Government, as Programme Officer at the Urban Local Body level.  
 
 
 
50 
 

9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
(2) Not more than five Programme Officers can be appointed in an Urban 
Local Body.  
(3) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for matching the demand 
for employment with the employment opportunities arising in the area. 
(4) The Programme Officer shall help the micro, small and medium 
enterprises to register and get them due approval to be part of the Scheme.  
(5) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for ensuring that clean and 
hygienic sanitation facilities, drinking water and first -aid for all the 
applicants who get employment under the scheme are available at the 
place of work.  
(6) The Programme Officer shall prepare a plan for the ward  under his 
jurisdiction by consolidating the project proposals received from  the 
residents of that area, as per their feasibility. 
(7) The functions of the Programme Officer shall be to:— 
(a) implement the projects taken up; 
(b) allocate employment opportunities amongst the applicants and 
ask them to report for work; 
(c) sanction and ensure payment of  unemployment allowance to 
the eligible applicants; 
(d) ensure prompt and fair payment of wages to all applicants who 
are employed under the Act and are working in that urban area; 
(e) deal promptly with all complaints that may arise in connection 
with the implementation of the scheme within the urban area; and 
(f) any other work as may be assigned to him by the Programme 
In-Charge or the District Programme  Coordinator. 
(8) The Programme Officers shall function under the direction, control and 
superintendence of the Programme In-Charge. 
  
 
30 
20. The State Government  shall make available to the District Programme 
Coordinator, the Programme In- charge and the Programme Officers, 
necessary staff and technical support as may be deemed necessary for the 
effective implementation of the Scheme. 
 Responsibilities 
of the State 
Governments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
21. The State Governments, shall make a dedicated portal where citizens can 
choose the Urban Local Body and recommend projects: 
Provided that citizens  with no internet access  may recommend 
projects to the Programme Officer or the Programme In -Charge through a 
letter. 
 Recommendation 
of Projects. 
  
 
 
40 
22. The State Government, shall, by rules, prescribe an  appropriate grievance 
redressal mechanisms at the ward  level and the district level for dealing 
with any complaint by any person in respect of implementation of the 
scheme and the procedure for disposal of such complaints. 
 Grievance 
redressal 
mechanism. 
   CHAPTER V 
FINANCE AND AUDIT 
  
  
 
45 
23. (1) The Central Government and the State Governments shall have 
concurrent responsibility for providing funds for implementing the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and 
recurring expenditure for the imp lementation of the provisions of the 
Act. 
 Sharing of 
financial 
responsibilities. 

10 
 
(3) The Central Government shall provide to the State Governments, 
as grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure referred 
to in sub- section (2) as it may determine, from time to time, in 
consultation with the State Governments. 
Funding Pattern.  24. (1) Subject to the rules as may be made by the Central Government in  
this behalf, in consultation with the State Governments, the Central 
Government shall meet the cost of the following, namely:— 
(a) the amount required for payment of wages for skilled and 
unskilled applicants employed under the scheme; 
(b) up to three-fourths of the material cost of the scheme; 
(c) such percentage of the total cost of the scheme as may be 
determined by the Central Government towards the administrative 
expenses, which may incl ude the salary and allowances of the 
Programme Officers and supporting staff,  and the administrative 
expenses of the Central Council. 
(d) such percentage of the total cost of the scheme as may be 
determined by the Central Government as grants towards Urban  
Local Bodies with more than twenty thousand applicants. 
(2) The State Government shall meet the cost of the following, namely:—  
(a) the cost of unemployment allowance payable under the 
Scheme;  
(b) one-fourth of the material cost of the Scheme including 
payment of wages to skilled and semi -skilled workers subject to the 
provisions of the Second Schedule;  
(c) the administrative expenses of the State Council. 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
Transparency 
and 
accountability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25. (1) The Programme In -Charge and all Programme Officers in the Urban 
Local Body shall be responsible for the proper utilisation and management 
of the funds placed at their disposal for the purpose of implementing the 
scheme. 
(2) The State Government, may pres cribe the manner of maintaining 
proper books and accounts of employment of the  applicants employed 
under the scheme and the expenditure incurred in connection with the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act and the rules and scheme 
made there under. 
(3) The State Government, may by rules, determine the arrangements to be 
made for the proper execution of the scheme and programmes under the 
Scheme and to ensure transparency and accountability at all levels in the 
implementation of the Scheme. 
(4) All payments of wages and unemployment allowances shall be made 
directly to the adult  concerned either digitally or through cash as per  the 
rules made by the State Government: 
Provided that applicants may be  encouraged to choose digital 
payment methods and in case of cash transfers, at least two witnesses for 
each payment so  made should be recorded in addition to the  procedure 
prescribed by rules made by the State Government, as the case may be. 
(5) If any dispute or complaint arises concerning the implementation of the 
Scheme, the aggrieved person may file a complaint in this regard to the 
Programme Officer in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(6) The Programme Officer shall enter every complaint in a complaint 
register maintained by him in such form and manner as may be prescribed 
and shall dispose of the disputes and complaints within seven days of its 
receipt and in case it relates to a matter to be resolved by any other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 

11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
authority it shall be forwarded to such authority under intimat ion to the 
complainant: 
Provided that if the Programme Officer is unable to find a suitable 
resolution within the stipulated seven days, the matter shall be referred to 
the Programme In-charge: 
Provided further that if the Programme In- Charge is unable to find a 
suitable resolution within thirty days of receipt of the complaint, the matter 
shall be referred to the District Programme Coordinator. 
  
10 
26. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India, prescribe appropriate arrangements for audit 
of the accounts of the Scheme at all levels. 
 
(2) The accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained  in such form and in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
 
 Audit of 
Accounts. 
  
 
15 
 CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
  
  27. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall on conviction be 
liable to a fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 
 Penalty for  
non-compliance. 
  
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
28. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers 
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules) may, in such 
circumstances and subject to such conditions and limitations, be 
exercisable also by the State Government or such officer subordinate to the 
Central Government or the State Government as it may specify in such 
notification. 
(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the powers 
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules and Schemes) may, in 
such circumstances and subject to such conditions and limitations, be 
exercisable also by such officer subordinate to it as it may specify in such 
notification. 
 Power to 
delegate. 
  
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
29. (1) The Central Government may  give such directions  as it may consider 
necessary to the State Government, for the effective implementation  of the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub- section (1), the Central 
Government may, on receipt of any complaint regarding the issue or 
improper utilisation of funds granted under this Act in respect of any 
Scheme if prima facie  satisfied that there is a c ase, cause an investigation 
into the complaint made, and can suggest changes to the State 
Government: 
Provided that the Central Government shall not stop the release of  
funds to a State Government in any case. 
 Power of Central 
Government to 
give directions. 
 
 40 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
30. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient 
so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First or 
the Second Schedule and thereupon the First or the Second Schedule, as 
the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly. 
(2) A copy of every notification made under sub- section (1) shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 
 Power to amend 
Schedules. 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
50 
31. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
District Programme Coordinator, Programme In-Charge and Programme 
Officer or any other person who is, or who is deemed to be, a public 
servant within the meaning of sub -section (2) of section 28 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, in respect of anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or Scheme 
made there under. 
 Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 

12 
Power to make 
rules. 
32. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Each State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
and subject to the conditions of previous publication, and consistent with
this Act and the rules made by the Central Government, make rules t o
c
arry out the provisions of this Act.
5 
Laying of rules 
and schemes. 
33. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making an y
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not
be made, the rule shall have thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any suc
h
m
odification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
(2) Every rule or Scheme made by the State Government  under this Ac t
s
hall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of the
State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such
legislature consists of one House, before that House.
10 
15 
20 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
34. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
25 

13 
 
  THE FIRST SCHEDULE   
  [See section 4(3)]  
  MINIMUM FEATURES OF URBAN EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME  
 1. The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works:-  
(i)   provide micro, small and medium enterprises skilled labour; 
(ii) use skilled labour to improve learning outcomes or skill 
development of students in schools;  
(iii)  help assisting works carried out by urban local bodies; 
(iv) help conduct different surveys by central and state 
governments; 
(v)     water conservation and water harvesting works; 
(vi) drought proofing (including afforestation and tree plantation); 
(vii)   land development; 
(viii) flood c ontrol and protection works including drainage in 
water logged areas; 
(ix)    rural connectivity to provide all-weather access; and 
(x)  any other work which may be notified by the Central 
Government in consultation with the State Government. 
 
 2. Ensure the social rights of urban poor.  
 3. Creation of durable assets and strengthening the livelihood resource base 
of the urban poor. 
 
 4. Provide decent working conditions with livable wages which shall be 
reviewed every year to counter inflation. 
 
 5. The State Council shall prepare a list of preferred works for different areas 
based on their ability to create durable assets. 
 
 6. The Scheme shall be subject to appropriate arrangements as may be laid 
down by the State Government under the rules issued by it for proper 
maintenance of the public assets created under the Scheme. 
 
 7. Under no circumstances shall the labourers be paid less than the wage rate 
as determined by the Central Council or as provided in the Act. 
 
 8. The Scheme shall not permit engaging any contractor for implementation 
of the projects under it. 
 
 9. Every Scheme shall contain adequate provisions for ensuring transparency 
and accountability at all level of implementation. 
 
 10. 
 
Provisions for regular inspection, supervision and feedback from owners 
of micro, small and medium enterprises, school principals and residents of 
works taken up and done by the applicant employed under the Scheme 
shall be made to ensure proper quality of work as well as to ensure that the 
total wages paid for the completion of the work is commensurate with the 
quality, quantity and satisfaction of work done. 
 
 11. The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme In -Charge and the 
Programme Officer shall prepare annually a report containing the facts and 
figures and achievements relating to the implementation of the Scheme 
within their jurisdiction and a copy of the same shall be made available to 
the public on demand and on payment of such fee as may be specified in 
the Scheme. 
 

14 
 
  THE SECOND SCHEDULE   
  [See sections 5 and 24(2)]  
  CONDITIONS FOR GUARANTEED URBAN EMPLOYMENT UNDER A SCHEME 
AND MINIMUM ENTITLEMENTS OF LABOURERS 
 
 1. The adult members of every household who:- 
(a) reside in any urban areas; and 
(b) are willing to do unskilled and skilled work,  
may submit their names, age and the address of the household to the Urban 
Local Body of which they reside for registration and issuance of a job 
card. 
 
 2. First preference regarding the employment opportunities shall be given to 
women, Scheduled Castes, Schedule Tribes, Other Backward Classes and 
Minorities. 
Provided that priority shall be given to women in such a way that at 
least one -third of the beneficia ries shall be women who have registered 
and requested for work under this Act. 
 
 3. It shall be the duty of the Programme Officer to register the applicant and 
get police verification done, after making such enquiry as it deems fit and 
issue a job card containing such details of adult members of the household 
affixing their photographs and Aadhar card number, as may be specified 
by the State Government in the Scheme. 
 
 4. The registration made under paragraph 3 shall be for such period as may 
be laid in the Scheme, but in any case not less than five years, and may be 
renewed from time to time. 
 
 5. Every adult member of a registered household whose name appears in the 
job card shall be entitled to apply for unskilled and skilled work under the 
Scheme. 
 
 6. All registered adults shall be entitled to employment in accordance with 
the Scheme made under the provisions of this Act, for as many days as 
each applicant may request. 
 
 7. The Programme Officer shall ensure that every applicant referred to in 
paragraph 6 shall be provided skilled or unskilled work in accordance with 
the provisions of the Scheme within fifteen days of receipt of an 
application or from the date he seeks work in case of advance application, 
whichever is later: 
 
 8. Applications for work must be for at least fourteen days of continuous 
work. 
 
 9. Applications for work may be submitted in writing either to the 
Programme Officer, as may be specified in the Scheme. 
 
 10. The Programme Officer, as the case may be, shall be bound to accept valid 
applications and to issue a dated receipt to the applicant. Group 
applications may also be submitted. 
 
 
 
11. Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated in writing, by 
means of a letter sent to himat the address given in the job card and by a 
public notice displayed at the Urban Local Body. 
 
 12. As far as possible, employment shall be provided within a radius of five 
kilometres of the place where the applicant resides at the time of applying. 
 
 13. In cases the employment is provided outside such radius, it must be 
provided within the jurisd iction of the Urban Local Body, and the worker 
 

15 
 
shall be paid ten per cent of the wage rate as extra wages to meet 
additional transportation expense. 
 14. In all cases where unemployment allowance is paid, or due to be paid, the 
Programme Officer shall inform the Programme in Charge and the District 
Programme Coordinator in writing the reasons as to why it was not 
possible for him to provide employment or cause to provide employment 
to the applicants. 
 
 15. The District Programme Coordinator shall, in his half yearly report to the 
State Council, explain as to why employment could not be provided in 
cases where payment of unemployment allowance is involved. 
 
 16. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance applications, that is, 
applications which may be submitted in advance of the date from which 
employment is sought. 
 
 17. The Programme Officer in the Urban Local Body shall prepare and 
maintain or cause to be prepared and maintained such registers, vouchers 
and other documents in such form and in such manner as may be specified 
in the Scheme containing particulars of job cards and passbooks issued, 
name, age and address of the applicant. 
 
 18. 
 
 
A list of adults, who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the 
notice board of the Urban Local Body and at such other places as the 
Programme in Charge may deem necessary and the list shall be open for 
inspection by the State Government, and any person interested. 
 
 19. 
 
If t he Programme Officer is satisfied at any time  that an adult  has 
registered with it by furnishing false information, it may direct the 
Programme In-Charge to direct his name to be struck off from the register 
and direct the applicant to return the job card: 
Provided that no such action under this paragraph shall be directed 
unless the concerned  has been given an opportunity of being heard in the 
presence of two independent persons. 
 
 20. If any personal injury is caused to any adult employed under the Scheme 
by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shall be 
entitled to, free of charge, such medical treatment as is admissible under 
the Scheme 
 
 21. 
 
Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State 
Government shall arrange for such hospitalisation including 
accommodation, treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance not 
less than half of the wage rate required to be paid had the injured been 
engaged in the work. 
 
 22. If an adult  employed under a Scheme dies or becomes permanently 
disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of employment, he 
shall be paid by the implementing agency an ex- gratia payment at the rate 
of one lakh rupees or such amount as may be notified by the Central 
Government, and the amount shall be paid to the legal heirs of the 
deceased or the disabled, as the case may be. 
 
 23. In case the number of children below the age of six years accompanying 
the worker at any employment area are five or more, provisions shall be 
made to depute one worker to look after such children. 
 
 24. The person deputed under paragraph 23 shall be paid wage rate.  
 25. In case the payment of wages is not made within the period specified 
under the Scheme, the workers shall be entitled to receive payment of 
compensation as per the provisions that shall be created by the Central 
Council. 
 
 26.  The wages under a Scheme may be paid by the method decided by 
respective State Governments. 
 

16 
 
 27. If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying any 
adult, who is employed under a Scheme, such adult  shall be entitled to, 
free of charge, such medical treatment for the child as may be specified in 
the Scheme and in case of death or disablement, through an ex -gratia 
payment as may be determined by the State Government. 
 
 28.  In case of every employment under the Scheme, there shall be no 
discrimination solely on the ground of gender and the wage rate 
determined by Central Council, shall be complied with. 
 
 29. The applicants who shall be employed under the Scheme can take two 
leaves per month other than the National holidays after informing the 
Programme Officer and their concerned supervisor. 
 
 30.  The Programme Officer should ensure that Workplace benefits tailored to 
job requirements, including rest areas, sanitation facilities, drinking water, 
first-aid stations, and child-care support, if applicable are provided. 
 
 31.  No worker shall work for more than eight hours and six days a week 
continuously. 
 
  

17 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Unemployment remains one of the most pressing and persistent challenges, 
affecting the livelihoods of millions and constraining the economic growth of the  
country. According to  the International Labour Organisation, one in three young 
people is neither in education, employment, nor training, with women constituting 
ninety-five per cent.  of this group. Further, the Economic Survey 2023- 24 
highlighted that half of college graduates are not immediately employable, and only 
4.4 per cent. of the youth workforce possesses formal skills. 
This persistent problem has become highly sensitive and severe. A testimony to 
this, is the fact that over forty thousand graduates and postgraduates, along with 
more than one lakh individuals with education up to C lass XII, applied for 
contractual sanitation worker positions in Haryana. Data from the National Crime 
Record Bureau indicates  that a person commits suicide every three hours due to 
unemployment in the country. While seventy  to eighty lakh youth enter the labour 
force every year, India is said to be experiencing a demographic dividend. However, 
this demographic dividend may soon turn into a demographic liability if enough jobs 
are not created.  
The Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) 2023 -24 reveals a disheartening 
reality: the youth unemployment rate has stagnated at ten per cent . country wide 
since last year, but urban areas are facing an even graver crisis. Urban youth 
unemployment stands at 14.7 per cent.  
While there is a policy that seeks to prov ide hundred days of guaranteed 
employment in rural areas, there is no comprehensive national policy to address 
urban unemployment. The Union Government introduced an Employment Linked 
Incentive (ELI) scheme to deal with the problem in this budget session. However, 
the per company load of hiring four thousand interns every year and training  them 
may not lead to desired results. Further, ELI as a scheme neglects the role of the 
States and the spirit of cooperative federalism. Thus, there is a need to create a 
comprehensive national policy addressing urban unemployment with States actively 
involved in the process.  
Considering the complexities of urban areas, the policy needs to take into 
consideration different factors like implementing agency, work permitted, worker 
registration and police verification, grievance redressal, eligibility criteria keeping in 
mind the fluid movement of people from rural to urban areas and vice versa, length 
of contract, wage rates, benefits, learning aspects, contract termination, working 
conditions,  and most importantly providing the job seekers with a fair chance for a 
more long term sustained employment.  
Eleven states in India have implemented schemes that aim at generating urban 
employment, either through employment guarantee programs or community work 
initiatives.  
Various academicians and the 25 threport of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour recommended that “There is an imperative need for putting in 
place an Employment Guarantee Programme for the urban workforce in line with 
MGNREGA.” Further, this would be in line with the Article 41 of the Constitution. 
Even though the article is a Directive Principle of State Policy, it urges the State to 
make effective provisions for the right to work, education, and public assistance 
within its economic capacity in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness, 
disablement, and in other unwanted circumstance s. Introducing an urban 
unemployment guarantee program would support the Right to Livelihood, which the 
judiciary has interpreted as an essential aspect of the Right to Life. 
This Bill aims to offer flexibility to both skilled and unskilled workers. Different 
types of work will have different length of contracts. This will help both unskilled 
and skilled workers to maintain fluidity of movement as well as provide them with 
the option to learn a new skill while performing their jobs. Moreover, the workers 
will have the option to work with micro, small and medium enterprises  (MSMEs) 
and schools for a year to enhance their long term employment opportunity.  

18 
 
The Bill further seeks to empower women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, 
Other Backward Cl asses and Minorities by prioritising their employment and 
representation in Central as well as State Councils. The bill features broad eligibility 
criteria to ensure accessibility for all and requires the Central Council to develop a 
scientific methodology , considering various input factors, in consultation with the 
states to determine wage rates. These rates will be reviewed annually to keep pace 
with inflation.  
Additionally, the B ill mandates the Central Council to propose methods for 
converging differe nt government schemes to provide social security for workers 
registered under this scheme. It also requires the Union government to act on the 
recommendations made by the Central Council within thirty days.  
The Bill includes provisions for compensation if the sought employment is not 
provided and establishes checks and balances at the district level through district 
coordinator, along with rules set by the states. Additionally, it outlines specifications 
for working hours, holidays, working conditions, and terms for contract termination. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above-mentioned objectives. 
       DEREK O’BRIEN. 
 
        
  

19 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the State Government shall, in such urban 
areas in the State, as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every 
adult skilled and unskilled work for not less than ninety days in a financial year in 
accordance with the S cheme. Clause 9 provides that if an applicant for employment  
under the Scheme is not provided employment  within fifteen days of receipt of 
his/her application, he /she shall be entitled to a daily  unemployment allowance.  
Clause12 provides for the constitution of a Central Employment Guarantee Council 
with a Chairperson and Members and for the appointment of officers and staff thereto 
as deemed necessary by the Central Government as well as for the salaries and 
allowances payable to them and the terms and conditions of their service.  Clause  14 
provides for the constitution  of State Employment Guarantee Council with a 
Chairperson and Members and for the appointment of officers and staff thereto as 
deemed necessary by the Central Government as well as for the salaries and 
allowances payable to them and the terms and conditions of their service. Clause 19 
provides for the appointment of a Programme Officer  at the Urban Body level . 
Clause 23 of Bill provides that the Central Government and the State Government 
shall make available funds for implementing  the provisions thereof and that the 
Central Government shall prepare the estimates of capital and recurring expenditure 
and provide to the State Governments, as grants- in-aid of revenues, such percentage 
of expenditure as it may determine from time to time, in consultation with State 
Governments. Sub-section (1) of Clause 2 4 provides that the Central Government 
shall meet the amount required fo r payment of wages for skilled and unskilled 
applicants employed under the scheme, up to three -fourths of the material cost of the 
Scheme, administrative expenses of the Programme Officers and his supporting staff  
and of the Central Council and grants towards Urban Local Bodies with more than 
twenty thousand applicants. The expenditure in relation to States shall be borne by 
the State Government concerned. However, the expenditure  in relation to Union 
Territories shall be borne by the Central Government. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non-recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible to 
estimate the exact quantum of recurring and non- recurring expenditure likely to be 
involved at this stage. 

20 
 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
 Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government  and State Government 
to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 34 provides that the 
Central Government may, make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary for 
removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill. 
As the matters in respect of which rules or orders may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail  only, the delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for enhancement of livelihood security to individuals in urban 
 areas of the country by formulation of an Employment Guarantee  
Scheme aimed at providing guaranteed wage employment  
in every financial year to every adult in the urban areas  
covered thereunder who volunteers to do skilled or 
 unskilled work and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
_______ 
(Shri Derek O’Brien, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—303—08.12.2025.