1
THE QUOTING OF SOURCE OF LAW BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for the quoting of source of law while publishing notifications, orders, circulars,
tenders for bringing in transparency in government functioning and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of  Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Quoting of Source of Law Bill, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as "the Central Government" may, by
notification in the official gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different
States and Union Territories.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in other, cases the Central Government;
(b) "publish" means publishing through official gazette, newspapers, magazines
and other print media;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXXIV of  2006
5
Definitions.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law in the time being in force the
appropriate Government shall not publish a notifications, orders, circulars, tenders without
quoting of source of law viz. Constitution of India, Act of Parliament or State Legislatures,
rules framed thereunder, regulations, bye-laws etc.
4. The Central Government may, by notification, in the official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Quoting of
some of law by
appropriate
Govt.
Power to make
rules.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Central Government as also State Governments publish, from time to time
notifications, orders, tenders etc. in Official Gazettes, newspapers and other print media.
However, in most of the cases, the source of the law, namely, Constitution of India, Act of
Parliament or the Act of a State Legislature, rules, regulations or byelaws, under which
these are issued, do not find mention therein.
To ensure transparency in the administration public should know all the relevant
aspects of government acts and deeds which are being published under the authority of law
regulations.
Public, companies, corporations or other bodies affected by such notifications, orders
etc. will get a clear idea if source of law under which these documents are published, is
made known to them. If any notification, order or tender etc. is issued under the executive
powers of any authority, constitutional or otherwise, the same should invariable be mentioned.
This will also prevent the authorities concerned from issuing notifications or orders
etc., which are outside the scope of the law.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM  NAIK
3

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
The Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the
purposes of this Bill. The rules relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a Normal Character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the quoting of source of law while publishing notifications, orders, circulars,
tenders for bringing in transparency in government functioning and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3792RS(S3)—18-12-2014.