1
Bill No. XXXIX of 2019
THE VICTIMS OF FLOODS CAUSED BY HEAVY RAINS, CYCLONES
AND OTHER REASONS (REHABILITATION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and rehabilitation of victims of floods which may be caused
by heavy rains, cloudbursts, cyclones, breached bunds of dams, reservoirs, etc. and
other reasons by making various provisions through a statutory board at national
level which may also suggest measures to be taken by Central and State
Governments to control floods and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Floods caused by Heavy Rains, Cyclones
and other reasons (Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate" Government means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Board" means the National Board for Rehabilitation and Welfare of Flood
Victims established under section 3;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
5
10

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within a period of sixty
days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish for the purposes of this Act a National Board for Rehabilitation and Welfare of
Flood Victims.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of properties, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Aurangabad in the State of Maharashtra
and its regional offices shall be located in the capital of each State and Union Territory.
(4) The Board shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson and six other members to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) not more than one representative each from the States and Union Territories
to be nominated by the respective State Governments and Union Territories
Administrations.
(5) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of officers and
staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the board.
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other members, officers and staff of the Board
shallf be such as may be prescribed.
(7) The Board shall comply with such directions as may, from tie to tie, be given to it
by the Central Government.
(8) The Board shall meet at such ties and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in the manner as may be
prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall discharge such functions as may be necessary for the protection
and rehabilitation of victims of floods caused by heavy rains, cloudbursts, cyclones, breached
bunds of dams, reservoirs, etc.
(2) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the Board may also provide for:—
(a) making a detailed study and analysis of floods caused in the past in the
regions and areas of the country and identify areas in every State and Union Territory
which are prone to floods;
(b) making provision for accelerated water drainage system in the residential
areas prone to floods in particular which are near the rivers or the sea, as the case may
be;
(c) suggesting policy with regard to construction of houses and commercial
establishments near the rivers and beaches;
(d) making provision for providing permanent shelters capable of withstanding
the severity and intensity of flood waters to the people of identified floodprone areas;
(e) steps to be taken for plantation of trees and shurbs as afforestation measure
in and around floodprone areas and in particular near the rivers and hilly areas where
landlides are caused by floods or heavy rain to mitigate the gravity of floods and
cloudbursts;
(f) installing flood forecasting systems to alert the people of floodprone areas;
(g) making provision for providing food, drinking water and other necessities in
flood-affected areas during floods in such manner as may be prescribed;
Functions of
the Board
Establishment
of Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(h) making provision for boats and other rescue materials for the rescue of
people in flooded areas;
(i) making recommendations to the Central Government for minimizing the loss
of lives and properties in flood affected and flood prone areas;
(j) keeping perpetual surveillance, carrying out inspections and monitoring rescue
operations during the floods;
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the recommendations
of the Board.
6. Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall pay compensation of,—
(i) rupees ten lakh to the nearest kin of a person who has lost his life in
flood;
(ii) rupee five lakh in case of a serious injury to a person affected by flood;
7. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time, as may be prescribed, its
annual report, giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous financial
year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the Annual Report to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
8.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf provide to the Board requisite funds every year for the effective implementation
of this Act.
9. This Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time
being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Annual Report.
Appropriate
Government to
implement
recommendations
of the Board.
Compensation
in case of
death or
serious injury
during flood.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In several parts of our vast nation floods are a regular phenomenon cause by mother
natures fury every year. Even this year floods have wreaked havoc in various States like
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Uttrakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh,
Maharashtra, Assam, Odisha, etc. It has not spared even desert States like Gujarat and
Rajasthan. Bihar, Assam and eastern Uttar Pradesh face the fury of floods every year caused
by rivers emanating from Nepal and China. Apart from the fury of mother nature humans too
have contributed immensely in the matter. Pollutted environment, unplanned and uncontrolled
development in the cities particulary those which are near the rivers and sea, ruthless
destructin of jungles, rampant use of plastic, toxic gases, chemicals, etc. leads to disruption
in the weather cycle in the country frequently culminating in the fury of floods. The floods
devastage quite a large number of villages, cities and damage properties, crops, roads and
kill people and livestock. The agricultural land also undergoes severe soil erosion. Due to
these floods country suffers huge losses in terms of human lives, livestock, properties,
crops, etc. thereby increasing the financial burden of the Governments of the day. At the
same time people become homeless and get displaced and face innumerable problems
including safety of their lives.
Though the Central Goverment and State Governments and their agencies to their
level best to provide relief to the victims of floods and their kins by making temporary
arrangements of shelter, food etc for them, it is felt that there still is need to have a permanent
statutory body to suggest measure to control floods. As such a National Board needs to be
established to exclusively deal with natural calamity of floods in the country.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR DHOOT
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Board for Rehabilitation
and Welfare of Flood Victims. Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds for effective implementation of the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to
quantify the amount at this stage but it is estimated that an amount of one thousand crores
rupees may involve as recurring expenditure per annum. A non-recurring expenditure to the
tune of five hundred crore rupee may also involve for creating assets.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is therefore of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and rehabilitation of victims of floods which may be caused
by heavy rains, cloudbursts, cyclones, breached bunds of dams, reservoirs, etc. and
other reasons by making various provisions through a statutory board at national
level which may also suggest measures to be taken by Central and State
Governments to control floods and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4318RS(S3)—11-12-2019.