AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 29TH DECEMBER, 2017
Bill No. XXXII of 2017
THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY AND MEMBERS OF THEIR
FAMILY (PROTECTION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION AND
GUARANTEE OF SOCIAL WELFARE)
BILL, 2017
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short Title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3.  Guiding Principles.
CHAPTER  II
R
IGHTS AND ENTITLEMENTS
4. Right to Equality and Non-Discrimination.
5. Prohibition of Discrimination.
6. Right to life and personal liberty.
7. Right to own property.
8. Right to form a family.
9. Right to participation.
10. Access to medical treatment.
11. Access to welfare measures by the Central and State Government.
12. Protection from torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
13. Protection from abuse, violence and exploitation.
CHAPTER III
E
DUCATION
14. Duty of educational institutions to provide education.
15. Reservations in primary, secondary and higher educational institutions.
CHAPTER IV
SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
16. Vocational and self-employment.
17. Reservations of Posts.
18. Incentives to employers in the private sector.
19. Reasonable Accommodation in employment.
20. Special Employment Exchange.

CLAUSES
CHAPTER V
SOCIAL INCLUSION, HEALTHCARE AND REHABILITATION
21. Social Security.
22. Healthcare facilities.
23. Rehabilitation.
24. Promotion of training and awareness programs on leprosy.
CHAPTER VI
M
ULTI-DRUG THERAPY FOR PEOPLE LIVING WITH LEPROSY
25. Central Government and State Government to take measures.
26. Multi-Drug Therapy by Central and State Government.
CHAPTER VII
DISCLOSURE OF MEDICAL RECORDS
27. Disclosure of medical records.
CHAPTER VIII
APPOINTMENT OF OMBUDSPERSONS
28. Appointment of Ombudspersons.
29. Powers of Ombudspersons
30. Procedure of complaint.
31. Orders of Ombudspersons.
32. Authorities to assist Ombudspersons.
33. Report to the State Government.
CHAPTER IX
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
34. Penalty for contravention.
35. Penalty for certain actions of individuals.
36. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Ombudspersons.
37. Penalty for breach of confidentiality.
38. Penalty for failure to furnish information.
39. Offences by Establishments.
40. Prohibition of victimisation.
41. Court to try offences.
42. Offences to be cognizable and bailable.
CHAPTER X
R
EPEAL OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
43. Substitution of certain terms.
44. Repeal of enactments
45. Amendments to certain enactments.
46. Act to have overriding effect.
(ii)

CLAUSES
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS
47. Central Government to provide funds.
48. Act to be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law
49. Action taken in good faith.
50. Power to remove difficulties.
51. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.
SCHEDULE I - Repealed Provisions and Act.
SCHEDULE II- Amendments.
(iii)

THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY AND
MEMBERS OF THEIR FAMILY (PROTECTION AGAINST
DISCRIMINATION AND GUARANTEE OF
SOCIAL WELFARE)
BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to protect the human rights of persons affected by leprosy, to eliminate discrimination
against them and their families, to promote their social welfare, to take steps for the
prevention and control of leprosy and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
WHEREAS the spread of leprosy and discrimination against persons affected by
leprosy and their family members is a matter of grave concern to all, and there is an urgent
need for the protection of the human rights of such persons, by repealing and amending
existing laws the discriminate against them;
AND WHEREAS  there is a necessity for effective care, support, treatment and social
inclusion and integration of persons affected by leprosy and their families;
AND WHEREAS the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 does not cover
persons affected by leprosy that are still to be diagnosed or those undergoing treatment and
also does not recognise the discrimination and stigma faced by the family members of
persons affected and cured of leprosy;
Bill No. XXXII of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 29TH DECEMBER, 2017

2
AND WHEREAS the General Assembly of the United Nations, of which India is a
member, recalling and reaffirming its previous commitments on leprosy, has unanimously
adopted a Resolution on the Elimination of Discrimination against Persons affected by
Leprosy and their Family Members in 2010, accompanied by Principals and Guidelines listing
out measures to improve the living conditions and social inclusion of such persons;
AND WHEREAS the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities 2006 (“UNCRPD”) to which India is a party, promotes, protects and ensures the
full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with
disabilities;
AND WHEREAS the Republic of India, having signed the Resolution of the General
Assembly of the United Nations on leprosy and having signed and ratified the UNCRPD,
2006 has to make provision to give effect to the said Resolution and Convention;
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
P
RELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rights of Persons Affected by Leprosy and Members
of their Family (Protection against Discrimination and Guarantee of Social Welfare) Act,
2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may. by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘abuse’ means any unwelcome verbal or non-verbal act or behavious towards
a person affected by leprosy or a member of the family of a person affected by leprosy
which causes:—
(i) bodily pain or harm to a person affected by leprosy or a member of the
family of a person affected by leprosy;
(ii) humiliation or embarrassment to a person affected by leprosy or a
member of the family of a person affected by leprosy; or
(iii) deprivation of exonomic and financial resources, foods and fluids or
any other form of support, to which a person affected by leprosy or a member of
the family of a person  affected by leprosy is entitled:
Provided that the word 'leper' shall be included with in the meaning of 'abuse'
when any person affected by leprosy is referred to by such word;
(b) ‘appropriated Government’ means;
(i) in relation to an establishment of the Central Government, or any
establishment, wholly or substantially owned or financed by that Government
or a Cantonment Board constituted under the Cantonments Act, or a Union
Territory without legislature, or the provider of a service which pertains to List I
in Schedule VII of the Constitution, the Central Government;
(ii) in all other cases, the State Government or, as the case may be, the
Government of a Union Territory with legislature.
(c) 'barrier' means any factor including attitudinal, cultural, economic, institutional,
political, religious, social or structural factors which hampers the full and effective
participation, of a person affected by leprosy or a member of the family of a person
affected by leprosy in society;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
41 of 2006.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
(d) 'disability due to leprosy' means grade 1 or grade 2 disability in the hand, leg
or eye that hinders full and effective participation of a person affected by leprosy in
society equally with others, whether or not his or her extent of disability has been
specified in measurable terms;
Explanation —
(i) Grade 1 disability means sensory impairment, scars with sensory
impairment or muscle weakness without contractures.
(ii) Grade 2 disability means visible impairment, Lagophthalmos,
Iridocyclitis, visual acuity of <6/60, burns, deep cracks, wounds (both simple
and deep ulcers), muscle atrophy, bone absorption of shortening or contractures.
(e) 'discrimination' means any act or mission which directly or indirectly, expressly
or by effect, immediately or over a period of time—
(i) imposes any burden, obligation, liability, disability or disadvantage on
any person or category of persons, who are either effected by leprosy or
associated with persons affected by leprosy; or
(ii) denies, restricts or withholds any benefit, opportunity or advangae
from any person or category of persons, who are either affected by leprosy or
associated with persons affected by leprosy, including denial of employment,
movement in public spaces and reasonable accommodation;
and the expression "discriminate" is to be construced accordingly.
(f) 'establishment' means and includes a company, club, firm or any other body
corporate or association of persons jointly carrying out a systematic activity for
consideration or otherwise including but not limited to:
(i) a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or a
co-operative society under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912;
(ii) a trust under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or corresponding state law
under which trusts may be established;
(iii) any organisation or institution or authority established by or under a
Central Act or State Act or otherwise;
(iv) any industry under section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; or
(v) any shop or establishment governed by a State Act concerning such
shops and establishments;
(g) 'exploitation' means any form of conduct which is intended for a commercial
purpose, whether for money or kind, and which results in the misuse or unjust treatment
of a person affected by leprosy or the member of the family of a person affected by
leprosy;
(h) 'healthcare provider' means and includes,—
(i) any individual whose vocation or profession is directly or indirectly
related to the maintenance of the health of another individual and includes any
physician, nurse, paramedic, therapist, psychologist, counsellor or other individual
providing medical, nursing, psychological or other healthcare, services, including
treatment through Multi-Drug Therapy; or
(ii) any public or private clinical establishment as defined under clause
(c) of section 2 of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation)
Act, 2010;
(i) 'informed consent' means consent given by a person affected by leprosy or a
representative of such person specific to a proposed intervention without any coercion,
21 of 1860.
2 of 1912.
2 of 1882.
14 of 1947.
23 of 2010.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
undue influence, fraud, mistake or misrepresentation and after informing such person
or his or her representative, as the case may be, such information as prescribed in the
rules, relating to risks and benefits of, and alternatives to, the proposed intervention in
such language and in such manner as understood by that the person affected by
leprosy or his or her representative, as the case may be;
(i) 'local authority' means a municipality, a Cantonment Board, a Panchayat or
any other authority, established under an Act of Parliament, or a State Legislature to
administer the civic affairs of any habitation as defined in or under such Act;
(j) 'leprosy' means a disease triggered by Mycobacterium Leprae characterised
by symptoms of pale and reddish skin, numbness of hands or feet or loss of feeling in
a patch of skins, and which may lead to disability as defined under clause (d) of this
section;
(k) 'leprosy cured person' means, notwithstanding any thing in the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 or any other law pertaining to persons with disability,
any person affected by leprosy, regardless of the percentage of his disability, who has
been certified by a registered medical practitioner, as having been administered  with
the first dose under Multi-Drug Therapy, (MDT) which renders his illness non-
infectious, or has completed treatment for leprosy;
(l) 'multi-durg therapy' (MDT) means the medical treatment wherein a combination
of drugs is administered to a person affected by leprosy to render the infection non-
contagious and kill Mycobacterium Leprae;
(m) 'members of the family of pesons affected by leprosy' means and includes—
(i) spouse;
(ii) parents;
(iii) children; and
(iv) brothers or sisters
 of the person affected by leprosy.
(n) 'person affected by leprosy'—means and includes a person who suffers
from, or has previously suffered from or has been cured of leprosy, whether or not
such person has undergone treatment under MDT;
(o) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government
under this Act;
(p) 'public building' means a building, irrespective of ownership, which is used
and accessed by the public at large; and includes its entrance, exit, parking space,
footpath and other appurtenant lands;
(q) 'reasonable accommodation' means necessary and appropriate modification
and adjustments, not imposing a disproportionate or undue burden, where needed in
a particular case, to ensure to a person affected by leprosy the enjoyment or exercise
of this or her fundamental rights and freedoms on an equal basis with others;
(r) 'services' means any provision, facitlity, utility or any other assistance provided
in any form to a person or persons affected by leprosy, or a member or members of the
family of a person affected  by leprosy and includes services relating to banking and
finance; education; health; insurance; rehabilitation; recreation and hospitality;
transport or travel; and telecommunications, and such other services which may be
notified by the Central Government;
(s) 'violence' means any act of commission or omission which causes physical,
emotional, psycholgical harm or injury to a person affected by leprosy or a member of
the family of a person affected by leprosy.
49 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
3. The appropriate Government and local authorities shall secure for persons affected
by leprosy and members of the family of persons affected by leprosy:—
(a) respect for inherent diginity, individual authonomy including the freedom to
make one's own chocies, and independence of persons;
(b) non-discrimination;
(c) full and effective participation and inclusion in society; and
(d) equality of opportunity.
CHAPTER II
RIGHTS AND ENTITLEMENTS
4. (1) No person, estabilshement or appropriate Government shall discriminate against
any person affected by leprosy solely on the ground of  his or her affliction, disability, or
physical attributes, or against any member of the family of the person affected by leprosy
solely on the ground of his or here association with a person affected by leprosy.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary steps to ensure that persons
affected by leprosy and members of the family of persons affected by leprosy enjoy the right
to equality before the law and equal protection of laws.
5. (1) No establishment, of appropriat Government or person, shall subject a person
affected by leprosy, where such person duly furnishes a certificate of a registered medical
practitioner that attests that such person has been administered with the first dose under
MDT or has been cured of leprosy, or a member of the family of a person affected by leprosy
to the following, namely:—
(a) the denial of, termination from, or the unfair treatment in, or in relation to,
employment or occupation;
(b) the denial of, or the unfair treatment in, or in relation to, departmental
promotions in employment or occupation;
(c) the  denial or discontinuation of, or, unfair treament, in healthcare services;
(d) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, educational
establishments and services thereof;
(e) the denial or discontinuation of or unfair treatment with regard to access to,
or the provision of, or the enjoyment of, or the use of any good, accommodation,
service, facility, benefit, privilege, or opportunity dedicated to the use of the general
public or customarily available to the public, whether or not for a fee, including shops,
public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertrainment or the use of wells, tanks,
bathing ghats, roads, burial grounds or funeral ceremonies and places of pubic resort;
(f) the denial, or, discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, the right
of movement;
(g) the denial or discontinuation of, or, unfair treatment with regard to, the right
to reside, purchase, rent, sale, transfer or otherwise occupy, any property;
(h) the denial or discontinuation of, or, unfair treatment in, the opportunity to
stand for, or, hold public or private office;
(i) the denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in, Government or
private establishment in whose care or custody the person may be;
(j) the denial of, or unfair treatment in, the provision of insurance;
(k) the unfair treatment in, or in relation to, adoption, inheritance, and marital
relations; and
(l) the isolation or segregation in any form.
Guiding
Principles.
Right to
Equality and
Non-
Discrimination.
Prohibition
of
Discrimination.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall take necessary steps to ensure that persons
affected by leprosy and members of the family of persons affected by leprosy enjoy the right
to life with dignity, and respect for their personal liberty on an equal basis with others.
(2) No person shall be deprived of his personal liberty only on the ground of being
affected by leprosy or being associated with a person affected by leprosy in any manner.
7. (1) No person affected by leprosy, or a member of the family of a person affected by
leprosy, shall be denied the right to own property or to reside, purchase, sale, rent, use,
transfer or otherwise occupy any property, merely for reason of such person being affected
by leprosy, or being a member of the family of a person affected by leprosy.
(2) No person affected by leprosy or a member of the family of a person affected by
leprosy shall be removed, or evicted from an existing settlement occupied by other persons
affected by leprosy and members of the family of such persons without prior sanction from
the Ombudsperson, appointed under section 28 of this Act, and without being rehabilitated
and adequately compensated.
(3) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take appropriate measures,
as far as possible, to ensure full enjoyment of the rights as mentioned in sub-section ( 1)
by:—
(a) securing the tenure, title and ownership of property to each person affected
by leprosy and member of the family of a person affected by leprosy, who are living in
existing settlements that are occupied only by persons affected by leprosy and members
of the family of persons affected by leprosy; and
(b) ensuring that such existing settlements are accessible, as per the accessibility
standards formulated by the Central Government under section 40 of the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, with sanitary and other community support services,
including such the assistance necessary to support living, and inclusion within the
community, as may be prescribed.
8. No person affected by leprosy, or any  member of the family of a person affected by
leprosy shall be denied the right to marry, or form a family, including the right to adoption, or
assisted procreation, including donor insemination.
9. The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take appropriate measures
to ensure the participation of persons affected by leprosy, members of the family of persons
affected by leprosy or the representatives of such persons in the decisions that directly
affect such persons under this Act.
10. (1) No healthcare provider shall deny a person affected by leprosy access to any
form of treatment for leprosy.
(2) Every healthcare provider shall ensure that every person affected by leprosy has
access to all healthcare facilities, goods and services that are available with the healthcare
provider and which are necessary for recovering from leprosy and its consequent wounds,
deformities and disabilities.
11. No person or establishment shall deny a person affected by leprosy or member of
the family of a person affected by leprosy, access to welfare schemes, provided under
Chapter V of this Act.
12. No person or establishment shall subject a person affected by leprosy or a member
of the family of persons affected by leprosy to torture, or cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment, or punishment.
Right to life
and personal
liberty.
Right to own
property.
49 of 2016.
Right to form
a family.
Right to
participation.
Access to
medical
treatment.
Access to
welfare
measures by
the Central
and State
Government.
Protection
from torture,
or cruel,
inhuman or
degrading
treatment or
punishment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
13. (1) No person or establishment shall subject a person affected by leprosy or a
member of the family of persons affected by leprosy, to any form of abuse, violence or
exploitation, both within and outside of home.
(2) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take all appropriate
administrative, social, educational and other measures to protect persons affected by leprosy
and members of the family of persons affected by leprosy, from all forms of abuse, violence
and exploitation, both within and outside of home.
(3) Any person, or registered organization who or which has reasons to believe that an
act of abuse, violence or exploitation has been, or is being, or is likely to be committed
against any person affected by leprosy or members of family of a person affected by leprosy,
may give information about it to the Executive Magistrate in whose jurisdiction such incident
occurs or is likely to occur, who, on receipt of such information, shall take immediate steps to
stop it or prevent its occurrence as the case may be, or pass such order as he deems fit for the
protection of such person including an order—
(a) to rescue such persons by authorizing the police or any reliable organisation
working for the benefit of persons affected by leprosy to provide for the safe custody
and rehabilitation of such persons;
(b) to provide protective custody to such persons if he or she so desires; or
(c) to provide compensation to such person, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(4) No civil or criminal liability shall be incurred by any person, including a person
affected by leprosy or a member of the family of a person affected by leprosy, who is good
faith furnishes information under sub-section (3);
(5) Any police officer, who receives a complaint or otherwise comes to know of abuse,
violence or exploitation towards a person affected by leprosy or a member of the family of a
person affected by leprosy, shall take all steps necessary to ensure that the aggrieved
person is:
(a) informed of and able to exercise his or her right to report the abuse, violence
or exploitation and apply for protection under sub-section (3);
(b) informed of the particulars of the Executive Magistrate having jurisdiction to
provide assistance to such person;
(c) informed of and directed to the nearest organization or institution working for
the rehabilitation of persons affected by leprosy, who have been subjected to abuse,
violence or exploitation.
(d) informed of and able to exercise his or her right to access free legal services
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 and any other service or services
offered by the National Legal Services Authority or the State Legal Services Authority
for the benefit of such person; and
(e) informed of and able to exercise his or her right to file a complaint under the
relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, or any other law dealing with such
crimes:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to free such police
officer of his or her obligation to proceed in accordance with this Act, or any other law
for the time being in force, upon the receipt of information as to the commission of a
cognizable offence.
(6) If the Executive Magistrate determines that the alleged act or behaviour is an
offence under the Indian Penal Code, 1860, or under any other law which imposes criminal
sanctions on such acts, the Executive Magistrate shall forward a complaint to that effect to
the Judicial or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, having jurisdiction in the matter,
Protection
from abuse,
violence and
exploitation.
39 of 1987.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
whereupon the latter shall act on it in accordance with the law, and within six months from the
date on which the information relating to the complaint is received by the former.
(7) The appropriate Government shall take all measures necessary to prevent all forms
of abuse, violence and exploitation against persons affected by leprosy and members of the
family of persons affected by leprosy by, inter alia providing information and raising
awareness on:
(a) illegality of incidents of abuse, violence and exploitation against persons
affected by leprosy and members of the family of persons affected by leprosy;
(b) the legal remedies available to persons affected by leprosy and members of
the family of persons affected by leprosy against such incidents;
(c) the legal consequences of such indicents;
(d) the steps to be taken for avoiding such incidents;
(e) the procedure for reporting such incidents; and
(f) the steps required for the rescue, protection and rehabilitation of persons
who have been victims of such incidents.
CHAPTER III
E
DUCATION
14. (1) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall ensure that all educational
institutions that are wholly or partially funded, or recognized by the appropriate Government
or local authorities, provide inclusive educaiton, and inter alia—
(i) admit students affected by leprosy or those whose family member is affected
by leprosy, without discrimination, and provide them education appropriate to their
age, or mental or physical development, as also opportunities for sports, recreation
and leisure activities on an equal basis with others:
(ii) provide reasonable accommodation that is tailored to the requirements of
each student affected by leprosy;
(iii) provide necessary support in environments that maximize the academic and
social development of each student affected by leprosy, and assist him or her in
reaching his or her maximum potential; and
(iv) monitor participation, progress in terms of attainment levels, and completion
of education, in respect of a student who is either affected by leprosy or is a member of
the family of a person affected by leprosy.
(2) Where a child affected by leprosy above six years of age has not been admitted in
any school or though admitted, could not complete his or her elementary education, then, he
or she shall be admitted in a class appropriate to his or her age and shall be entitled to receive
special training available under section 4 of the Right of Child to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009.
15. (1) All Government institutions of primary, secondary and higher education, and all
primary, secondary and higher education institutions receiving aid from the Government
shall reserve seats in each class or course for persons affected by leprosy as provided for
under the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016:
Provided that such persons shall not to be prevented from competing for seats which
are not reserved for them.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), reservations for leprosy-cured persons with
benchmark disabilities as envisaged under sub-section ( 1) of section 32 of the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, shall also include persons affected by leprosy, who have
been administered with the first doese under MDT.
Duty of
educational
institutions
to provide
inclusive
education.
49 of 2016.
Reservations
in primary,
secondary and
higher
educational
institutions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
35 of 2009.
49 of 2016.

9
CHAPTER IV
SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
16. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within a period of one year from the com-
mencement of this Act, formulate schemes and programmes to facilitate and support the
employment of persons affected by leprosy and members of the family of persons affected
by leprosy, including measures to facilitate vocational training and self-employment of such
persons.
(2) The appropriate Government shall institute mechanisms for providing loans at
concessional rates to persons affected by leprosy or members of the family of persons
affected by leprosy for self employment ventures, and for the marketing of their products, as
the case may be as provided for under the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
17. (1) The appropriate Government shall reserve, in every establishment owned or
controlled by the appropriate Government, posts that are meant to be filled by direct
rectuitment, for persons affected by leprosy:
Provided that such persons shall not to be prevented from competing for posts
which are not reserved for them.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), reservations for leprosy-cured persons with
benchmark disabilities as envisaged under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of Section 34 of the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, shall also include persons affected leprosy,
who have been administered with the first dose under MDT.
18. The appropriate Government shall provide incentives to employers in the private
sector in order to enable them to progressively include persons affected by leprosy as part
of their workforce within a period of five years from the commencement of this Act.
19. The appropriate Government shall ensure that a person affected by leprosy is
provided reasonable accommodation in the place of his or her employment, which is tailored
to the requirements of such person:
Provided that the concerned person affected by leprosy shall be consutled in the
provision for reasonable accommodation.
20. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, specify that the employer in
every establishment shall furnish such information or return, as may be prescribed in relation
to vacancies appointed for persons affected by leprosy, that have occurred, or are about to
occur in that establishment to the special employment exchange notified and established by
the Central Government under section 36 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
(2) The form, manner, and time period of providing such information or return shall be
as prescribed by the Central Government under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 100 of
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
CHAPTER V
S
OCIAL INCLUSION, HEALTHCARE AND REHABILITATION
21. (1) The appropriate Government shall promulgate necessary schemes and
programmes to,—
(a) safeguard and promote the rights of persons affected by leprosy, and members
of the family of persons affected by leprosy; and
(b) ensure that persons affected by leprosy and members of the family of persons
affected by leprosy have access to adequate standard of living and living conditions.
(2) The schemes under sub-section (1) shall, inter-alia provide,—
(a) financial assistance for income generating activities and market based
vocational training for such persons affected by leprosy who have no families, or have
been abandoned, or are without shelter or livelihood;
V ocational
training and
self
employment.
49 of 2016.
Reservations
of Posts.
49 of 2016.
Incentives to
employers in
the private
sector.
Reasonable
accommodation
in
employment.
Special
Employment
Exchange.
Social
Security.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
49 of 2016.
49 of 2016.

10
(b) access to safe drinking water and appropriate and accessible sanitation
facilitis especially in urban slums and rural areas, including settlements where only
persons affected by leprosy and members of the family of persons affected by leprosy
reside;
(c) pension to persons affected by leprosy or members of the family of persons
affected by leprosy subject to such income ceiling as may be notified.
(d) unemployment allownace to unemployed persons affected by leprosy, who
are registered with special employment exchange, which is notified and established
by the Central Government under Section 36 of the Rights of persons with Disabilities
Act, 2016 and have been unemployed for more than two years;
(e) community-based rehabilitation to persons affected by leprosy and members
of the family of persons affected by leprosy as may be prescribed;
22. (1) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take all necessary
measures to ensure that each person affected by leprosy has barrier-free access to healthcare
facilities and schemes available under section 25 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Act, 2016.
(2) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall take all measures
necessary to ensure that healthcare providers do not subject persons affected by leprosy to;
(a) inhumane treatment or abuse during the course of medical treatment; or
(b) unethical or involuntary medical procedures or research, including in
relation to vaccines, treatments or microbicides for terminal or such other diseases;
(3) The apropriate Government shall take all steps necessary to provide aids and
appliances, medicine, diagnostic services and corrective surgery free of cost to each person
affected by leprosy with such income ceiling as may be notified.
(4) The appropriate Government shall make shcemes and programmes for the coverage
of medical expenses and therapeutic interventions by a comprehensive insurance scheme
for persons affected by leprosy with such income ceiling as may be notified.
23. (1) The appropriate Government and local authorities shall undertake or cause to
be undertaken services and programmes of rehabilitation, particularly in the areas of
health, education and employment for all persons affected by leprosy and members of the
family of persons affected by leprosy, based on the assessment of issues faced by such
persons:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall give due consideration to the diversity
of disabilities that affect persons affected by leprosy, and to the gender, age, and socio-
economic status of such persons and the members of the family of such persons.
(2) The services and programmes under sub-section (1) shall be initiated at the
earliest, and no later than one year from the date of commencement of this Act.
(3) For purposes of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2), the appropriate Government
and local authorities shall, subject to fulfillment of financial and other norms, and availability
of budgetary allocation, grant financial assistance to non-governmental organizations,
working for the benefit of persons affected by leprosy, to provide rehabilitation services to
such persons and the members of the family of such persons.
(4) Prior to the formulation of rehabilitation schemes under sub-section (1), the
appropriate Government and local authorities shall consult the representatives of persons
affrected by leprosy, or associations of persons affected by leprosy, or non-governmental
organizations working for the benefit of persons affected by leproty.
49 of 2016.
Healthcare
facilities.
Rehabilitation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
24. (1) The appropriate Government shall conduct and promote suitable training and
awareness programs for healthcare providers, public servants, and members of the general
population to emphasize the importance of early treatment of leprosy through MDT and
dispel misconceptions surrounding leprosy.
(2) For the promotion of training and awareness under sub-section (1), the appropriate
Government shall formulate and disseminate leprosy-related information in English and in
regional languages and shall ensure that such information is easy to understand, age-
appropriate, gender-sensitive, non-stigmatising, non-discriminatory and is revised from time
to time.
CHAPTER VI
M
ULTI-DRUG THERAPY FOR PEOPLE LIVING WITH LEPROSY
25. The Central Government and every State Government, as the case may be, shall
take all measures as it deems necessary and expedient for the prevention of the spread of
leprosy, in accordance with the guidelines and protocols on leprosy under the National
Leprosy Eradication Program and the National Health Mission.
26. The measures to be taken by appropriate Government and local authorities under
sub-section (1) of Section 22 of this Act shall include provision for free-of-cost MDT to
persons affcted by leprosy.
CHAPTER VII
D
ISCLOSURE OF MEDICAL RECORDS
27. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force—
(i) no person affected by leprosy shall be compelled to disclose his medical
records except by an order of a competent Court that declares the disclosure of such
information to be necessary in the interest of justice and for the determination of
issues in the matter before the Court;
(ii) no person or establishment shall disclose or be compelled to disclose the
medical records or any other private information of a person affected by leprosy, who
has imparted such information to the person or establihsment, in confidence, or in a
relationship of a fiduciary nature, except with the informed consent of such person
affected by leprosy or of the representative of such person obtained earlier in writing;
(2) The informed consent for disclosure of medical records under sub-section ( 1) is
not required where the disclosure is made—
(a) by a healthcare provider to another healthcare provider who is involved in
the care, treatment or counseling of a person affected by leprosy, when such disclosure
is necessary to provide care or treatment to such person;
(b) by an order of a competent Court that declares such disclosure as necessary
in the interest of justice and for the determination of issues in the matter before the
Court;
(c) in suits or legal proceedings between persons, whether or not any of such
persons, who is a party to the suit, is affected by leprosy, and where the disclosure of
such information is necessary in filing suits or legal proceedings or for instructing
their counsel;
(d) in relation to statistical or other information of a person affected by leprosy
that could not reasonably be expected to lead to the identification of such person; and
(e) to the officers of the Central Government or the State Government, as the
case may be, for the purposes of monitoring, evaluation or supervision of the incidence
of leprosy within the population:
Promotion of
training and
awareness
programs on
leprosy.
Central
Government
and State
Government
to take
measures.
Multi-Drug
Therapy by
Central and
State
Government.
Disclosure of
medical
records.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
Provided that, in case of disclosure under clauses (d) and (e) the name and identity of
the person affected by leprosy shall not be disclosed.
CHATER VIII
APPOINTMENT OF OMBUDSPERSONS
28. (1) Every State Government and U.T. Administration shall appoint one or more
Ombudspersons—
(a) possessing such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed, or
(b) designate any of its officers not below such rank, as may be prescribed, by
the State Government,
to exercise such powers and discharge such functions, as may be conferred on the
Ombudsperson under this Act.
(2) The terms and condition of the service of an Ombudspersons appointed under sub-
section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Government or the U.T. Administration.
(3) The Ombudsperson appointed under sub-section (1) shall have such jurisdiction
in respect of such area or areas as the State Government or the U.T. Administration may, by
notification, specify.
29. (1) The Ombudsperson shall, upon a complaint made by any person, inquire into
the violations of any of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Ombudsperson may require any person to furnish information on such points
or matters, as he or she consider necessary, for inquiring into the matter, and any person so
require shall be deemed to be legally bound to furnish such information.
(3) Any person who fails to furnish such information as required under sub-section (2)
shall be punishable under sections 176 and 177 of the Indian Penal code, 1860.
(4) The Ombudsperson shall maintain record of the inquiries conducted by him or her
in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government or the U.T. Administration.
30. A complaint may be made to an Ombudsperson under sub-section (1) of Section 29
in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government or the U.T. Administration.
31. (1) The Ombudsperson shall, within a period of thirty days from the receipt of the
complaint under sub-section ( 1) of Section 29, and after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the parties, pass such order, as he or she deems fit, giving reasons therefor and in
such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government or the U.T. Administration.
(2) Piror to passing an order under sub-section ( 1), the Ombudsperson shall consult
such persons or organizations, including experts on leprosy, as he or she may deem
appropriate.
32. All authorities, including the civil authorities functioning in the area for which an
Ombudsperson has been appointed under Section 28, shall assist the Ombudsperson of that
area in the execution or orders passed by such Ombudsperson under Section 31.
33. Each Ombudsperson shall, after every six months, report to the State Government or
the U.T. Administration as the case may be the number and nature of complaints received, the
action taken and orders passed in relation to such complaints and such report shall be published
on the website of Ombudsperson and a copy thereof be forwarded to the Central Government.
CHAPTER XI
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
34. Notwithstanding any action that may be taken under any other law for the time
being in force, whoever contravenes the provisions of Section 5 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to
two years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
Appointment
of
Ombudspersons.
Powers of
Ombudspersons.
Procedure of
complaint.
Orders of
Ombudspersons.
Authorities to
assist
Ombudspersons.
Report by
Ombudsperson.
Penalty for
contravention.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.

13
35. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, voluntarily or knowingly, publishes,
propagates, advocates or communicates by signs or by visible representation or otherwise
the feelings of hatred against any person affected by leprosy or member of the family of
person affected by leprosy in general, or specifically, or disseminates, broadcasts or displays
any information, advertisement or notice, which may reasonably be construed to demonstrate
an intention or propagate hatred, or which is likely to expose persons affected by leprosy or
members of the family of persons affected by leprosy to hatred, discrimination of physical
violence, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shal not be less than three
months but which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees, or with both.
36. Whoever fails to comply with the order or an Ombudsperson passed under Section
31, within such time as may be specified in such order, shall be liable to pay a fine which may
extent to ten thousand rupees, and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which shall failure continues.
37. Notwithstanding any action that may be taken under any law for the time being in
force, whoever discloses information regarding the medical record of a person affected by
leprosy to any person or entity, without the informed constent of such person or this or her
reresentatives, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, unless
such disclosure is made pursuant to any of the grounds mentioned under sub-section (2) of
Section 27.
38. Whoever fails to produce any book, account or other document or to furnish any
statement, information or particulars which, under this Act, or any order, regulation, or
direction made, or given thereunder, he or she is duty bound to produce or furnish, or to
answer any question put in pursuance of the provisions of this Act, or of any order, regulation,
or direction made, or given thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may extent to
twenty-five thousand rupees in respect of each offence, and in case of continued failure or
refusal, with further fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for each day of continued
failure, or refusal after the date on which the original order imposing punishment of fine was
passed.
39. (1) where any offence under this Act has been committed by an establishment,
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was the appointed head or was
directly in charge of, and was responsible for the day to day functioning of the establishment,
including its conduct of business, shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence, and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in Section 34, shall render any such person liable to
any punishment provided in this Act, if it is proved that the offence was committed without
the knowledge of such person, or that all due diligence was exercised by such person in
order to prevent the commission of the offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 34, where an offence under this
Act has been committed by an establishment, and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent, or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of
any other officer of the establishment, such person shall also be deemed to be guilty of such
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
40. No person shall subject any other person, or persons to any detriment on the
ground that such person, or persons have taken any of the following actions, namely: —
(a) made a complaint under this Act;
(b) brought proceedings under this Act against any person or establishment;
(c) furnished any information, or produced any document to any authority
exercising or performing any power or function under this Act; or
(d) appeared as a witness in a proceeding under this Act.
Penalty for
certain
actions of
individuals.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
orders of
Ombudspersons.
Penalty for
breach of
confidentiality.
Penalty for
failure to
furnish
information.
Offences by
Establishments.
Prohibition
of
victimisation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

14
41. No court other than the court of a judicial Magistrate of the First Class shall take
cognizance of an offence under this Act.
42. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
offences under this Act shall be Cognizable and bailable.
CHAPTER X
REPEAL OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
43. Notwithstanding any other law for the time being in force, in all laws that are in
force, and in all official records of the Government of India, State Governments, and
establishments defined under sub-section ( f) of section 2 the term ‘leper’ and such other
terms in national, regional and local languages, shall be substituted by the term ‘persons
affected by leprosy’, or any other term that bears the same meaning in the national, regional
or local language.
44. The statutes and provisions enumerated in Schedule I are hereby repealed.
45. The statutes and provisions enumerated in column I of Schedule II shall stand
amended in accordance with the respective entries in column II of Schedule II.
46. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, or any instrument having
effect by virtue of any such law.
CHAPTER XI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
47. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this
behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
48. The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any other law, rules, orders or instructions which provide any entitlement
or benefit to persons affected by leprosy.
49. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for any
action or omission which is done in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
50. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the said difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this Section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
51. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the appropriate Covernment may, by
notification in the official Gazette make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) form, manner and the value of compensation that may be awarded to a person
affected by leprosy or a member of the family of persons affected by leprosy under
clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 13;
Court to try
offences.
Offences to
be cognizable
and bailable.
2 of 1974.
Substitution
of certain
terms.
Repeal of
enactments.
Amendments
to certain
enactments.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to be in
addition to
and not in
derogation of
any other law.
Action taken
in good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
appropriate
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

15
(b) form, manner and content of information required to be reported to the special
employment exchange under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(c) form and manner of community-based rehabilitation for persons affected by
leprosy and members of the family of such persons under clause (e) of sub-section (2)
of section 21;
(d) form, manner and content of information required to be disclosed to obtain
informed consent under clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 27;
(e) the composition, the requisite qualifications of the Ombudsperson and manner
of appointment of Ombudspersons under sub-section (1) of section 28;
(f) the terms and condition of service of Ombudspersons under sub-sections (2)
and (3)of Section 28;
(g) form and manner in which Ombudspersons are required to maintain records
under sub section (3) of section 29;
(h) the form, manner and procedure for making a complaint to Ombudspersons
under section 30; and
(i) the form, manner and content of orders that Ombudspersons can pass under
section 31.
(3) Prior to the formation of rules, the appropriate Government shall make available the
draft of the rules in accessible formats to the members of the public and invite their suggestions
and objections to the same.
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions and if, before the expiry of the session, immediately following the session, or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree, in making any modification in the rule, or
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form, or be of no effect, as the case may be:
Provided that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(5) Every rule made by the State Government under this Section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
5
10
15
20
25
30

SCHEDULE—I
(See Section 44)
REPEALED PROVISIONS AND ACTS
1. Repeal of clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of Section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869.
2. Repeal of sub-section (vi) of Section 2 of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act,
1939.
3. Repeal of explanation (g) of Section 27 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
4. Repeal of clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955.
5. Repeal of clause (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act, 1956.
6. Repeal of the proviso to Rule 6 of Metro Railways (Carriage and Ticket) Rules, 2014.
16
4 of 1869.
VIII of 1939.
43 of 1954.
25 of 1955.
78 of 1956.

SCHEDULE—II
(See Section 45)
AMENDMENT TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
Legislation Amendment
1. The Banaras Hindu In sub-clause ( a) of clause (1) of Section 12B, the words
University Act, 1915 “or suffers from contagious leprosy” shall be removed,
and the sub-clause will read as, namely:
(a) if he is of unsound mind or is a deaf-mute;
In sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of Section 32, the words
“or suffers from contagious leprosy” shall be removed,
and the sub-clause will read as, namely:
(a) if he is of unsound mind or is a deaf-mute;
2. The Visva Bharati Act, 1951 In sub-clause ( a) of clause (3) of Section 38B, the words
“or suffers from contagious leprosy” shall be removed,
and the sub-clause will read as, namely:
(a) is of unsound mind or is a deaf-mute; or
3. The Jawahar Lal Nehru In sub-clause ( a) of clause (1) of Section 23, the words
University Act, 1966 “or suffers from contagious leprosy” shall be removed,
and the sub-clause will read as, namely:
(a) if he is of unsound mind or is a deaf-mute
In sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of Section 31, the words
“or suffers from contagious leprosy” shall be removed,
and the sub-clause will be read as, namely:
(a) if he is of unsound mind or is deaf-mute;
4. Legal Services Authorities After sub-clause ( d) of Section 12, the following
Act, 1987 sub-clause shall be inserted namely:
(dd) a person who suffers from, or has previously
suffered or has been cured of Leprosy; or
5. The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 After the first proviso to sub-section ( 4) under Section
8 of the Act, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:
Provided further that the licensing authority shall not
refuse to issue a learners licence to a peson affected by
Leprosy, who has been certified by a registered medical
practitioner, as having either been cured of Leprosy,
or as having been administered with the first dose under
Multi-Drug Therapy, with containuing treatment for
Leprosy being provided.
6. The Nurses and Midwives In clause ( c) of Section 6, the words “a leper” shall be
Act, 1953 removed, and the sub-clause will read as, namely:
(c) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by
a competent Court, or a deaf-mute;
7. The Hindu Religious In sub-clause ( ii) of clause (5) of section 25, the words
Institutions and Charitable “or is suffering from leprosy” shall be removed, and the
Endowments Act, 1997. sub-clause will read as, namely:
(ii) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by
a competent cours or if he is a deaf or mute or any
virulent or contagious disease.
17
16 of 1915.
29 of 1951.
53 of 1966.
39 of 1987.
59 of 1988.
Kerala Act
No. X of
1953.
Karnataka
Act No. 33 of
2001.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The spread of leprosy and discrimination faced by persons affected by leprosy is a
matter of grave concern. In 2015, India had the largest number of new leprosy cases, comprising
60% of all the cases reported globally. Approximately 1.25 to 1.35 lakh new cases are being
reported every year in India for over a decade. The problem which is even more serious is
that of discrimination and stigma faced by persons affected by leprosy and their families.
They continue to face segregation, restrictions and exclusions within and outside family
structures, in communities and public spaces, including public transportation systems. It is
highly unfortunate that the discrimination being faced by these persons primarily stems from
their affliction of a particular disease and its consequent effects on their body.
The General Assembly of the United Nations recognised the marginalised status of
persons affected by leprosy and their family members and unanimously adopted a Resolution
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Persons Affected by Leprosy and their Family
Members in 2010. The Principles and Guidelines, which are appended to the Resolution of
the General Assembly, direct Member States to accord to persons affected by leprosy and
their family members certain protections and provisions that are necessary to bring them at
par with others. Additionally, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, 2007 (“UNCRPD”) also promotes the full and equal enjoyment of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities, while laying emphasis on
the respect for their inherent dignity. Since India is a member of General Assembly of the
United Nations as well as a signatory to both of these documents, it is under an obligation to
address the concerns and eliminate discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and
their family members.
Although the recently passed Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (“RPD
Act”), intends to give effect to India’s obligations under the UNCRPD, it falls short of
covering all persons affected by leprosy. In fact, only those persons who are cured of
leprosy and who have 40% or above disability are covered within the ambit of the RPD Act.
Hence, in terms of discrimination as well as State action, there is a pressing need to undertake
a range of actions for the benefit of persons affected by leprosy and their family members.
For one, it is imperative that, affirmative action and anti-discrimination measures be applicable
to a range of persons, who may either be affected by leprosy, may be undiagnosed, may be
under-going treatment, or may have been cured, as well as family members of such persons
to holistically address the impact of stigma, fear, exclusion and invisibility faced by such
persons. Another change that is necessary is the repeal and amendment of discriminatory
provisions in various civil and criminal laws of India that legitimise discrimination and
segregation of persons affected by leprosy on the grounds that leprosy is an incurable and
highly infectious disease. As noted by the World Health Organisation, leprosy is now fully
curable through Multi-Drug Therapy, which renders the infected individual non-contagious
with its very first dose of treatment, and which is made available free of cost under the
National Leprosy Eradication Programme of India. Consequently, the object and purpose
sought to be served through these discriminatory provisions no longer hold ground and
constitute a violation of the right of persons affected by leprosy to equality before law and
equal protection of laws under the Indian Constitution. Since persons affected by leprosy
continue to remain a highly marginalised, vulnerable and invisible section on the fringes of
society, there is also a need for implementing positive steps to provide them with effective
care, support and treatment, and Promote their social inclusion.
The Law Commission of India took note of the disparate situation of persons affected
by leprosy and their families and came out with a study on the condition of persons affected
by leprosy in India in its Report No. 256, titled “Eliminating Discrimination Against Persons
Affected by Leprosy”. This comprehensive report, which deals with discriminatory laws as
18

19
well as positive measures for persons affected by leprosy and their family members, was
submitted to the Ministry of Law & Justice on 9th April 2015, along with a model draft law to
eliminate discrimination faced by persons affected by leprosy. However, little or no action
seems to have been taken to either enact the model law, or modify or repeal any law that
directly or indirectly discriminates against persons affected by leprosy.
While the Lepers Act, 1898, which sanctioned arrest and segregation of persons affected
by leprosy into leper asylums, was repealed by Parliament in 2016, the Sikh Marriages Bill,
2016, which was introduced in 2016, contains a provision that allows for dissolution of
marriage when a spouse is suffering from a virulent and incurable form of leprosy. The
provisions under other enactments and legislations which discriminate against persons
affected by leprosy continue to exist on the statute books, despite the fact that leprosy is
completely curable, as mentioned by the Law Commission in its Report.
The long-standing discrimination faced by persons affected by leprosy and their
families has continued to exclude such persons from participating in society and have resulted
in the violation of their fundamental rights that are guaranteed to them under the Constitution
of India. Moreover, term ‘leper’, which continues to be used in the provisions of several
Central and State enactments, is nothing less than a profanity for persons affected by
leprosy. Hence, enacting a law that promotes anti-discrimination measures and the social
inclusion of persons affected by leprosy and their family members is imperative and urgent.
Without the protection of human rights, there can be no democracy or justification for
democracy. Undoing years of discrimination that the persons affected by leprosy and their
family members have faced, requires immediate interventions by the State.
Hence this Bill.
K.T.S. TULSI

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 21 provides for social security including financial assistance for income
generating activities and market based vocational training for such persons affected by
leprosy. Clause 22 empowers the appropriate Government and local authorities to take all
necessary measures to ensure that each person affected by leprosy has barrier-free access
to healthcare facilities. Clause 23 also seeks to provide services and programmes of
rehabilitation, particularly in the areas of health, education and employment for all persons
affected by leprosy and members of the family of persons affected by leprosy. Clause 28
provide for appointment of ombudspersons for every State and UT. Clause 47 says that the
Central Government after due appropriation by Parliament will provide adequate funds, from
time to time, for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The recurring and non-recurring
expenditure on this count cannot be estimated at this stage, but has to be worked out by
Central Government while implementing the provisions of the Act.
Clause 16 of the Bill provides for vocational training and self employment to persons
affected by leprosy. Clause 18 provides for incentives by the appropriate Government to
employers in the private sector in order to enable them to include persons affected by
leprosy.
20

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 51 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
21

GMGIPMRND—3412RS(S3)—02.01.2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to protect the human rights of persons affected by leprosy, to eliminate discrimination against
them and their families to promote their social welfare, to take steps for the prevention and
control of leprosy and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri K.T.S. Tulsi, M.P .)