AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABH\

Bill No. XXXIX of 2001

THE HIGH COURT OF TRIPURA BILL, 2001
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a High Court for the State of Tripura.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the High Court of Tripura Act, 2001.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

5 (a) “appointed date” means the date which, the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint;

(b) “Gauhati High Court” means the existing common High Court of Assam,
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura;

3. (1) There shall be established a separate a High Court for the State of Tripura to
10 be known as the High Court of Tripura consisting of a Chief Justice and, until President
appoints a larger number, of not less than three other Judges.

(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Tripura shall be at Agartala.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) the Judges and the divi-
sion courts of the High Court of Tripura may sit at such other place or places in the State

Short ttle

Definitions

Establish-
ment of High
Court of
Tripura


Jurisdiction of
High Court of
Tripura,

Abolition of
‘Agartala Bench
of Gauhati High
Coun.

Special Provi-
sion Relating to
Advocates.

Practice and
Procedure in
High Court of
Tripura.

Form of writ
and other proc-
ess.

Powers of
Judges.

Procedure as to
appeals to Su-
preme Court.

Transfer of pro-
ceedings from
the Gauhati
High Court to
High Court of
Tripura.

Interpretation,

of Tripura other than its principal seat as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the
Governor of Tripura, appoint.

4. On and from the appointed date, the High Court of Tripura shall have, in respect
of territory of Tripura, all such jurisdiction, powers and authorities as, under the law in
force immediately before the appointed date, are exercisable by the Gauhati High Court.

5. (7) On and from the appointed date, the Agartala Bench of Gauhati High Court
shali cease to function and is hereby abolished.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prejudice or affect the continued operation of
any notice served, injunction issued, direction given or proceeding taken before the ap-
pointed date by the Agartala bench of Gauhati High Court abolished by that sub-section.

6. (1) Subject to any rule made or any direction given by the High Court of Tripura
in this behalf, any person, who immediately before the appointed date, is an advocate
entitled to practice in the Gauhati High Court, shall be entitled to practice as an advocate
in the High Court of Tripura.

(2) The right of audience in the High Court of Tripura shall be regulated in accord-
ance with the like principle as immediately before the appointed date, are in force with
respect to the right of audience in the Gauhati High Court.

7. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the law in force immediately before the
appointed date with respect to practice and procedure in the Gauhati High Court shall,
with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Tripura.

8. The law in force immediately before the appointed date with respect to the form
of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the Gauhati High Court shall, with
the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes
used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Tripura till such law is made and forms are
prescribed.

9. The law in force immediately before the appointed date with respect to the pow-
ers of the Chief Justice, single Judge and Division Courts of the Gauhati High Court with
respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with necessary modi-
fications, apply in relation to High Court of Tripura.

10. The law in force immediately before the appointed date relating to appeals to
the Supreme Court from the Gauhati High Court and the Judges and division courts thereof
shall, with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Tripura.

11. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, all proceedings instituted from State of Tripura and pending in the Gauhati High
Court either in the Principal seat or in permanent Bench at Agartala immediately before
the appointed date shall, from such date, stand transferred to the High Court of Tripura.

(2) Every proceeding transferred under sub-section (/) shall be disposed of by the
High Court of Tripura as if such proceeding was entertained by that High Court.

(3) Any order made before the appointed date by the Gauhati High Court shall have
effect as if such effect as if such order is made by the High Court of Tripura.

12. For the purpose of section 11—

(a) Proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the court until that court has
disposed of all issues between the parties, including any issues with respect to the
taxation of the cost of the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision
and petitions for writs; and

20

25

30

35

45


3

(6) References to High Court shall be construed as including references to a
Judge or division court thereof; and references to an order made by a court or a
Judge shall be construed as including references to a sentence, judgement or decree
passed or made by that Court or Judge.

5 13. Any person who, immediately before the appointed date, is an advocate entitled
to practice in the Gauhati High Court and was authorized to appear or to act in any
proceedings transferred from the said High Court to the High Court of Tripura under
section 11, shall have the right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of
Tripura in relation to those proceedings.

10 14, Nothing in this Act shall affect the application to the High Court of Tripura of
any provision of the Constitution, and this Act shall have the effect subject to any provision
that may be made on or after the appointed date with respect to that High Court by the
Tripura Legislative Assembly or other authority having power to make such provisions.

15, In sections 28, 29, 31, 33 or Part-IV of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation)
15 Act, 1971 the words “and Tripura” wherever they occur shall be deleted.

Right to appear
or act in pro-
ceedings to be
transferred to
the High Court
of Tripura.

Savings.

Amendment of
North-Eastern
Areas (Reor-
ganisation)
Act, 1971


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, there is a permanent Bench of the Gauhati High Court at Agartala with
the strength of 3 (Three) judges, but very often only one judge remains at Agartala and
judges from the principal seat and other outlying Benches of the Gauhati High Court are
deputed time to time for holding Division Bench on Circuit.

Though a permanent Bench of the Gauhati High Court has been established in Tripura,
the people do not receive the service of a permanent Bench throughout the year. That
apart, the means of travel and communication linking Tripura with the principal seat of
High Court at Gauhati is inadequate to facilitate swift movement and communication.
The people of this State face much hardship in instituting, prosecuting and defending
their cases in case of urgency at the principal seat of the High Court at Gauhati. The cost
of travel to the principal seat is not within the means of common men. The people of the
State suffer from economic and other disability and as such they do not have equal
opportunity of securing justice from the apex judicial institution of the State.

Government of India in principle and on justification accepted that establishment of
a separate High Court for Tripura is a legal necessity for honouring the aspiration of the
people of this frontier State and such commitment deserves to be implemented in proper
spirit and perspective.

The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

KHAGEN DAS.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a High Court for the State of Tripura.

(Shri Khagen Das, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—27RS—09-04-2001.