1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 107 of the Constitution, after clause 1, clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) The Government of India shall, within one year from the date of introduction of
a Bill in either House of Parliament by any Member other than a Minister, express its stand on
the Bill through a written statement by the concerned Minister in the House in which the Bill
is introduced."
Bill No. XXXI  of  2014
Short title
and
Commence-
ment.
Amendment
of article
107.5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH NOVEMBER, 2014

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our Democratic Parliamentary system is one of best parliamentary systems in the
world and is an example for other nations to follow.
Many Parliamentarians are very active to take part in various parliamentary activities.
This is extremely healthy situation for our democratic parliamentary system and many
Parliamentarians introduce Private Member Bills according to their perceptions in the  country
interest.
When Private Member Bills are introduced in Parliament, concerned Ministry must
respond their views on these Bills. It is a different matter that Government may agree or
disagree with the contents of the Private Member Bills. This in turn, will be extremely helpful
to strengthen further our great democratic parliamentary system.
Hence this Bill.
MANSUKH, L. MANDAVIYA,

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE
107.  (1) Subject to the provisions of articles 109 and 117 with respect to Money Bills
and other financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament.
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 108 and 109, a Bill shall not be deemed to have
been passed by the Houses of Parliament unless it has been agreed to by both Houses,
either without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses.
(3) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the
Houses.
(4) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by the House of
the People shall not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People.
(5) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having been passed by
the House of the People is pending in the Council of States, shall, subject to the provisions
of article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the House of the people.
* * * * *
Provisions as
to
introduction
and passing
of Bills.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3072RS(S3)—28.11.2014.