AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026 
Bill No. XXXIII of 2026 
THE FREE EDUCATION (SECONDARY TO 
UNDERGRADUATE LEVEL) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to provide for free education to all children from the ninth class up 
 to the completion of Undergraduate Degree, in order to  
secure substantive equality, eliminate structural 
 barriers to higher learning; and fulfil the 
constitutional mandate of social, 
 economic and educational  
justice; and for matters  
connected therewith  
or incidental 
 thereto. 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Free Education (Secondary to
Undergraduate Level) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
CHAPTER II 
DEFINITIONS 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,‒
(a) “appropriate Government” means–
(i) in relation to an educational institution established,
owned or controlled by the Central Government, or the 
administrator of the Union territory, having no legislature, the 
Central Government; 
(ii) in relation to an educational institution, other than the
institution referred to in sub-clause (i), established within the 
territory of ‒ 
(A) a State, the State Government;
(B) a Union territory having legislature, the
Government of that Union territory; 
(b) “capitation fee” means any kind of donation or contribution
or payment other than the fee notified by the school;  
(c) “educational institution” means a recognized school,
college, university or other institution imparting secondary education 
or higher education, as the case may be; 
(d) “eligible person” means any citizen of India, who has
obtained the certificate of completion, in such form and in such 
manner, as may be prescribed, of –  
(i) eighth class, for the purpose of admission to secondary
education; and 
(ii) twelfth class, for the purpose of admission to
undergraduate education; 
(e) “free education” means education for which no tuition fee,
capitation fee or any other compulsory charge shall be levied; 
(f) “Fund” means the National Fund for Universal Secondary
and Higher Education established under section 8; 
(g) “neighbourhood educational institution” means an
educational institution imparting secondary education, and which is 
situated within such reasonable distance from the residence of an 
eligible person as may be prescribed; 
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;
(i) “secondary education” means education imparted from ninth
class to twelfth class in a recognised educational institution; and 
(j) “undergraduate education” means any first degree
programme conducted by a recognised university or higher 
educational institution. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
CHAPTER III 
RIGHT TO FREE EDUCATION 
Right to free 
secondary 
3. (1) Every eligible person shall have the right to free secondary education
in a neighbourhood educational institution.
45 

3 
education. 
5 
(2) No eligible person shall be denied admission to secondary education on
grounds only of caste, religion, gender, disability, language, socio-
economic background, migration status, or place of birth.
(3) Every person completing his secondary education shall be awarded a
certificate, in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
10 
15 
20 
4. The appropriate Government shall take such measures as may be
necessary to give effect to free secondary education under this Act
and, in particular, ensure‒
(a) availability of adequate neighbourhood educational
institutions; 
(b) appointment of duly qualified teachers and staff in such
pupil-teacher ratio and possessing such minimum qualifications  
as may be prescribed; 
(c) the provision of free textbooks, learning materials and
access to appropriate digital resources for eligible persons; 
(d) the provision of necessary facilities for persons with
disabilities and appropriate support measures for persons 
belonging to disadvantaged categories; and 
(e) such other measures as may be necessary to give effect
to the right to free secondary education under this Act. 
Duties of the 
appropriate 
Government for 
free secondary 
education. 
25 
5. (1) Every eligible person shall have the right to pursue one free
undergraduate education in any recognised educational institution.
(2) No eligible person shall be denied admission to an undergraduate
degree programme in an educational institution on grounds only of caste,
religion, gender, disability, language, socio-economic background,
migration status, or place of birth.
(3) Every person completing his undergraduate education shall be awarded
a certificate, in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
Right to free 
undergraduate 
education. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
6. The appropriate Government shall take such measures as may be
necessary to give effect to free undergraduate education under this
Act and, in particular, shall –
(a) establish, maintain and adequately fund educational
institutions imparting higher education; 
(b) augment and maintain adequate capacity in educational
institutions imparting higher education, so as to progressively 
ensure that no eligible person is denied admission to an 
undergraduate degree programme solely on account of lack of 
institutional capacity; 
(c) provide, in such manner as may be prescribed,
scholarships, hostels, transport facilities and appropriate 
academic support to eligible persons; 
(d) ensure the maintenance of uniform standards of quality
in educational institutions through appropriate regulatory 
mechanisms; 
(e) endeavour to progressively increase public expenditure
on education to realise the objectives of this Act; and 
(f) take such other measures as may be necessary or
expedient to give full effect to the right to free undergraduate 
education under this Act. 
Duties of the 
appropriate 
Government for 
free 
undergraduate 
education. 

4 
Prohibition of 
capitation fee 
and 
screening. 
7. No educational institution shall collect capitation fee or levy any other
charge, or subject any student to discriminatory screening procedures
inconsistent with merit and constitutional principles.
CHAPTER IV 
NATIONAL FUND FOR UNIVERSAL SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION 5 
National 
Fund for 
Universal 
Secondary 
and Higher 
Education. 
8. (1) The Central Government and the State Governments shall have
concurrent responsibility for providing funds to meet the expenditure
required for carrying out the provisions of this Act, in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government may, in consultation and concurrence
with the States, establish, by notification in the Official Gazette, a
National Fund for Universal Secondary and Higher Education for the
purposes of this Act.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Central Government, in
consultation with the State Governments, and there shall be credited
thereto any sums of money provided by the Central and State
Governments, in such ratio and in such manner as may be prescribed.
10 
15 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Power to 
make rules. 
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule
or notification should not be made, the rule or notification shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
notification.
(3) Every rule or notification made by the State Government under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State
Legislature.
20 
25 
30 
35 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
appropriate Government, may, by order, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be
necessary for removing the difficulty
40 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
   The Constitution of India envisions a social order in which justice - social, 
economic and political - informs all institutions of life. While Article 21A 
guarantees free and compulsory education to children between the ages of six and 
fourteen, the realities of contemporary India demonstrate that education up to 
Class VIII is insufficient to secure meaningful equality or economic mobility. 
   The transition from elementary to secondary and higher education remains 
the most decisive point of exclusion. Financial barriers, social discrimination and 
increasing commercialisation prevent lakhs of capable students from pursuing 
further studies. The lack of access to secondary and undergraduate education 
perpetuates intergenerational poverty, weakens democratic participation and 
undermines national development. 
   In a knowledge-driven global economy, secondary education has become 
the minimum threshold of literacy, and undergraduate education the gateway to 
dignified employment. Without universal access to these levels, constitutional 
guarantees of equality remain formal rather than substantive. 
   This Bill seeks to extend the principle underlying the Right of Children to 
Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, to secondary and undergraduate 
education, thereby transforming education from a limited entitlement into a 
comprehensive right consistent with constitutional principles. 
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 JOHN BRITTAS. 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clauses 4 and 6 of the Bill provides for the measures to be taken by the 
appropriate Government for ensuring the right to free secondary and 
undergraduate education respectively. Clause 8 provides for establishment of 
National Fund for Universal Secondary and Higher Education which shall be 
funded by Central and State Governments, in such ratio and in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 
 Though the exact quantum of expenditure cannot be estimated at this stage, 
the expenditure shall constitute long-term capital investment in human 
development and national productivity. 
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India and that of States. However, at this stage, it is not 
possible to quantify the recurring or non-recurring expenditure involved. 

7 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the Act. Clause 11 empowers the appropriate 
Government to make such provision, by order, as may appear necessary for removing 
the difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 
 As the matters in respect of which rules and orders may be made under the 
aforesaid provisions are matters of procedural or administrative detail only, the 
delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
B
ILL 
to provide for free education to all children from the ninth class up 
 to the completion of Undergraduate Degree, in order to  
secure substantive equality, eliminate structural 
 barriers to higher learning; and fulfil the 
constitutional mandate of social, 
 economic and educational  
justice; and for matters  
connected therewith  
or incidental 
 thereto. 
___________ 
(Dr. John Brittas, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(H)―175― 16..03.2026. 