1
THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 2021
A
BILL
further to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second year of the Republic of India as
follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention
of Atrocities) Amendment Act, 2021.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XXXIX of  2021
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 3, in sub-section (1):—
(i) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ha) denies payment of minimum wages to a member of a Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe;"
(ii) for clause w (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely;—
"intentionally touches a woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe, when such act of touching is of a sexual nature and is without the consent of the
women;"
3. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely;—
"8A. ( 1) The State Government shall appoint at each district level a Deputy
Superintendent of Police or a Circle Officer from Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe
communities as the Principal Investigating Officer to investigate offences of atrocities against
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
(2) The State Government may form a panel of officers headed by an administrative
officer, not below the rank of District Magistrate to monitor such cases in districts where
cases of atrocities against persons belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes are
high."
4. In section 15A of the principal Act:—
(i) in sub-section (8), after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(d) issuing directions for payment of compensation to a victim or his dependent when
the accused is proven guilty.
Provided the amount of compensation shall be proportionate to the gravity of offences."
(ii) in sub section (11), after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(fa) to create a fund to bear the costs of paying the transportation allowance to the
victims or victims' families for appearing in the courts and police stations and compensation
for lost daily wages, if any;"
5
Amendment
of section 3.
Insertion of
new Section
8(A).
Investigation
and
monitoring of
cases of
atrocities.
Amendment
of Section
15A.
10
15
20
25
33 of 1989.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, which
came into effect  in 1990, was enacted with a view to provide protective cover to those
belonging to these castes and tribes, keeping in mind, the Right to Life under Article 21.
Although, there have been various protective pieces of legislation to ensure the
protective cover to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes communities, atrocities against them
have been on rise.  For instance, as per a report tabled in the Rajya Sabha in March 2021,
while there has been an increase of 15.55 per cent in crimes against women and children from
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes communities in the last three years (2017-2019), the
conviction rate under Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989 during the same period has been as low as 26.86 per cent, with pendency at an
alarming 84.09 per cent.
The Cambridge Dictionary defines 'atrocity' as 'an extremely cruel, violent, or shocking
act.  Atrocity can be physical as well as mental.  For instance, utilizing full labour and not
paying adequate wages just because the worker belongs to a certain category, class or
religion in an example of atrocity in itself.
Crimes of sexual assault against Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes women is a result
of thinking emanating from the sub-conscious mind, where an Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes woman is considered to be vulnerable as well as incapable of fighting for her dignity.
As per the National Crime Record Bureau's (NCRB) report for the year 2019, there were 13,273
assault cases of beating stripping, kidnapping including 3,486 cases of rape, against women
from Scheduled Castes communities.  Wide-spread under-reporting, threatening the victim
and her family, hesitation to report the crime from the victim itself, not registering FIRs,
shoddily conducted investigation are some of the major problems faced by the victims of
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes communities.
Moreover, lack of adequate financial resources of fight a legal case is a major impediment
for the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes victims to continue with the legal proceedings.
A fund taking care of the transportation allowances and daily wages lost, if any, of
victims will motivate the victims to not drop As the case due to inability to pay for the travel
from their home to the Police Station and Court.  The compensation declared by the Court, to
be given to victim, shall be imposed as penalty on the accused, when proven guilty. The
threat of becoming financially incapacitated will act as a deterrent to the perpetrator from
committing future crimes against the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes.
No matter, how serious is the atrocity committed against the Scheduled Castes/
Scheduled Tribes, if the Investigation officer acts with the prejudices, then it is hard to
expect justice being delivered.  In such scenario, it becomes necessary that Deputy
Superintendent of Police/Circle Officer from Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes communities
should be appointed as the Principal Investigating Officer to handle the case.
Hence, this Bill.
DR.  NARENDRA  JADHA V
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES (PREVENTION OF
ATROCITIES) ACT, 1989
(33 of 1989)
*****
3.(1) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe,—
*****
(h) makes a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Schedculed Tribe to do “begar” or other
forms of forced or bonded labour other than any compulsory service for public purposes
imposed by the Government;
*****
(w) (i) intentionally touches a woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a. Scheduled
Tribe, knowing that she belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, when such act
of touching is of a sexual nature and is without the recipient’s consent;
*****
8. In a prosecution for an offence under this Chapter, if it is proved that—
(a) the accused rendered any financial assistance in relation to the offences committed
by a person accused of, or reasonably suspected of committing, an offence under this
Chaper, the Special Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that such person had
abetted the offence;
(b) a group of persons committed an offence under this Chapter and if it is proved that
the offence committed was a sequel to any existing dispute regarding land or any other
matter, it shall be presumed that the offence was committed in furtherance of the common
intention or in prosecution of the common object;
(c) The accused was having personal knowledge of victims for his family, the court
shall presme that the accused was aware of the caste or tribal identity of the victim, unless
the contrary is proved.
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or in any other provision of
this Act, the State Government may, if it consider it necessary or expedient so to do—
a. for the prevention of and for coping with any offence under this Act, or
b. for any case or class or group of cases under this Act,
in any district or part thereof, confer, by notification in the Official Gazette, on any officer of
the State Government, the powers exercisable by a police officer under the Code in such
district or part thereof or, as the case may be, for such case or class or group of cases, and in
particular, the powers of arrest, investigation and prosecution of persons before any Special
Court.
(2) All officer of police and all other officers of Government shall assist the officer
referred to in sub-section (1) in the execution of the provisions of this Act or any rule,
scheme or order made thereunder.
(3) The provisions of the Code shall, so far as may be, apply to the exercise of the
powers by an officer under sub-section (1).
*****
4
Punishments
for offences
atrocities.
Presumption
as to
offences.
Conferment
of Powers.

5
15A. (1) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the State to make arrangements for
the protection of victims, their dependents, and witnesses against any kind of intimidation
or coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence.
*****
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
Special Court or the Exclusive Special Court trying a case under this Act shall provide to a
victims his dependent, informant or witnesses—
(a) the complete protection to secure the ends of justice;
(b) the travelling and maintence expenses during investigation, inquiry and trial;
(c) the social-economic rehabilitation during investigation, inquiry and trial; and
(d) relocation.
*****
(8) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (6), the con-
cerned Special Court or the exclusive Special Court may, on an application made by a victim
or his dependent, informant or witness in any proceedings before it or by the Special Public
Prosecutor in relation to such victims, informant or witness or on its own motion, take such
measures including—
(a) concealing the names and addresses of the witnesses in its orders or judg-
ments or in any records of the case accessible to the public;
(b) issuing directions for non-disclosure of the identity and addresses of the
witnesses;
(c) take immediate action in respect of any complaint relating to harassment of a
victim, informant or witness and on the same day, if necessary, pass appropriate orders
for protection:
Provided that inquiry or investgation into the complaint received under clause
(c) shall be tried separately from the main case by such Court and concluded within a
period of two months from the date of receipt of the complaint:
Provided further that where the complaint under clause (c) is against any public
servant, the Court shall restrain such public servant from interfering with the victim,
informant or witness, as the case may be, in any matter related or unrelated to the
pending case, except with the permission of the Court.
*****
Rights of
victims and
witnesses.

MGIPMRND—1349RS(S3)—07-12-2021.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989.
————
(Dr. Narendra Jadhav, M.P.)