1
THE  COMPULSORY  REGISTRATION  OF  INTERNATIONAL  PREPAID
SIM  CARDS  TO  BE  OPERATED  IN  INDIA  BILL,  2012
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of international prepaid  SIM cards to be
operated in India in the interest of national security and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Registration of International  SIM cards
 to be Operated in India Bill, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "cellular or mobile phone" includes any wireless device that sends and
receives voice, data, etc., using radio frequency energy;
(b) "mobile network operator" means and includes any company that provides
network, for voice or data services to mobile phones in the country;
(c) "international prepaid SIM (Subscriber Identification Module) Card" means a
portable memory chip or a printed circuit board for which credit is purchased in advance
of service use, required to be connected in any Global System for Mobile Communication
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  XXXIII of 2012
Definitions.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012

2
(GSM) or Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) mobile phone which contains
subscriber details such as security information, internal memory of phone numbers
and similar data that identifies the caller to the network operator, which has been
issued by a mobile company of any other country;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indan Penal Code, 1860, the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Information Technology
Act, 2000 shall have the same meaning as is respectively assigned to them in those
Acts.
3. (1) Every person coming to India and carrying a prepaid  mobile phone connection,
shall within two days of his arrival in India, register his mobile phone connection within such
mobile network operator of India who has a collaboration with the operator issuing the
International prepaid SIM card to carry the calls of that company in India. Provided that in
case of the person fails to register his prepaid international SIM card within the prescribed
period of two days, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and his SIM card shall be
deactivated by the mobile network operator in India.
(2) Every mobile network operator immediately on receiving the details of any prepaid
International SIM card shall register the profile of its prepaid international subscribers and
maintain proper record of users who may operate their international mobile SIM cards in
India.
(3) Every local mobile network operator, before registration of prepaid International
SIM Card, shall obtain the following details from the International SIM card holder:—
(i) photo copy of valid passport of the user; and
(ii) time period of the users stay in India as permitted through a valid Visa, during
which prepaid international SIM card may be used in India.
(4) The mobile network operator shall, as soon as may be but not later than two days
from the activation of prepaid International SIM card, submit the identification of the person
using the card to the nearest police station.
(5) All mobile network operators shall inform the police about existing activated prepaid
International SIM cards within three months from the commencement of this Act.
4. The concerned police authorities shall maintain record of profile of International
SIM card holders who are using the prepaid International SIM card through local mobile
operators in India.
5. (1) Any mobile network operator who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) of Section 3 of this
Act shall be punished with fine which may extend to rupees two lakh for the first violation
and upto rupees ten lakh for second and subsequent violation.
(2) Any subscriber who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 3 of
the Act shall be punished with fine which may extend to rupees five hundred.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 every
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
7. Notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
45 of 1860.
13 of 1885.
21 of 2000.
Registration
of
International
SIM Cards in
India with
local Moble
network
operators.
Police to
maintain
records of
International
SIM card
holders.
Penalty.
Offences to be
cognizable.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The world today has become a global village. Thanks to the advancement of the
communications systems, the boundaries have blurred. One such development is the roaming
facility on mobile phones which has made possible the one world, the one number a reality.
But apart from the benefits, this development of science has brought with itself a plethora of
problems like is, misuse by terrorists. A concern of police and security agencies worldwide is
that prepaid mobile services allow the user to be anonymous and therefore facilitate criminal
or terrorist activities. Prepaid phone users generally remain anonymous since the prepaid
SIM card can be sold in a shop like any other goods and as prepaid services can often be
topped up using cash and vouchers, there is no way to trace the payment and hence to
determine the identity of a prepaid phone user from payment records. In view of this, it
become very difficult to nab such criminals. This problem gets compounded in case of
international SIM cards which are issued from an outside country. The person carrying such
cards comes to our country and uses an international prepaid SIM card for nefarious activities
and we are left with no trace or record of such a person. Thus, it is high time that suitable
statutory framework are to  be initiated to keep a check on such actitivies and nab the
offenders.
Hence this Bill.
PARSHOTTAM  KHODABHAI  RUPALA

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is therefore of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of international prepaid  SIM cards to be operated
in India in the interest of national security and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3939RS(S3)—07-12-2012.