Bill No. XXXII of 2013
THE GIRLS AND WOMEN (PREVENTION OF BEASTLY AND
BARBAROUS BRUTALITY , RAPE, TEASING, MOLESTATION,
STRIPPING AND OTHER ATROCITIES) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to prohibit and prevent the commission of atrocities and offences against the girls and
women leading to beastly and barbarous brutality such as committing rape and
inserting any foreign objects into the private parts thereby damaging the internal
body parts, battering, killing after committing rape, chopping the body, burning
alive, committing gangrape, publicly stripping and parading naked or raping
pregnant women resulting in her miscarriage or death, committing rape on girl
child of tender age, teasing, outraging modesty, molestation, branding or killing
as witches, forcing into prostitution and such other offences and to provide for
deterrent punishment including surgical castration and capital punishment and for
the establishment of Fast Track Courts to try the offences and for the rehabilitation
of victims and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Girls and Women (Prevention of Beastly and
Barbarous Brutality, Rape, Teasing, Molestation, Stripping and other Atrocities) Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.5
[AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 11TH JULY, 2014]

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government.
(b) "atrocity" in respect of girls and women includes assault, torture, beating,
branding as witch or performer of black magic, parading naked, painting face or
body black, blaming as loose character, forcing to do bonded labour, misusing position
to harass or to get sexual favour, insulting or intimidating to humiliate publicly,
taking pictures or videography without consent or forcing into prostitution in any
manner or such other acts which are punishable under the Indian Penal Code, 1860;
(c) "beastly and barbarous brutality" include,—
(i) committing rape on a girl or women, as the case may be, and then
killing her by battering, strangulation or by any other means;
(ii) committing rape on a girl child of tender age or toddler;
(iii) committing rape or gangrape on a woman or girl, as the case may
be, and piercing with or putting any blunt foreign objects through the private
parts of the victim which damages her internal body system in any manner;
(iv) after killing a girl or woman, as the case may be, mutilating the
face and other parts of the body of the victims by stones or any other blunt
object, or disposing off her body by chopping into pieces or by burning or
throwing at secluded place or river, canal or nullah or by burying;
(v) burning an alive girl or woman, as the case may be, leading to her
permanent incapacitation or death;
(vi) committing gangrape on a girl or woman;
(vii) killing a girl or woman, as the case may be, by way of gangrape;
(viii) committing rape on a pregnant woman resulting in her miscarriage
or death;
(ix) committing incestuous rape; and
(x) throwing acid on the girl or woman as the case may be.
(d) "castration" includes chemical castration wherein administration of a drug
testosterone in leydig cells  in the tests of a male to make him impotent and surgical
castration of removal of male testes;
(e) "fast tract court" means a Court established under section 8;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "stripping" includes forcibly removing or getting removed under threat or
tearing off any cloth or part thereof worn by a girl or woman, as the case may be, in
order to expose her body or any part thereof or such a girl or woman, as the case
may be;
(h) "teasing" in relation to a girl or woman includes uttering of words, song,
making sound of whistle, suggestive gesture, touching in any manner whatsoever,
leaning or forcing over her, exhibiting any object or part of the body, throwing any
object or doing any act to attract the attention, sending SMS or making obscene
calls through mobile or landline phone thereby intentionally harassing a girl or
woman, as the case may be;
(i) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the
meaning respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
Definition.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
3. (1) Nothwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the committing of beastly and barbarous brutality, rape, teasing, molestation,
stripping and other atrocities on girls and women are hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 shall be
guilty of an offence under this Act.
4. whoever,—
(a) commits beastly and barbarous brutality on a girl or woman, as the case
may be, shall be punished with death:
Provided that if the accused opts for voluntary surgical castration and pleads
before the trial court to reduce his sentence the trial court may reduce the sentence
to life imprisonment to remain in jail custody till the end of his life and no remission
shall be granted by the appropriate Government or any authority to such convict;
(b) commits atrocity on a girl or woman, as the case may be, shall be liable for
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but may
extend to ten years and also withfine which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(c) commits the offence of stripping on a girl or woman, as the case may be,
shall be liable for rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years but may extend to life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees; and
(d) commits the offence of teasing against a girl or woman, as the case may be
shall be liable for rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
five years but may extend to ten years and also with fine which may extend to two
lakh rupee.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Juvenile Justice (case and protection
of Children) Act, 2000, any Juvenile who has attained the age of fifteen years and above,
if commits beastly and barbarous brutality on a girl or woman, as the case may be shall be
administered surgical castration.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
an offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
no court other than a High Court or Supreme Court of India shall have the authority to
grant anticipatory bail to any person accused of committing an offence under this Act.
8. ( 1) All the offences committed under this Act shall be tried exclusively in
Fast Track Courts.
(2) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Fast Track
Courts preferably headed by women judges, as it may deem necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this Act, within its territorial jurisdiction in consultation with the
Chief Justice of the concerned High Courts.
(3) Every Fast Track Court established under this Act shall exercise all the
jurisdiction powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all
Courts except the concerned High Court and Supreme Court of India in relation to
all matters of offences committed against girls and women under the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 or any other law for the time being in force relating to women.
(4) From the date of commencement of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and
authority in relation to offences committed under this Act shall be exercisable by a
Fast Track Court established under this Act and no other Court except the High Court
Prohibition of
beastly and
barbarous
brutality, rape,
teasing,
molestation,
stripping and
other atrocities
on girls and
women.
Penalty.
Special
provision for
Juveniles.56  of  2000.
2  of  1974. Offence to be
cognizable and
non bailable.
Bar on granting
anticipatory
bail.
Establishment
of Fast Track
Courts.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
concerned and the Supreme Court of India shall have jurisdiction, powers or authority
in relation to such offences.
(5) Every suit or other proceedings pending before any other Court, Tribunal
or Authority immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, being a suit
or proceeding, the cause of action wherein it is based, is such that if it had arisen
after such constitution of the Fast Track Court within its jurisdiction, shall stand
transferred on that date to such special court:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a suit or other
proceedings pending in a High Court or Supreme Court of India, as the case may be.
(6) The judicial proceedings in the Fast Track Court shall be conducted in a
camera on day to day basis without any adjournment till the verdict is declared by
the Court as early as possible.
(7) There shall be created special deposition rooms in every Fast Track Court
established under this Act to protect the victims privacy and it shall be ensured that
no one shall inquire prior sexual history of the victims, notions about signs of physical
struggle being indicative of rape and posing horrendous questions which may increase
rape victims trauma.
9.  (1)  Whoever, being a public servant, willfully neglects his duties required to
be performed by him under this Act or any police personnel who willfully does not
register a complaint or First Information Report or shooed away the victim or any
person intending to register a complaint or lodge an First Information Report about
a crime committed under this Act shall be dismissed from service forthwith.
(2) The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) provide quick medical help to the victim of rape or other atrocities
punishable under this Act;
(b) get the victims medically examined forthwith and the doctors doing so
shall submit the medical report within forty eight hours to the appropriate
Government;
(c) ensure time bound probe by Police or any investigating agency not
beyond one month;
(d) provide protection to witnesses and ensure concealing of their identity;
(e) improve policing system to provide security to girls and women and
law abiding citizens;
(f) provide Free legal aid to needy women who wish to free pursue their
cases in Special Courts;
(g) initiate rehabilitation measures for the victims covered under this Act;
(h) implement such welfare measures for the victims covered under this
Act, as it may deem expedient and necessary.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appears to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
12. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act and rules
made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Recently, a girl was brutally gang raped by six sex starved maniacs including a
juvenile Short of only three months to attain majority in a moving bus and their beastly
act did not stop in raping her as they inserted an iron rod in her private parts and also
severely hit her with that rod which totally damaged her intestines. They also beat her
friend and both the girl and the boy were thrown out of the moving bus totally naked and
the hapless girl later expired in a Singapore Hospital where she was taken for specialized
treatment. This heinous crime jolted the whole nation leading widespread protests in the
National Capital and other parts of the Country in which the inhumane approach and
apathy of Police and authorities was also witnessed by the people of largest democracy of
the world. Girls and women remain vulnerable to various kinds of exploitations mostly
sexual ones and other atrocities. Such atrocities include day-to-day teasing and molestation
even at public places and means of transport. The goons pass vulgar remarks, throw
objects including stones, whistle on hapless girls and women, touch their body parts,
pinch them, sing vulgar songs and such other acts. In many cases, if the girl or woman
resists the advances of the goons, they even throw acid on them spoiling their whole lives.
In many places girls and women are publicly stripped and paraded naked mostly by
influential ones to show their might, power, position and to teach the victim lesson or to
take revenge. In many parts women are being branded witches and killed either to grab
their properties or in case they refuse to accept the sexual advances of the culprits.
Cases of rape on girl child of few months or years and on pregnant women are on
increase. To destroy evidence, girls and women are killed brutally and thrown at secluded
places. In many cases, the rapists commit incestuous rape on their own daughters and
sisters. Besides, increasing incidents of gang rape are also matters of serious concern.
Needless to say, offence of rape and afflicting brutality on girls and women in the course
of rape only indicates an element of fearlessness and disrespect to the law by the offenders.
Since the existing legislative measures have not created any deterrence, the time
has come to take stern action by providing deterrent punishment including capital
punishment, chemical castration, etc. for the rapists and rigorous imprisonment varying
various terms and life imprisonment for other atrocities committed on them and by setting
up special courts to try such offences on day-to-day basis to provide timely justice to the
victims. The victims are also needed to be suitably rehabilitated. It is also felt that crimes
against women by perpetrators be made cognizable and non-bailable. A more stringent
and effective legislation is need of the hour to address all these issues.
Hence this Bill.
DR. AKHILESH DAS GUPTA
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Fast Tracks Courts to try the
crimes against girls and women in the Country. Clause 9 provides for medical help to the
victim, provide free legal aid, initiate rehabilitation measures and welfare measures for
the victim. Clause 11 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds to implement the provisions of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated fund of India. It is not possible to quantify the amount right now
but it is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty five thousand crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum. A sum of rupees fifty thousand crore may also involve as non-
recurring expenditure to create infrastructure throughout the Nation.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives powers to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit and prevent the commission of atrocities and offences against the girls and
women leading to beastly and barbarous brutality such as committing rape and
inserting any foreign objects into the private parts thereby damaging the internal
body parts, battering, killing after committing rape, chopping the body, burning
alive, committing gang rape, publicly stripping and parading naked or raping
pregnant women resulting in her miscarriage or death, committing rape on girl
child of tender age, teasing, outraging modesty, molestation, branding or killing as
witches, forcing into prostitution and such other offences and to provide  for deterrent
punishment including surgical castration and capital punishment and for the
establishment of Fast Track Courts to try the offences and for the rehabilitation of
victims and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1079RS—11-07-2014.