1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  XXXIV  of   2023
THE BLACK MONEY RECOVERY BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to recover the black money held abroad by Indian citizens and to establish a fund to
deposit a prescribed share of the amount from such recovery into each Indian
citizen's bank account and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Black Money Recovery Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "black money" means any asset or income that has not been reported to the
public authorities either at the time of their generation or disclosed thereto during their
possession or recorded for tax purposes;
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA 
SABHA ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Definitions.
5

2
Constitution
of
Management
Committee.
Duties of the
Managing
Committee.
Composition
of Managing
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(b) "citizen" means any Indian citizen as per the provisions of the Citizenship
Act, 1955;
(c) "Committee" means the Managing Committee of the Public Fund of India
constituted under section 6 of this Act;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "Public Fund" means the Public Fund of India formed under section 4 of this
Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, formulate a policy to be known as the "National
Policy for Black Money Recovery" to recover all of the black money held abroad by Indian
citizens, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the National Policy
formulated under sub-section (1).
4. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a fund with the State Bank of India to be known as the "Public Fund of
India" for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to,—
(a) issue a White Paper on the black money recovered in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, within seven days of each and every such recovery;
(b) deposit such recovered black money, as per provisions of section 3, into the
Public Fund of India within fourteen days of each and every such recovery, in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(c) deposit the recovered black money into each and every citizen's bank account
held within the territory of India in such quantum and manner, as may be prescribed;
and
(d) share the remaining recovered amount, if any, to all State Governments and
the share of each State shall be calculated by the percentage of the Gross State Domestic
Product contributed by each State on 31st day of March, 2022 in such manner as may
be prescribed.
6. ( 1) Within seven days of coming into effect of this Act, the Central Government
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Managing Committee of the Public
Fund of India to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The head office of the Committee shall be at such place, as may be notified.
7. It shall be the duty of the Managing Committee to,—
(i) monitor, supervise and coordinate the distribution of funds from the Public
Fund in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) review the progress of distribution of funds from the Public Fund; and
(iii) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it.
8. (1) The Managing Committee shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(i) the Minister of Finance, Government of India, Chairperson, ex-officio;
(ii) the Leader of the Opposition in Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha or any other
Member of Parliament nominated by the opposition parties in the absence of a Leader
of Opposition, Co-Chairperson, ex-officio;
(iii) the Chairman, NITI  AAYOG , Vice-Chairperson, ex-officio;
National
Policy for
Black
Money
Recovery.
Constitution
of the Public
Fund of
India.
Duties of the
Central
Government.

3
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
(iv) the Governor, Reserve Bank of India — Member, ex-officio;
(v) six Members of Parliament representing the Lok Sabha, of which only a
maximum of two shall belong to the ruling party, to be nominated by the Central
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed — Member;
(vi) six Members of Parliament representing the Rajya Sabha, of which only a
maximum of two shall belong to the ruling party, to be nominated by the Central
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed — Member; and
(vii) the Finance Secretary, Government of India, Secretary of the Committee,
ex-officio;
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such officers and staff, from the Ministry
of Finance, Government of India, to assist the Committee, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
9. (1) All Members, Officers and staff of the Committee shall work on an honorary
basis and shall not be entitled to any salary.
(2) The Committee shall compulsorily meet once every fifteen days at the head office,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Any and every expenditure incurred towards the working of the Committee shall
be borne by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
(4) Members of Parliament shall be entitled for reimbursement of flight ticket
expenses incurred by them for attending the meetings of the Committee.
(5) All decisions of the Committee shall be taken by a simple majority.
10. The Central Government shall, if it deems fit, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the
provisions of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Terms and
conditions of
service of the
Members,
Officers and
staff of the
Committee.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The amount of black money held abroad by Indians has seen an exponential rise over
the years. This amount, when recovered can be utilised to improve the quality of life of each
and every citizen of India.
In view of this, there is need to enact an integrated legislation in this regard so that the
amount is recovered by the Government of India and it finally reaches every citizen of India
with proper oversight. Any remaining amount shall be distributed between the States for
their development.
This Bill seeks to recover all black money held abroad illegally by Indian citizens and
utilise the same towards the development of the nation.
Hence, this Bill.
M. MOHAMED  ABDULLA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation and implementation of the National
Policy for Black Money Recovery by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides that the
Central Government shall constitute a Public Fund for depositing the recovered black money.
Clause 6 provides for the constitution of a Management Committee to monitor, supervise
and coordinate the distribution of the recovered black money. Clause 9 provides for the
terms and conditions of service of the Members, officers and staff of the Managing Committee
whereby Members of Parliament shall be reimbursed towards the flight ticket expenses
incurred by them to attend the Committee meetings. Clause 10 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as one-time
non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to recover the black money held abroad by Indian citizens and to establish a fund to
deposit a prescribed share of the amount from such recovery into each Indian
citizen's bank account and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla, M.P.)
RS–P&PS–PMB(E) –065–12.12.2023.