THE MANGARH DHAM NATIONAL MEMORIAL BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for the erection and management of a National Memorial to perpetuate the
memory of those killed or wounded on the 17th day of November, 1913, in Mangarh
Dham in the State of Rajasthan.
B
E it enacted by Parliament  in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mangarh Dham National Memorial Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XXXII of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 22ND NOVEMBER, 2019

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Memorial" means the Mangarh Dham National Memorial to prepetuate the
memory of those killed or wounded on the 17th day of November, 1913, on the site
known as the Mangarh Dham, Banswara, State of Rajasthan;
(b) "Trust" means the Trust for the erection and Management of the Memorial.
(c) "Trustees" means the Trustees of the Mangarh Dham National Memorial.
3. The objects of theTrust shall be —
(a) to erect and maintain suitable buildings, structures and parks at or near
the site of the  Mangarh Dham in the city of Banswara, State of Rajasthan to perpetuate
the memory of those who were killed or wounded on the 17th day of November, 1913,
on the said site;
(b) to acquire lands, buildings and other properties for the purposes of theTrust;
and
(c) to raise and receive funds for the purposes of the Memorial.
4. (1) The Trustees of the Memorial shall be the following, namely:—
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson,
(b) the Union Minister in-charge of Culture,
(c) the Leader of Opposition recognised as such in the House of the People or
where there is no such Leader of Opposition, the Leader of the single largest opposition
party in that House;
(d) the Governor of the State of Rajasthan;
(e) the  Chief Minister of the State of Rajasthan; and
(f) three eminent persons to be nominated by the Central Government.
(2) The trustees shall be a body corporate with perpetual succeession by the name of
the "Trustees of the Mangarh Dham National Memorial" and a common seal, and in that
name shall sue and be sued, and shall have power to acquire and hold property, to enter
into contracts and to do all acts necessary for, and consistent with, the purposes of this
Act.
5. The Trustees nominated under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4 shall be
Trustees for a period of five years, and shall be eligible for renomination.
6. All the funds and property, whether movable or immovable, which may hereafter be
given, be queathed or otherwise transferred for the purposes of the Memorial or acquired for
the said purposes shall vest in the Trustees.
7. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Trusts, grants of such sums of money as the Central Govt. may
think fit, for the purposes of this Act.
8. (1) For the purposes of managing the affairs of the Trust, the Trustees may,
resolution passed at a meeting, appoint a committee of management, and entrust to it such
powers, duties and functions, under such directions and limitations, as may be defined by
such resolution.
(2) The Trustees may appoint any person as members of the committee of management,
whether such person are Trustees or not, and may, from time to time, vary or rescind any
resolution passed by it under this section.
Definitions.
Objects of the
Trust.
Trustees of the
Memorial.
Term of office
of nominated
Trustees.
Property
vested in
Trustees.
Power of
Trustees to
appoint
committee of
management.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The Trust shall meet at least once in a year to approve the audited accounts of the
Trust and shall transact such other business as may be considered necessary.
10. No act of the Trustees shall be deemed to be invalid merely by reason any vacancy
in, or any defect in the constitution of, the body of Trustees.
11. ( 1) The accounts of the Trust shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Trust to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-Generl and any person appointed by him in connection
with the audit of the accounts of the Trust under this Act, shall, have the same rights and
privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in
particular shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Trust.
(3) The accounts of the Trust as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General or
any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall
be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Trust and the Central Government
shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each
House of Parliament.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the objects of this Act.
(2) In  particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for—
(a) the manner in which funds belonging to the Memorial shall be kept deposited
or invested;
(b) the mode of authentication of orders for payment of money by the Trustees;
(c) the form in which accounts shall be kept by the Trustees and the audit and
publication of such accounts;
(d) the laying out, erection, improvement, maintenance and management of the
Memorial and the care and custody of the properties thereof.
(e) the condition under which the public shall have access to the Memorial or
particular parts thereof and the regulation of the conduct of persons entering the
precincts of the Memorial;
(f) the preservation of, and the prevention of injury to or interference with, any
property vested in the Trustees and the prevention of persons from trespassing into
any particular part of the Memorial.
(3) A rule made under this section may provide that a breach of any rule made under
clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one
hundred rupees.
13. The Trustees may make regulations consistent with this Act for all or any of the
following purpose, namely:—
(a) the manner in which meetings of the Trustees shall be convened, the quorum
for the transaction of any business thereat and the procedure at such meetings;
Validity of acts
of Trustees
not to be
questioned by
reason of
vacancy, etc.
Accounts and
audit.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
approve
audited
accounts.
Power of
Trustees to
make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(b) the manner in which a majority decision of the Trustees shall be obtained by
circulation to the Trustees of the matter requiring decision;
(c) the term of office of members of the committee of management, their powers
and duties, and the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which such
powers and duties may be exercised;
(d) the appointment of such officers and servants as may be necessary for the
purpose of the Trust, and their terms and conditions of service.
14. Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
5
10
15
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
All of us remember the Jallianwala Bagh massacre. On the day of Baisakhi
(13th April, 1919), British soldiers under General Dyer fired at the assembled people who
came to celabrate Baisakhi. As per the British official estimate, 379 people died but modern
historians believe that more than one thousand innocent men, women and children died on
that day at Jallianwala Bagh in Amritsar.
But very few of us know that six years prior to Jallianwala Bagh, British soldiers along
with the soldiers of rules of some smaller states, attacked and killed assembled innocent
Bhils at Mangarh on 17th November, 1913. The number of casualties was more than one
thousand five hundred. Mangarh is known as Jallianwala Bagh of Rajasthan.
To rely on the oral history of the Bills, the English army had foiled 1500 supporters of
the tribal leader and reformist Govind Guru with gunfire on Mangarh tekri. Govind was a
resident of V edasa village near Dungarpur in Rajasthan, from the Banjara community. He
awakened the Bhil community and filled them with a sense of patriotism, and inspired them
to fight for freedom. More than 1500 Gurubhakt Bhils sacrificed their lives while fighting
against the British army. It is therefore also known as Jallianwala Bagh of Rajasthan.
Historical research also confirms this verbal history of the Bills. A historian at Gujarat
University, points out that Govind Guru had started his movement in the 1890s among the
Bhils. The fire god was considered a symbol in the movement. The followers has to stand in
front of the sacred fire and do havan (i.e. fumigation) along with the worship.
Govind Guru and Mangarh Massacre have become part of the memory of Bhils. Despite
this, it was buried in remote areas of Banswara-Panchmahal, situated on the border of
Rajasthan and Gujarat, and this historic tragedy could not become more than a footnote in
the history of India's freedom fight.
The need is, therefore, to recognise the sacrifice given by the Bhils of Banswara at
Mangarh in State of Rajasthan by providing for establishment of a Mangarh Dham National
Memorial to perpetuate the memory of those killed or wounded on 17th day of November,
1913 at Mangarh in Banswara, State of Rajasthan.
Hence this Bill.
KIRODI  LAL  MEENA
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the Trust to erect and maintain suitable buildings,
structures and parks at or near the site of the Mangarh Dham in the city of Banswara; to
acquire lands, buildings and other properties for the purposes of the Trust; and to raise and
receive funds for the purposes of the Memorial. Clause 7 provides for making grants to the
trustees by the Central Government after the appropiation by Parliament by law for the
purpose of the Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and recurring
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However it is difficult to estimate the
amount required for the purpose as it would depend upon the decisions of the trust.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only, and as such, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the erection and management of a National Memorial to perpetuate the
memory of those killed or wounded on the 17th day of November, 1913,
in Mangarh Dham in the State of Rajasthan.
————
(Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3618RS—22.11.2019.