1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  XXXI  of   2023
THE PREVENTION OF CUSTODIAL TORTURE BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to provide a framework for the prevention of custodial torture inflicted by public
servants, punishment and compensation for custodial crimes, rehabilitation of
victims, protection  of  victims, complainants and witnesses, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Custodial Torture Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)  "appropriate Government" means relation to a State, the Government of  that
State and in relation to a Union Territory, the Central Governent.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "public servant'' without prejudice to section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860, refers to any person acting in his/her official capacity under the Central
Government or the State Government or employed in any Government Company as
defined in clause 45 of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, or in any other
institution under the control of the Central Government or the State Government.
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made uder this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act shall have
the same meanings respectively as assigned to them in the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(3) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in any area,  shall, in
relation to that area, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law,  if any, in
force in that area.
3. Whoever, being a public servant or being abetted by a public servant or with
the consent or acquiescence of a public servant, intentionally inflicts physical or mental
suffering on a person detained, held in custody or held in administrative detention or
imprisoned as a result of conviction for an offence, for the purpose of:—
(a) obtaining information or a confession from him/her or  a third persons; or
(b) punishment for an act he/she or a third person has committed or is
suspected of having committed; or
(c) intimidating or coercing him/her or a third person for any reason based
on discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, gender, race, place of residence,
language or sexual orientation, is said to inflict custodial torture:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any pain, hurt or
danger caused by any act which is inflicted in accordance with any procedure
established by law or justified by law.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “custodial torture”, apart
from physical and mental suffering, includes, but is not limited to food deprivation,
submersion of head in water, asphyxiation, use of psychoactive drugs, maltreating
family members, and inflicting shame upon the victim.
4. Where custodial torture referred to in section 3 is inflicted on a person, the
burden of proof that the torture was not intentionally caused or abetted by, or was not
with the consent or acquiescence, of a public servant, shall shift to such public servant.
5. (1) Where the public servant referred to in section 3 or any person abetted by
or with the consent or acquiescence of such public servant, tourtures or attempts to
torture any person, such public servant or person shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than three years but which can extend to ten years and
shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
(2) Where death of any person is caused due to custodial torture, the person
committing the offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and shall also be
liable to fine.
6. (1)  Any public servant or other person committing custodial torture or attempting
to commit such torture shall also be liable to a fine which shall be payable as
compensation to the affected person.
(2) Notwithstanding the fine imposed under this Act, the appropriate Government
may award such amount of compensation including interim compensation to the victim
of custodial torture as may be considered necessary for rehabilitation of the victim, as
may be prescribed.
45 of 1860.
18 of 2013.
45 of 1860.
Burden of
Proof.
Custodial
torture.
Punishment
for custodial
torture.
Compensation
to victims of
custodial
torture.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) Compensation by the appropriate Government to the victim of custodial torture
for the purpose of his rehabilitation shall be awarded taking into consideration amongst
others, the following factors, namely:—
(a) the gravity of the physical and mental harm and suffering inflicted,
including death if caused as a result of custodial torture;
(b) lost opportunities, including employment, education and social benefits;
(c) material damages and loss of earnings including loss of earning
potential;
(d) cost required for legal or expert assistance, medicine and medical
services, and psychological and social services; and
(e) the age, family responsibilities and material condition of the dependents
of the victim.
(4) In case of death due to custodial torture, the dependents of the deceased
person shall be entitled to such amount of compensation including enterim comensation
under this Act, as may be prescribed.
7. A public servant who abets, consents, acquiesces, or conspires to commit
custodial torture shall be liable to the same punishment and compensation referred to in
sections 5 and section 6.
8. (1) Whoever, being a public servant or with the consent or acquiescence of a
public servant, sexually abuses a person detained, held in custody or held in
administrative detention or imprisoned as a result of conviction for an offence, shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(2) A public servant who consents, acquiesces, or conspires to commit custodial
sexual abuse referred to in the sub-section (1), shall also be liable to the same punishment
referred to in sub-section ( 1).
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
no court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act unless the complaint is
made within a period of two years from the date on which the offence is alleged to have
been committed.
10. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the State Government to make
arrangements for the protection of victims of custodial torture and custodial sexual
abuse, complainants and witnesses against all kinds of ill-treatment, violence, threats
of violence, or physical harm or mental trauma, from the time of submission of the
complaint till such time the State Government is satisfied that such protection is no
longer required.
11. (1) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anyting
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
Abetment to
torture.
Custodial
sexual abuse.
Cognizance of
the offence.
2 of 1974.
Protection of
victims,
complainants
and witnesses.
Effect of
provisions of
this Act.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5

4
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 21 of the Indian Constitution guarantees the right to life and personal liberty to
each and every person in the country. Custodial violence not only takes away the fundamental
right to life but also viciously violates human dignity. Unfortunately, the existing laws in
India do not adequately address custodial crimes.
2. India is a signatory to the United Nation Convention against Torture and other
Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment since 14th October, 1997, however,
India is yet to ratify the same. Therefore, enabling legislation against torture is necessary for
the ratification of the Convention. A legislation against custodial torture in consonance with
the definition of torture provided under the Convention and related Indian legal provisions
will ensure a right against custodial torture for all persons in India.
3. The Supreme Court in the case of D.K. Basu v. State of West Begnal (1997) held that
the expression “life or personal liberty” in article 21 of the Constitution of India includes a
guarantee against torture and assault even by the State and its functionaries to a person who
is taken into custody. The Law Commission of India has also recommended ratification of the
UN Convention against Torture and tougher laws for custodial torture.
4. In 2010, the Lok Sabha passed the Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010 which subsequently
lapsed in Rajya Sabha. However, the Select Committee of Rajya Sabha in its report on the
2010 Bill flagged certain gaps in the Bill and suggested stricter provisions of prevent custodial
torture. Taking a cue from the Committee Report, the current Bill criminalises custodial torture,
death and sexual abuse, and prescribes punishments for these offences. In addition to this,
the Bill also provides a legal framework for compensation, rehabilitation, and protection of
victims of custodial violence.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above-stated objectives.
MANOJ  KUMAR  JHA.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 empowers the Central Government, as the case may be, to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The matters in respect of which the rules and
regulations may be made are of procedure and administrative details and as such, it is
not practicable to provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide a framework for the prevention of custodial torture inflicted by public servants,
punishment and compensation for custodial crimes, rehabilitation of victims, protection
 of victims, complainants and witnesses, and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha, M.P .)
RS–P&PS–PMB(E) –067–12.12.2023.