As INTRODUCED IN THE RAIYA SABHA

Bill No. XXXII of 1999
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1999
A
BILL

Surther to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
1999.

43 of 1951 2. In section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred
5 to as the principal Act),—

(i in sub-section (7), for the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—

“Provided that no association or body shall be registered as a political
party under this sub-section, if—

10 (a) the association or body bears a religious name; or

(b) the memorandum or rules and regulations of such association
or body do not conform to the provisions of sub-section (5);”"

Short title.

Amendment of
section 29A.


Insertion of
new Section
298.
De-registration
of political par-
ties.

2

(ii) for sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this
Act or in any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the
Supreme Court from any decision of the Commission under this section:

Provided that every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a
period of thirty days from the date of the decision of the Commission:

Provided further that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after
the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the association
or body had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within such period.”.

3. In Part IVA of the principal Act, after section 29A, the follwoing section shall be
inserted, namely:—

“298, (1) Where,—
(a) any political party bears a religious name; or

(6) the memorandum or rules and regulations of the political party no longer
conform to the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 29A; or

(c) the activities of the political party are not in accordance with its
memorandum or rules and regulations referred to in sub-section (5) of section 29A,

its registration as a political party under section 29A shall be liable to be cancelled by an
order of the High Court within whose jurisdiction the main office of that political party is
situate:

(2) On receipt of a complaint that there is sufficient cause for cancelling the registation
of a political party under sub-section (1), the High Court may call upon the political party
affected by notice in writing to show cause, within thirty days from the date of the service
of such notice, why the registration of the political party should not be cancelled:

Provided that where the High Court is not satisfied that there is sufficient
cause for cancelling the registration of the political party, it may summarily reject
the complaint.

(3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the political party or office-bearers
or members thereof, the High Court may, after holding such inquiry as it may deem fit
and after calling for such information as it may consider necessary from the political party
or from any office-bearer or member thereof, decide whether or not there is sufficient
cause for cancelling the registration and make such order as it may deem fit either dismissing
the complaint or cancelling the registration of the political party.

(4) No complaint under sub-section (2) shall lie to the High Court within a period of
ninety days from the commencement of the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 1993 on the ground specified in clause (a) of sub-section (/), if the political party
changes it religious name within the said period.”.

20

25

30

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Democracy and secularism are the two pillars of our State. They represent the basic
features of the Indian constitutional policy. The principle of equality is the very foundation
of both democracy and secularism. Under the Constitution, all the citizens of India enjoy
equal rights and privileges without any discrimination and no section of the people is
competent to usurp the rights of another section. One of the menaces which our country
faces today is that of communalism. It fragments the society and holds a threat to the
unity and the integrity of India.

2. In view of above, it has become necessary to strengthen the provisions of section
29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 relating to registration of political
parties. It is proposed to further amend that section so as to provide that no association or
body shall be registered by the Election Commission as a political party under that section
if the association or body bears a religious name, since such a religious name could be
said to contain an appeal to vote for the political party on the ground of religion which
would be detrimental to the cause of secular democracy. An appeal is proposed to be
provided against the decision of the Election Commission to the Supreme Court. Further,
a new section 298 is proposed to be inserted in the said Act, whereunder.a complaint can
be made to the High Court within whose jurisdiction the main office of a political party is
situate, for cancelling the registration of a political party where such political party bears
a religious name or the memorandum or rules and regulations of the political party ng
longer conform to the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 29A or the activities of the
political party are not in accordance with the said memorandum or rules and regulations.
It is also proposed to lay down a time limit of ninety days within which political parties
with religious name would be required to change such names and conform to the new law.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

EDUARDO FALERIO


Registration
with the Elec-
tion Commis-
sion of associa-
tions and bod-
ies as political
parties,

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE Act, 1951
(43 oF 1951)

* * * * *
PART IVA
REGISTRATION OF POLITICAL PARTIES
298. (J) * * * *

(5) The application under sub-section (/) shall be accompanied by a copy of the
memorandum or rules and regulations of the association or body, by whatever name called,
and such memorandum or rules and regulations shall contain a specific provision that the
association or body shall bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established, and to the principles of socialism, secularism and democracy, and would
uphold the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.

(6) The Commission may call for such other particulars as it may deem fit from the
association or body.

(7) After considering all the particulars as aforesaid in its possession and any other
necessary and relevant factors and after giving the representatives of the association or
body reasonable opportunity of being heard, the Commission shall decide either to register
the association or body as a political party for the purposes of this Part, or not so to
register it;,and the Commission shall communicate its decision to the association or body:

Provided that no association or body shall be registered as a political party under
this sub-section unless the memorandum or rules and regulations of such association or
body conform to the provisions of sub-section (5).

(8) The, decision of the Commission shall be final.

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951

(Shri Eduardo Falerio, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2030RS—25-11-99.