THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO GIRL CHILD BELONGING TO
PARENTS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE  BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for financial protection and security to girl child of parents living below
poverty line and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Financial Assistance to Girl Child Belonging to Parents
Living Below Poverty Line Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of J&K.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “girl child” means any female child upto the age of twenty years belonging to
the parents living below poverty line; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXXIX of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015
Definitions.
5
10

2
3.  (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Girl Child
Development Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall deposit a sum of one lakh rupees in the bank
account of every girl child of  below poverty line family at the time of her birth within its
territorial jurisdiction.
(4) The deposit shall mature when the girl child attains the age of eighteen years or
such period as may be fixed by the appropriate Government and such proceeds may be used
by the girl child for education purpose, etc.
4. The appropriate Government shall issue directions to the nationalised and private
sector banks or insurance companies, within six months of the coming into force of this Act,
to formulate suitable schemes which provide benefits of fixed or term deposit or insurance
benefits to the girl child.
5. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force giving benefits to the girl child.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Establishment
of Girl Child
Development
Fund.
Schemes to be
formulated by
banks and
insurance
companies.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even after the completion of sixty-eight years of Independence, no clear-cut policy
for the overall development of girl child belonging to below poverty line (BPL) family has
been formulated in our country so far. Today, a girl child of a poor family has to face
problems at every stage. This includes, problems relating to poverty, upbringing, malnutrition,
education, employment, vocational training, health care and problems faced at the time of
her marriage. There is no institutional mechanism  to harness the potential and channelize
the energy of girl child of BPL family for the betterment of the country. There is no proper
planning for comprehensive development of girl child. The plight of girl child belonging to
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes is even worse. Apart from
all the problems as mentioned above, they also have to face social ostracisation. Birth of a
girl child is still considered to be a curse.
There is a need to instill a sense of belongingness among the female children by
providing them all opportunities for their development so that they can contribute to the
progress of the country to their full potential. The facilities should be provided to them as
a matter of right and not as a privilege. The steps taken in this direction will not only uplift
the conditions of girl child but will also create a better society leading to a civilized and
stronger nation. The Government should take responsibility of depositing one lakh rupees
or as may be prescribed in financial institutions like banks and insurance companies in the
name of new born girl child of BPL family, which will become a handsome amount after
eighteen years or so which can be used for the purpose of higher education, skill development,
training etc. of the girl child.
In this way, financial protection and security to girl child of BPL family must be
ensured. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for creation of a Girl Child Development Fund. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand
crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand five hundred crore is
also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for financial protection and security to girl child of parents living below
poverty line and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr . T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3380RS(S3)—07-12-2015.