AS INTRODUCED  IN THE RAJYA  SABHA
ON THE 17TH FEBRUARY, 2006.
THE  CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2004
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  To clause ( 1) of article 75 of the Constitution, the following provisos, shall be
added, namely:—
“Provided that a person shall be disqualified for being appointed as the Prime
Minister, or a Minister if he stands charged by a competent Court of Law with any
criminal offence under any criminal law for the time being in force the conviction on
which charge disqualifies a person from being a member of either House of Parliament
under article 102 of this Constitution:
Provided further that notwithstanding anything in article 74, if the President is
satisfied that a Minister in the Council of Ministers stands charged by a competent
Court of Law with any criminal offence under any criminal law for the time being in
force, he may drop such a Minister from the Council of Ministers forthwith.
Bill No.  XXXIV of  2004
Shorte title,
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of Article 75.5
10

2
3. In article 164 of the Constitution, in clause (1) after the existing proviso, the following
provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for being appointed as the
Chief Minister, or a Minister if he stands charged by a competent court of law with any
criminal offence under  any criminal law for the time being in force, the conviction on
which charge disqualifies a person from being a member of the legislature of a State
under article 191 of this Constitution:
Provided also that notwithstanding anything in article 163 if the Governor is
satisfied that a Minister in the Council of Ministers stands charged by a competent
court of law with any criminal offence under any criminal law for the time being in
force, he may drop such a Minister from the Council of Ministers forthwith.
Amendment
of Article 164.
5
10
2

3
STA TEMENT OF  OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The Council of Ministers at the Union and State levels are the highest executive
bodies who run the affairs of the nation. It is all the more necessary that in order to provide
clean and corruption free administration the Ministers should have clean and honest image.
But, unfortunately, persons with criminal background have recently occupied Ministerial
posts both at the Central and the State levels. Recently, Parliament was rocked by the issue
of induction of the tainted Ministers in the Union Council of Ministers when it was found
that persons who have been chargesheeted in the Courts for heinous offences like murders,
kidnapping, rape, extortion, etc. have been appointed Ministers. This is the climax of
criminalisation of politics. Hence it has become necessary that if a competent Court of Law
frames a criminal charge against a persons, the person concerned should be disqualified for
being a Minister till he is acquitted by the Court. This will uphold the prestige and credibility
of the Council of Ministers and restore the respect for ethical and moral values in our polity.
Hence this Bill.
ALLADI P. RAJKUMAR

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V—The Union—Arts. 75, 76)
75. (1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
* * * * *
164. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor:
Provided that in the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, there shall be a
Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in charge of the welfare of the
Scheduled Castes and backward classes or any other work.
* * * * *
Other
provisions as
to Ministers.
Other
provisions as
to Ministers.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5394RS(S-1)—17-02-2006.