THE HINDU MARRIAGE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (i) This Act may be called the Hindu Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(ii) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(iii) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, after clause (iv) the following clause
shall be inserted, namely—
(v) the parties are not belonging to the same Gotra/Parivara and residing in the same
village.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of Section 5.
Bill No. XXXI of 2010
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH AUGUST, 2010

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Social fabric and mutual ties are so strong in rural areas of the country that any
violation of their established  norms are not accepted. Entire village is considered as one unit
and its young folk as brothers and sisters as per the age old custom and tradition.  Elderly
persons treat them as their sons and daughters. This cultural commitment has gone a long
way in ensuring dignity and safety of women in day-to-day activities at their place of work
and residence. Marriage, as an institution of personal law, has been playing an extremely
significant role for social life and healthy society.
Vedic literature and the seers prohibited marriages in the same Gotra or Parivara. Further,
custom and age long tradition prohibited marriages in the same village and in the same Gotra
and Sapindas of each other. In recent past, some unscrupulous youth have started violating
the settled customs and values of the society by nuptial ties which are prohibited otherwise.
This has caused a stir in the society and a mass movement to condemn such relationship has
started. To check this trend of marriages, it is a fact that there should be a suitable legislative
measure in place. It is therefore, high time that the Hindu Marriage Act should be amended
for barring marriages in the same Gotra and Parivara, in the same villages.
Hence this Bill.
SHADI  LAL  BATRA
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955
* * * * * *
"5. A marriage may be solemnized between any two hindus, if the following conditions
are fulfilled, namely:—
(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage;
(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party—
(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of
unsoundness of mind; or
(b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from
mental disorder of such a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and
the procreation of children; or
(c) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity or epilepsy;
(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of 21 [twenty-one years] and the
bride the age of 18 [eighteen years] at the time of the marriage;
(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the
custom or usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two;
(v) the parties are not sapindas of each other, unless the custom or usage
governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two."
* * * * * *
3

GMGIPMRND—3866RS(S3)—13-08-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
————
(Shri Shadi Lal Batra, M.P.)