12
Bill No. XXXIX-F of 1994
THE INDIAN BOILERS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2007
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJYA SABHA ON 27TH NOVEMBER, 2007
LOK SABHA ON 30TH NOVEMBER, 2007)
ASSENTED TO
ON 12 DEC., 2007
ACT NO. 49 OF 2007

1
THE INDIAN BOILERS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Boilers Act, 1923.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Boilers (Amendment) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In section 1 of the Indian Boilers Act, 1923 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in sub-section (1), the word "Indian" shall be omitted.
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(1) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
Amendment
of section 1.
Bill No. XXXIX-F of 1994
Short title,
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
5 of 1923.

2
'(a) "accident" means an explosion of boiler, or boiler component, which is
calculated to weaken the strength or an uncontrolled release of water or steam
therefrom, liable to cause death or injury to any person or damage to any property;’;
(2) for clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(b) "boiler" means a pressure vessel in which steam is generated for use
external to itself by application of heat which is wholly or partly under pressure
when steam is shut off but does not include a pressure vessel,—
(i) with capacity less than 25 litres (such capacity being measured
from the feed check valve to the main steam stop valve);
(ii) with less than one kilogram per centimetre square design gauge
pressure and working gauge pressure; or
(iii) in which water is heated below one hundred degrees centi-
grade;
(ba) "boiler component" means steam piping, feed piping, economiser,
superheater, any mounting or other fitting and any other external or internal part
of a boiler which is subject to pressure exceeding one kilogram per centimetre
square gauge;';
(3) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ca) "Competent Authority" means an institution recognised in such man-
ner as may be prescribed by regulations for issue of certificate to the welders for
welding of boiler and boiler components;
(cb) "Competent Person" means a person recognised in such manner as
may be prescribed by regulations for inspection and certification of boilers and
boiler components during manufacture, erection and use. All Inspectors shall be
ipso facto competent persons;';
(4) after clause (ccc), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ccd) "Inspecting Authority" means an institution recognised in such
manner as may be prescribed by regulations for the inspection and certification
of boilers and boiler components during manufacture. All Chief Inspectors of
Boilers shall be ipso facto Inspecting Authorities;
(cce) "manufacture" means manufacture, construction and fabrication of
boiler or boiler component, or both;
(ccf) "manufacturer" means a person engaged in the manufacture;';
(5) in clause (d), for the words "includes any person", the words "includes any
person possessing or" shall be substituted;
(6) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(f) "steam pipe" means any pipe through which steam passes if—
(i) the pressure at which steam passes through such pipe exceeds
3.5 kilogram per square centimetres above atmospheric pressure, or
(ii) such pipe exceeds 254 millimetres in internal diameter and the
pressure of steam exceeds 1 kilogram per square centimetres above the
atmospheric pressure,
and includes in either case any connected fitting of a steam-pipe;';
(7) for clause (g), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(g) "structural alteration, addition or renewal" means,—

3
Substitution of
new section
for section 3.
(i) any change in the design of a boiler or boiler component;
(ii) replacement of any part of boiler or boiler component by a part
which does not conform to the same specification; or
(iii) any addition to any part of a boiler or boiler component;
(h) "superheater" means any equipment which is partly or wholly exposed
to flue gases for the purpose of raising the temperature of steam beyond the
saturation temperature at that pressure and includes a re-heater;
(i) "Technical Adviser" means the Technical Adviser appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 4A.'.
4. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"3. Nothing in this Act shall apply to—
(a) locomotive boilers belonging to or under the control of the railways;
(b) any boiler or boiler component,—
(i) in any vessel propelled wholly or in part by the agency of steam;
(ii) belonging to, or under the control of, the Army, Navy or Air
Force; or
(iii) appertaining to a sterilizer disinfector used in hospitals or nursing
homes, if the boiler does not exceed one hundred litres in capacity.".
5. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"4A. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Technical Adviser from amongst
the persons having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by rules.
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Technical Adviser shall be such as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) The Technical Adviser shall, in addition to exercising the powers and
discharging the functions assigned to him under this Act or rules or regulations made
thereunder, exercise such other powers and discharge such functions as the Central
Government and the Board may delegate to him.
4B. (1) Any person who proposes to undertake any welding work connected
with or related to a boiler, or a boiler component or both shall apply to a Competent
Authority for issue of a Welders certificate.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Competent Authority
shall follow such procedure for examination and grant of Welders certificate as may be
prescribed by regulations.
(3) The Competent Authority may, if satisfied that the person applying for Welders
certificate under sub-section (2) has compiled with the conditions precedent for issue
of the Welders certificate, issue such certificate, to such person subject to the payment
of such fee and such other conditions as may be prescribed by regulations:
Provided that the Competent Authority shall not refuse Welders certificate to
any person unless such person is given an opportunity of being heard.
4C. (1) No person shall manufacture or cause to be manufactured any boiler or
boiler component, or both unless—
(a) he has provided in the premises or precincts wherein such boiler or
boiler component, or both are manufactured, such facilities for design and
construction as may be prescribed by regulations;
Insertion of
new sections
4A to 4F.
Technical
Adviser.
Welders
certificate.
Conditions
precedent for
manufacture
of boiler and
boiler
component.
Limitation of
application.

4
(b) the design and drawings of the boiler and boiler component have been
approved by the Inspecting Authority under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 4D;
(c) the materials, mounting and fittings used in the construction of such
boiler or boiler component, or both conform to the specifications prescribed by
regulations; and
(d) the persons engaged for welding boiler or boiler component hold
Welders certificate issued by a Competent Authority.
4D. (1) Every manufacturer, before commencing manufacture of a boiler or boiler
component, shall engage an Inspecting Authority for carrying out inspection at such
stages of manufacture as may be prescribed by regulations.
(2) The Inspecting Authority engaged under sub-section ( 1) shall follow such
procedure for inspection and certification of boiler or boiler component as may be
prescribed by regulations and after inspection, if it is—
(a) satisfied that the boiler or the boiler component conforms to the stand-
ards prescribed by regulations, it shall issue a certificate of inspection and
stamp the boiler, or boiler component, or both; or
(b) of the opinion that the boiler, or boiler component, or both does not
conform to the standards prescribed by regulations, it may for reasons to be
recorded in writing refuse to issue such certificate:
Provided that no certificate shall be refused unless the Inspecting Authority
had directed the manufacturer of the boiler or boiler component, or both in writing
to carry out such modifications or rectifications as it deems necessary and the
Inspecting Authority is of the opinion that inspite of such direction the manufac-
turer of the boiler or boiler component, or both did not carry out the direction.
(3) The Inspecting Authority may, for the purposes of inspection under this
section, charge such fee as may be prescribed by regulations.
4E. (1) The owner who proposes to register a boiler under section 7, shall engage
on Inspecting Authority for carrying out inspection at the stage of erection of the
boiler.
(2) The Inspecting Authority shall follow such procedure for inspection and
certification of a boiler or boiler component, or both as may be prescribed by regula-
tions and after inspection, if it is—
(a) satisfied that the erection of the boiler is in accordance with the regu-
lations, it shall issue a certificate of inspection in such form as may be prescribed
by regulations; or
(b) of the opinion that the boiler has not been erected in accordance with
the regulations, it may for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to grant the
certificate and shall communicate such refusal to the manufacturer of the boiler
or boiler component forthwith:
Provided that no such certificate shall be refused unless the Inspecting
Authority had directed the owner in writing to carry out such modifications or
rectifications as it deems necessary and the Inspecting Authority is of the opin-
ion that in spite of such direction the owner did not carry out the direction.
(3) The Inspecting Authority may, for the purposes of inspection under this
section, charge such fee as may be prescribed by regulations.
4F. No person shall repair or cause to be repaired any boiler or boiler component
or both, unless—
(a) he has provided in the premises or precincts, where in such boiler or
boiler component or both are being used, such  facilities for repairs as may be
prescribed by regulations;
Inspection
during
erection.
Conditions
precedent for
repairing
boiler and
boiler
component.
Inspection
during
manufacture.

5
(b) the design and drawings of the boiler or boiler component, as the case
may be, and the materials, mountings and fittings used in the repair of such
boiler or boiler component conform to the regulations;
(c) persons engaged in welding, holds a Welders certificate issued by a
Competent Authority;
(d) every user who does not have the in-house facilities for repair of boiler
or boiler component shall engage a Boiler Repairer possessing a Boiler Repairer
certificate for repair of a boiler or boiler component or both, as the case may be;
(e) every user shall engage a Competent Person for approval of repairs to
be carried out in-house or by the repairers.".
6. In section 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 4), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(4A) No person shall be appointed as the Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector
or Inspector unless he possesses such qualifications and experience as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.".
7. In section 6 of the principal Act, in clause (e), for the words "State Government" the
words "Central Government" shall be substituted.
8. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words "may apply to the Inspector to have the
boiler registered", the words "may apply to the Inspector along with such other
documents as may be prescribed by regulations to have the boiler registered" shall be
substituted;
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) On the said date the Inspector shall inspect the boiler with a view to
satisfying himself that the boiler has not suffered any damage during its transit
from the place or manufacture to the site of erection and forward a report of the
inspection alongwith the documents to the Chief Inspector within seven days.".
9. In section 8 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (c),for the figures "18.58", the figures "20" shall be substituted;
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(d) save as provided in section 12, when any structural alteration,
addition or renewal is made in or to the boiler;";
(iii) in clause (f), for the words "it or any steam pipe", the words "it or any
boiler component" shall be substituted;
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) When a certificate ceases to be in force, the owner of the boiler may
apply to the Competent Person for renewal thereof for such period as may be
prescribed by regulations.";
(c) for sub-sections (4) and (5), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (
3), the Competent
Person shall, within fifteen days from the date of such receipt, inspect the boiler
in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations.
(5) If the Competent Person is—
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 8.

6
(a) satisfied that the boiler and the boiler components attached
thereto are in good condition he shall issue a certificate for such period as
may be prescribed by regulations.
(b) of the opinion that the boiler or boiler component, or both does
not conform to the standards prescribed by regulations, it may, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, refuse to issue such certificate:
Provided that no certificate shall be refused unless the Inspecting
Authority had directed the owner of the boiler or the boiler component, or
both in writing to carry out such modifications or rectifications as it deems
necessary and the Competent Person is of the opinion that inspite of such
direction the owner of the boiler or boiler component, or both did not carry
out the direction:
Provided further that the Competent Person shall, within forty-eight
hours of making the examination, inform the owner of the boiler or boiler
component any defect in his opinion and the reasons therefor and shall
forthwith report the case to the Chief Inspector.
(6) The Competent Person may for the purpose of inspection under this
section charge such fee as may be prescribed by regulations.".
10.  In section 9 of the principal Act, the words, brackets and figures "or sub-section
(5) of section 8" shall be omitted.
11.  In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause (c), for the words "State Government", the words "Central Govern-
ment" shall be substituted;
(b) clause (d) and the proviso shall be omitted.
12.  In section 12 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
"Provided that no such sanction is required where the structural alteration,
addition or renewal is made under the supervision of a Competent Person.".
13. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"13. (1) Before the owner of any boiler registered under this Act makes any
structural alteration, addition or renewal in or to any boiler component attached to the
boiler, he shall transmit to the Chief Inspector a report in writing of his intention and
send therewith such particulars of proposed alteration, addition or renewal as may be
prescribed by regulations.
(2) Any structural alteration, addition or renewal referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be made by a person possessing a Boiler Repairer certificate under the supervision
of the Competent Person.".
14.  In section 14 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (a), for the word "Inspector", the words "Competent Person"
shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words, "prescribed manner", the words "manner
prescribed by regulations" shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (c), for the words "be prescribed", the words "be prescribed
by regulations" shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment
of section 12.
Substitution of
new section
for section 13.
Amendment
of section 14.
Alteration or
renewal of
boiler
component.

7
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the word "Inspector", the words "Competent
Person" shall be substituted.
15.  In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words and figures "the Indian Factories
Act, 1911", the words and figures "the Factories Act, 1948" shall be substituted.
16. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the word "steam-pipe", at both the places where it
occurs, the words "boiler component" shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), where any
death has resulted due to any accident, an inquiry may be conducted by such
person and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.".
17. Section 19 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and
after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be made in such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
(3) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed
by the State Government.".
18. Section 20 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) and—
(a) in sub-section ( 1) as so renumbered, for the words "lodge with the Chief
Inspector an appeal to an Appellate Authority to be constituted by the State Govern-
ment under this Act", the words "prefer an appeal to the Central Government" shall be
substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(2) Any person considering himself aggrieved by the refusal of an In-
specting Authority to grant a certificate of inspection of manufacture or erec-
tion, as the case may be, may within thirty days from the date of communication
of such refusal, prefer an appeal to the Central Government.
(3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be made in such manner as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.".
19. In section 21 of the principal Act, for the words, figures and letters "An order of the
Central Government under section 20A and save as otherwise provided in sections 19, 20
and 20A, an order of an appellate authority", the words, figures and letter "An order of the
Central Government under sections 20 and 20A," shall be substituted.
20. In section 22 of the principal Act, for the words "one hundred rupees", the words
"five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
21. In section 23 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words "five hundred rupees", the words "one lakh rupees" shall be
substituted;
(b) for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" shall
be substituted.
22. In section 24 of the principal Act, for the words "punishable with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees", the words "punishable with imprisonment which may extend
Amendment
of section 15.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 19.
12 of 1911.
63 of 1948.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 21.
Amendment
of section 22.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section 24.

8
to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both" shall be
substituted.
23. In section 25 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "five hundred rupees", the words "one lakh
rupees" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "fine, or with both", the words "fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees or with both" shall be substituted.
24. In section 27A of the principal Act, for sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), the following
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Secretary to the Government of India incharge of the Department of
the Central Government having administrative control of the Board who shall be
the Chairperson ex officio;
(b) a senior technical officer conversant with the inspection and examina-
tion of boilers, to be nominated by the Government of each State (other than a
Union territory);
(c) equal number of other persons as in sub-section ( b) above to
represent—
(i) Central Government,
(ii) the Bureau of Indian Standards,
(iii) boiler and boiler component manufacturers,
(iv) National laboratories,
(v) engineering consultancy agencies,
(vi) users of boilers, and
(vii) such other interests which in the opinion of the Central
Government ought to be represented on the Board,
to be nominated by the Central Government;
(d) Technical Adviser, Member-Secretary ex officio.
(3) The term of office of the members nominated under clauses ( b) and (c) of
sub-section (2) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.".
25. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) for laying down the standard conditions in respect of material,
design, construction, erection, operation and maintenance which shall be
required for the purposes of enabling the registration and certification of boilers,
boiler components, boiler mountings and fittings under this Act;";
(ii) in clause ( d), for the word "steam-pipes", the words "boiler components,
boiler mountings and fittings" shall be substituted;
(iii) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ea) for prescribing the qualifications and experience subject to which
the Inspecting Authorities, Competent Authorities and Competent Persons shall
be recognised under this Act;
(eb) the conditions subject to which and the manner in which
manufacturer of boiler components or material may be recognised;
Amendment
of section 25.
Amendment
of section
27A.
Amendment
of section 28.

9
(ec) facilities for design and construction which are required to be
provided in the premises in which the manufacturing of any boiler or boiler
component is carried out;
(ed) fee for the purposes of inspection or grant of recognition or any
certificate under this Act;
(ef) procedure for examination and grant of Welders certificate;
(eg) powers and functions which the Board may delegate to the Technical
Adviser;
(eh) documents to be enclosed alongwith the applicaiton for registration
of boilers or renewal of a certificate authorising the use of boilers;
(ei) the manner of inspection of boilers;
(ej) the period for which a certificate authorising the use of a boiler may be
renewed;
(ek) the conditions subject to which and the form in which Competent
Person shall renew a certificate authorising the use of boilers;
(el) the manner and the form in which a Repairer's certificate shall be
issued;
(em) the manner in which the boilers shall be preprared for examination;
(en) drawings, specification, documents and other particulars which owner
of a boiler is required to make available to the Competent Person;
(eo) the manner in which a person may be authorised to conduct energy
audit and the manner in which such audit shall be conducted;
(ep) the manner in which disputes between the States with respect to
registration of boilers shall be resolved.".
26. In section 28A of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(1A) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the procedure to be followed in making applications under section 20A
and the fees payable in respect of such application;
(b) the qualifications and experience of persons to be appointed as Chief
Inspectors, Deputy Chief Inspectors and Inspectors;
(c) the manner in which appeals may be preferred to the Board, the fees
payable in respect of appeals and the procedure to be followed of disposing
such appeals;
(d) the term of office of the members and the manner in which they shall be
nominated under clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (2) of section 27A;
(e) the qualifications and experience of the Technical Adviser;
(f) for requiring boilers to be under the charge of persons holding certificate
of proficiency or competency and for prescribing the conditions on which such
certificate may be granted;
(g) the manner in which and the person who shall conduct inquiry into the
accident.".
Amendment of
section 28A.

10
27. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) the powers and duties of the Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspectors
and Inspectors;";
(ii) clause (d) shall be omitted;
(iii) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(f) fee payable for registration of boilers;";
(iv) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(h) the manner in which appeals shall be preferred to the Chief Inspector
and the procedure to be followed for hearing such appeals;";
(v) clause (j) shall be omitted.
28. In section 30 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" shall
be substituted;
(b) for the words "one thousand rupees", the words "one lakh rupees" shall be
substituted;
29. In section 33 of the principal Act, for the word "steam-pipes", the words "boiler
components" shall be substituted.
30. In section 34 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) If the State Government is satisfied that having regard to the material,
design or construction of boilers and to the need for the rapid industrialisation of the
country, it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette and
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by regulations, exempt any boiler or
boiler components in the whole or any part of the State from the operation of all or any
of the provisions of this Act.".
Amendment
of section 29.
Amendment
of section 30.
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment
of section 34.

A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Boilers Act, 1923.
—————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND— 5395LS (S5)—28-12-2007.