AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 26th  JULY, 2024
Bill No. XXXIV of 2024 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE PRESERVATION OF 
ENDANGERED LANGUAGES BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for the 
 Preservation of Endangered Languages and for matters 
 connected therewith or incidental thereto 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:- 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for the Preservation of
Endangered Languages Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
10 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, th e
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
Definitions. 

2 
(b) “Commission" means the National Commission for the Preservation
of Endangered Languages established under section 3;
(c) “endangered languages” means  any languages in the country, which
a
re at risk of extinction or becoming obsolete due to declining native
speakers, limited inter -generational transmission, significant 
external cultural or linguistic pressures, such as the shifting of
speakers to other languages and significant decrease in domains of
use and are notified as such by the Central Government under
section 4 of this Act;
(d) "member" means a Member of the National Commission for the
Preservation of Endangered Languages; and
(
e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
 
5 
 
10 
National 
Commission 
for the 
Preservation 
of 
Endangered 
Languages. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of one year from the
date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a Commission to be known as the National 
Commission for the Preservation of Endangered Languages to 
exercise the powers conferred upon and to perform the functions 
assigned to it, under this Act. 
(2) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
(3) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(4) The Commission shall consist of the following: —
(i) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government,
having specialised  knowledge and remarkable experience in
the field of preserving endangered languages and related
activities;
(ii) four Members, to be nominated by the Central Government,
from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing who
have extensive professional experience in, –
(a) language vitality and endangerment;
(b) organisations and institutions working for the preservation
of endangered and indigenous languages;
(c) conceptualising and developing innovative projects for
endangered language revitalisation with the support of
digital technologies; and
(d) language policies of the Central Government and State
Governments.
1
5 
 
20 
2
5 
 
30 
 
35 

3 
5 
1
0 
(iii) one officer of the Indian Administrative Service, to b e
nominated by the Central Government, having at least te n
years of professional experience in the management of
matters related to endangered languages – Member
S
ecretary.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(6) The Chairperson and every Member of the Commission shall hold office
f
or such period, not exceeding four years as may be specified by the
Central Government in this behalf.
1
5 
4. (1) The Commission may appoint such number of officers and staff and
experts as it may consider necessary for the efficient discharge of its
functions under this Act.
(2) The mode of recruitment, the salary and allowances payable to, and
other terms and cond itions of service of the officers and staff of the
Commission and experts appointed under sub- section (1) shall be such
as may be prescribed.
Secretariat of 
the 
Commission. 
 
20 5. The Central Government shall, upon the advice of the Commission, notify 
languages that are at risk of becoming endangered as ‘Endangered 
Languages’ in the Official Gazette. 
Notification of 
Endangered 
Languages. 2
5 
3
0 
 
35 
6. The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely, to –
(i) function as an apex authority for ensuring the preservation and
development of endangered languages in the country;
(ii) identify endangered languages in the country and conduct a
detailed assessment to analyse the degree of endangerment of each
language;
(iii) formulate a comprehensive national policy for revitalising and
developing all the endangered languages in the country, and design 
a strategic action plan, guidelines for implementation, and
monitoring and evaluation ac tivities for the preservation of
endangered languages based on the national policy framework;
(iv) support the efforts of the native speakers of endangered languages
to reclaim, revitalise, maintain and strengthen their language and
culture in a meaningful manner;
Functions of the 
Commission. 

4 
(v) perform such functions regarding the formulation and
implementation of schemes for the preservation of endangered
languages as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government;
(vi) coordinate with various Government departments both of the
Central an d State Governments as well as other institutions and
organisations working in this field for creating technological tools,
educational materials and permanent records of endangered
languages including audio and video records of the native
speakers, dictionaries, lexicons and grammar of the languages for
the purpose of maintenance and transmission;
(vii) conduct in- depth research and suggest to the appropriat e
Government better ways of ensuring the preservation of
endangered languages in the country;
(viii) advise t he appropriate Government in matters related to the
promotion of endangered language learning and preservation of
indigenous cultural activities in order to increase the number of
endangered language speakers;
(ix) support the institutions, organisations and individuals who are 
engaged in the promotion and preservation of endangere d
languages in the country;
(x) enquire into any complaints concerning the deprivation of the
rights of people speaking endangered languages and to
recommend to the appropriate Government the action to be take n
in
 such matters;
(xi) act as a national -level grievance redressal mechanism in matters
related to endangered language development and preservat ion of
the welfare and empowerment of native speakers of the
endangered languages; and
(xii) advise the appropriate Government on such matters arising out of
the administration of this Act or  as may be referred to it  by the
appropriate Government, from time to time.
 
5 
1
0 
 
15 
2
0 
 
25 
 
30 
Commission 
to have 
powers of 
Civil Court.
 
7. The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to it under
clauses (x) and (xi) of section 6, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying
a suit and, in particular in respect to the following matters, namely, –
(a) summoning and enforcing the  attendance of any person from a ny
pa
rt of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or
office;
 
35 
4
0 

5 
(e) issuing commiss ion for the examination of witnesses a nd
documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
 
5 
8. The appropriate Government shall consult the Commission on all policies
affecting the preservation of the endangered languages in the country.
Appropriate 
Government to 
consult the 
Commission. 
 
10 
9. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the officia l
Gazette, constitute a Special Fund to be known as the Endangered
Languages Fund to implement the provisions of this Act;
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments, shall from
time to time, after due appropriation made in this behalf by the
Parliament or the respective State Legislature by law, contribute such
sums of money to the Endangered Language Fund, in such ratio as may
be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Commission.
Endangered 
Languages 
Fund. 
 
15 
 
20 
2
5 
 
30 
10. (1) The Commission shall prepare every year, in such form and within such
time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year
including audited annual statement of acco unts and copies thereof shall be
forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) T he President shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament the
report submitted by the Commission under sub- section (1) along with a
memorandum explaining the reasons for not accepting any of the
recommendations made therein, within a period of one year from the date
of receipt of such report.
(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues
connected with the State Government, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the Governor of that State, who shall in turn, cause to be lai d
b
efore the State legislature concerned, such report along with an explanatory 
memorandum concerned with the action taken or proposed to be taken on
the recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for not
accepting any of the recommendations made therein, within a period of one
year from the date of receipt of such report. .
Annual Report 
of the 
Commission. 
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
 
 
35 12. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law 
for the time being in force. 
Act to have an 
overriding 
effect. 

6 
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary
or expedient for removing such difficulty.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
Power to 
make rules. 14. (1) The Central Gov ernment may, by notification in th e Official Gazette, 
make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each H ouse of Parliament
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 

7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
People’s ability and freedom to use their native language is essential 
for human dignity and peaceful co- existence. Language is a systematic form 
of communication. It facilitates meaningful interactions with one another, 
enables cultural expressions in a variety of forms, as well as the transmission 
of centuries -long knowledge, history, world views, beliefs, and traditions. 
When the State fails to guarantee the ‘right to use one’s own language’, it 
seriously limits the boundaries of the freedom of thought and expression 
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) and the 
Fundamental Rights guaranteed in the Indian Constitution. Hence, it is critical 
to protect and preserve all the languages irrespective of the number of 
speakers. Realising the alarming rate of the disappearance of indigenous 
languages at the global level, UNESCO has already declared the decade of 
2022-2032 as the International Decade of Indigenous Languages.  
A
n ‘endangered language’ is one that is likely to become extinct in 
the near future.  As per census 2011, more than 19,500 languages or dialects 
are spoken in India as mother tongues, while only 121 languages are spoken 
by 10,000 or more people. This shows the quantum of endangered languages 
in our country.  Many languages are falling out of use and are being replaced 
by others that are more widely used in the region. Unless current trends are 
reversed, these endangered languages will become extinct soon.  Many other 
languages are no longer being learned by new generations of children or by 
new adult speakers. Hence, these languages will become extinct when their 
last speaker dies. In fact, dozens of languages today have only one native 
speaker still living,  and that person's death will mean the extinction of the 
language.  
According to the Peoples Linguistic Survey of India, India has 
already lost 250 languages during the last 50 years. Although successive 
Governments have undertaken many programmes at the national and state 
level to conserve the endangered languages, these efforts are not sufficient for 
protecting and preserving the vulnerable languages in the country.  There is 
an urgent need to understand the gravity of the problem at the national level 
a
nd formulate a proactive action plan to preserve these endangered languages. 
Therefore, establishment of a National Commission for the Preservation of 
Endangered Languages is perceived as the most effective and pragmatic 
policy initiative to revive, preserve and develop the endangered languages in 
the country. 
H
ence, this Bill. 
 S
ANDOSH KUMAR P. 

8 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
C lause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National 
Commission for the Preservation of Endangered Languages and appointment 
of a Chairperson, Members, Member Secretary  to the Commission. Clause 4 
provides for the appointment of officers an d staff and experts to assist the 
Commission in the efficient discharge of its functions.  Clause 5 provides that 
the Commission shall conduct in-depth research to suggest to the Government 
better ways of ensuring the preservation of endangered languages i
n the 
country as well as support the institutions, organisations and individuals who 
are engaged in the promotion and preservation of endangered languages in the 
country as part of its functions.  Clause 9 provides for the constitution of an 
Endangered Language Fund to which the Central and State Governments shall 
contribute in such ratio as may be prescribed. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non-
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 

9 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to 
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

RAJY
A SABHA 
________ 
A 
BILL 
to pr
ovide for the establishment of a National Commission for the 
Preservation of Endangered Languages and for matters 
 connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
__________ 
(Shri San
dosh Kumar P., M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)-151-30.07.2024 