AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXXII of 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A

BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
5 2. In article 74 of the Constitution, in clause (1):—

(i) Before the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the strength of the Council of Ministers shall not exceed

ten percent of the combined total membership of the House of the People and
the Council of States.”
10 (i) in the existing proviso after the word “Provided” the word “further” shall be
inserted.
3. In article 75 of the Constitution, to Clause (1) the following proviso shall be added,
namely:—
“Provided that the President shall not appoint any Member of Parliament as a
15 Minister who has left the Political Party on whose symbol he was elected to either
House of Parliament and has joined or formed another Political Party, as the case may
be.”

Short title and
‘commence-
ment.
Amendment
of article 74.

Amendment
of article 75.


2

Amendment 4. In article 163 of the Constitution, to Clause (1) the following proviso shall be added,
of article 163. pamely:—

“Provided that the strength of the Council of Ministers shall not exceed ten
percent of the total membership of the Legislative Assembly of the State where
unicameral Legislature exists and the combined total membership of the Legislative
Assembly and Legislative Council where bicameral Legislature exists.”

Amendment 5. In article 164 of the Constitution, in clause (1),—
of article 164. ७७ the
(i) before the existing provi, thie following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Governor shall not appoint any Member of the State

Legislature as a Minister who has left the Political Party on whose symbol he

was elected to either House of the State Legislature and has joined or formed

another Political Party, as the case may be.

(ii) in the existing proviso after the word “Provided” the word “further” shall be
inserted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Presently there is no constitutional limit prescribed on the size of the Council of
Ministers at the Union level or at the State level. As a result many States have very big
Council of Ministers like the States of U.P. and Bihar. Many a times Union Council of
Ministers is also very big. Such big Council of Ministers become financial burden on the
exchequer. It is therefore necessary to check such a trend by prescribing the limit to the size
of Council of Ministers.

Similarly lure of Ministership is one of the foremost reasons for defections by the
legislator or group of legislators which has become the menace of our democracy and
unfortunately the anti defection law has failed to curb this menace. If the defectors are
denied Ministership this menace can be contained to some extent.

Hence this Bill.

R.S.GAVAI.


Council of
Ministers to
aid and advise
President.

Other
provisions as
to Ministers.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

74. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid
and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with
such advice:]

Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such
advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall act in accordance with the
advice tendered after such reconsideration.

* * * * * *

164. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Minister
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor:

Provided that in the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, there shall be a
Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in charge of the welfare of the
Scheduled Castes and backward classes or any other work.

* * * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
Bill

further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri R. S. Gavai, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—7019RS.t-05-03-2001.