As InrRobucep In Rasya SABHA

Bill No. XXXII of 2000

THE PREVENTION OF COMMUNALISATION OF EDUCATION,
HISTORY, HERITAGE AND EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
पु BILL, 2000

A

Bru

to prevent the Central and State Governments from prescribing syllabi for the schools and
educational institutions containing communal bias or agenda and nominating persons
with communal background to the apex bodies connected with education like NCERT,
UGC, governing bodies of Universities, Centres promoting art, culture, history,
science and such other bodies and interfering in the research and other works of
educational bodies and attempts to change the facts relating to history, culture and
heritage of the society and for matters connected therewith.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1 (J) This Act may be calted the Prevention of Communalisation of Education, Short title, ex-
History, Heritage and Educational Institutions Act, 2000. tent and com-

mencement,
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Defenitions.

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of State, the Government of that
State and in other cases, the Central Government;


Power to
confiscate
syllabus book
having
communal bias
or agenda.

Prohibition of
interfering in
the seers
work and)
changing
Power to make

2

(6) “educational institutions” include all the educational institutions right from the
preparatory level to university level whether run with Government funds or by private
individuals or bodies;

(०) “educational bodies” include all the bodies such as Boards, councils, registries,
Commissions and Academies etc. directly or indirectly connected with education;

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no educational body authorised for prescribing syllabus for various classes, courses; and
degrees shall approve any syllabus which contains communal bias or agenda or propose to
change the historical facts being taught in any educational institutions.

4. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, no Minister of the appropriate Government shall nominate any person having
communal or criminal background to any educational body in any capacity whatsoever,
either under his discretionary powers or under any authority conferred ypon him by any
law for the time being in force.

(2) Any nomination made in contravention of sub-section(1) shall be void ab-initio.

5. (1) Any book prescribed for the syllabus of any educational institution containing
communal bias or agenda or an attempt to change the historical facts therein shall be
confiscated by the district administration through the local police and destroyed in such
manner iS may be prescribed.

(2) The appropriate Government shall withdraw the book from the syllabus which
has been confiscated under sub-section (1) with immediate effect.

6, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being inforce,
no Minister or any authority of the appropriate Government shali, interfere in any research
work of any historian or academician in any manner whatsoever nor shall attempt to
change the facts.of history or culture or heritage of the nation.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Of late, reports are emanating from the media that Central and some State
Governments are changing or have changed the syllabus of schools and colleges on
communal lines toeing the agenda of communal organisations supporting the Government
concerned which has vitiated the atmosphere in educational institutions and is creating
communal tension in the temples of education. Similarly, Ministers at the Central and
State levels are nominating persons with commynal background and in a particular case,
akiller who himself has confessed in a book that he had killed a person during partition of
the country, to higher educational bodies like NCERT, UGC etc. which has sent shock
waves amongst the secular society. The Cultural and Historical bodies are being
reconstituted by nominating persons which the communal background and who are
supporters of fundamentalists organisations. The entire nation was shocked to learn that
two volumes of “Towards Freedom” project were withdrawn by ICHR under pressure and ‘
it was widely published that there are attempts to review the history and rewrite it. It is an
attempt to play with the facts, culture and heritage of the nation. These actions are seen as
attempts to saffronise and communalise education and educational institutions which has
to be stopped in order to save the democracy in the country.

Hence this Bill.

SURESH PACHOURI


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Govérnment to make rules for carrying
ovt the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

Bue

to prevent the Central and State Governments from prescribing syllabi for the schools and
educational institutions containing communal bias or agenda and nominating persons
with commynal background to the apex bodies connected with education like NCERT,
UGC, governing bodies of Universities, Centres promoting art, culture, history, science
and such other bodies and interfering in the reearch and other works of educational
bodies and attempts to change the facts relating to history, culture and heritage of the
society and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1519RS—26-6-2000.