1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 12TH JULY, 2019
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of  India
 as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 85 of the Constitution, after clause ( 1), the following proviso shall be
inserted—
"Provided that each House of Parliament shall sit for atleast one hundred and
twenty days in a year."
Bill No. XXXIV of  2018
Amendment
of article 85.
5

2
3.  In article 174 of the Constitution, after clause ( 1), the following proviso shall be
inserted—
"Provided that each House of the Legislature of the State shall sit atleast sixty
days in year.
Amendment
of article 174.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Over the years, there has been a decline in the number of sittings of the Rajya Sabha as
well as in the Lok Sabha. In the beginning, Parliament used to sit for more than one hundred
days and this practice continued upto early part of seventies. Gradually, the number of
sittings of the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha started decreasing and at present the sittings
of the Houses stand around seventy. This is not a healthy trend especially in a vibrant
democracy like ours. The important legislations concerning welfare of the citizens, women
and the marginalised sections of the society suffer due to paucity of time. Discussions on
various national and international issues also get neglected and the people at large are the
worst sufferers. The situation in various State Legislative Assemblies is also not encouraging.
These Assemblies hardly sit for more than thirty days in a year. As a result, many important
issues go unnoticed. In view of this scenario, it is all the more desirable that both the Houses
of Parliament should sit for atleast  one hundred and twenty days and the Legislative
Assemblies/Legislative Councils of the States should sit atleast for sixty days in a year.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
C.M. RAMESH
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clauses 2 and 3 of the Bill respectively provide for specifying the number of sittings of
both Houses of Parliament and the State Legislatures in a year. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted,
by Parliament or State Legislatures will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India as well as Consolidated Fund of the concerned State. However, it is not possible at this
stage to assess the exact amount which is likely to be incurred towards recurring and non-
recurring expenditure for the purpose.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
85. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.—
(1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet at
such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting
in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next Session.
(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People.
* * * * *
174. Sessions of the State legislature, prorogation and dissolution.—
(1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of the
Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall
not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting
in the next Session.
(2) The Governor may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the House or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.
* * * * *
Sessions of
Parliament,
prorogation
and
dissolution.
Sessions of
the State
Legislature,
prorogation
and
dissolution.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri C.M. Ramesh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1562RS(S3)—15-07-2019.