1
THE CONTESTING ELECTION ON GOVERNMENT
EXPENSES BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for election expenses to the recognised political parties and their official
candidates for contesting elections to Lok Sabha, Legislative Assembly and local
bodies by the State in order to check increasing use of black money in such
elections and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Contesting Election on Government Expenses
Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "partial election expenses" means the expenses that may be fixed, from time
to time by Parliament for providing to the Official candidate and the recognise Political
Parties for contesting elections to Lok Sabha, Legislative Assembly and local bodies.
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No.  XXXVIII of 2012
Definitions.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012

2
(d) "recognised political party" means the political party that has been allotted
election symbol by the Election Commission of India;
(e) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 shall have the meanings respectively assigned
to them in that Act.
3. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall provide partial election expenses to the
recognised political parties and their official candidates in the country for contesting
Lok Sabha, State Legislative Assembly and local body elections in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the recognised political parties and their official candidates shall be allowed to accept all
kinds of donations and contributions from general public, entrepreneurs and corporate
houses.
Provided that such donations, exceeding rupees ten thousand shall be accepted through
cheque or draft and the names of the contributors shall have to be disclosed by the political
parties on their website.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an
Election Fund at national level to provide for partial election expenses to the recognised
political parties and their official candidates.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), Parliament shall by due appropriation made by
law in this behalf, provide initial capital of rupees five thousand crore to the corpus of
Election Fund.
(3) After the Election Fund so establish, funds shall be provided to the Election Fund
by the Central and State Governments in such proportion as may be agreed to by them from
time to time.
5. (1) The Appropriate Government shall provide the election expenses to  the recognised
political parties if:—
(i) there exists internal democracy within the party; and
(ii) the  internal set  up and the accounts of income and expenditure are  maintained
in order.
(2) The appropriate Government shall set up a regulatory mechanism to look into the
internal democracy, internal set up and accounts of income and expenditure of political
parties in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The regulatory mechanism so set up shall  function as a constituent of the Election
Commission of India.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government, under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament; while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
election
expenses to
recognised
political
parties and
their official
candidates.
Establishment
of Election
Fund.
Setting up of a
reulatory
mechanism.
Power to make
rules.
43 of 1951.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Today, increasing use of black money in elections has become the biggest problem
being faced by the Indian democracy. As per the estimate nearly rupees ten thousand crore
was spent by the political parties and the official candidates in the Lok Sabha elections of
2009. This amount is more than the amount spent during the American Presidential election
held in 2008. A large amount of sum is used in the elections to the State legislatures and local
bodies. To check the usage of black money in the elections, concerns have been expressed
from time to time. Several Committees have also been constituted in this regard but their
recommendations could not be implemented. The Election Commission has taken effective
steps to check the use of black money but these steps have not proved successful in curbing
black money completely. The proposal of providing the expenses for the election by the
Government to the political parties and the candidates can prove to the effective in checking
the use of black money. Almost all the Committees related to the electoral reforms have made
this recommendation.
Hence this Bill.
PRABHAT JHA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 provides the appropriate Government to provide election expenses to
recognised political parties and their official candidates. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the
establishment of an election fund. There is a provision of initial capital of rupees five thousand
crore in the election fund. This would involve an expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a regulatory mechanism. An
annual recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is likely to be incurred for the
management of this mechanism. The Bill, if enacted, would involve a non-recurring expenditure
of rupees fifty crore for the immediate constitution of the regulatory mechanism. The recurring
and non-recurring expenditure related to constitution and management of the regulatory
mechanism will be net from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for election expenses to the recognised political parties and their official
candidates for contesting elections to Lok Sabha, Legislative Assembly and local
bodies by the State in order to check increasing use of black money in such
elections and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3933RS(S3)—07-12-2012.