THE BOOMING POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of family planning measures by the Central and State
Governments to control the booming population of the nation through incentives
and disincentives so as to ensure that the population is commensurate with its social,
economic and other developments and with the ecological balance and bridge the
gap between the haves and have nots and for achieving quality of life and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Booming Population Control Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise, requires,—
(a) "appropriate government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. XXXV  of  2009
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution of India or any other law
for the time being in force, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act are for the
purposes of giving effect to the policies of the State towards securing the principles laid
down in article 38 of the Constitution of India.
4. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, formulate a comprehensive population policy particularly for the purposes of having
one child norm for the eligible couples and other issues including economic, education, legal
medical, social and other incidental aspect to promote small family norms so as to effectively
control the booming population of the country in order to achieve rapid economic progress
and raise the standard of living of the masses.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
employees, of the Central Government or of a Public Sector enterprise under the Control of
Central Government who adopt small family norm undergoing sterilization operation himself
or of the spouse after the birth of his first child shall be given:—
(a) one year additional salary with all allowances along with two additional
increments as incentives;
(b) a plot or a house site or build up houses the from Housing Board or
Development Authority of the Government at subsidized rates;
(c) loan for construction or purchasing the house from nanks or financial
institutions on nominal rate of interest;
(d) free healthcare facilities;
(e) free education facilities to the child with vocational  training and professional
courses wherever necessary; and
(f) such other benefits and incentives as may be prescribed.
6. The incentives and benefits referred to in section 5 shall be extended mutatis
mutandis to the general public in the manner as may be prescribed.
7. Whoever  in contravention of small family norm procreates more than two children
shall lose the incentives and benefits provided in this Act and in addition thereto shall.
(a) be denied the subsidies in matters of loans extended to him;
(b) not be eligible to get the benefits of Public Distribution System;
(c) not be given and loan by and bank or financial institution; and
(d) not be entitled for such other facilities as may be prescribed.
8. Any woman having two living children shall not be provided with maternity facilities
in any Government Hospital Dispensary, Health Centre or Medical Center for the birth of her
third child:
Provided that if such woman agrees to undergo sterilization operation after the birth of
her third child then she shall be provided with the requisite maternity facilities forthwith.
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the election laws for the time
being in force, a citizen shall be disqualified for being chosen as a member of either House of
Parliament or of the legislature of a State or of any body of the local self government bodies,
if he has more than two living children:
Provided that this provision shall not apply to a citizen who have more than two living
children on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
Giving effect
to the
policies of
the States as
laid in article
38 of the
Constitution
of India.
Formulation
of
Comprehensive
Population
Policy.
Facilities to
Government
employees
who adopts
small family
norm.
Extension of
benefits to
general public.
Loss of
benefits
whoever
contravenes
small family
norm.
No maternity
benefits to be
given for
those having
more than
two living
children.
Miscellaneous
provisions.

3
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
marriage shall be solemnized between a male who is less than twenty-five years of age and a
female who is less than twenty-two years of age.
(3) Every serving government employee and those who will join any government
service shall give an undertaking that he shall not procreate more than two children:
Provided that provision of sub-section (3) shall not apply to those government
employees who have more than the prescribed number of living children on or before the
date of commencement of this Act.
10. Whoever contravenes,—
(a) the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 9  be guilty of shall, committing
a cognizable offence and shall be punishable with simple  imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than two years but may extend to four years and also with a
fine, which  may extend to two lakh rupees.
(b) the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 9, shall forfeit his right to
promotion and shall not be eligible for any further increment till he is in government
service.
11. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) implement the revised National Population Policy to achieve the goals
enumerated therein;
(b) set up maternity hospitals and centers in sufficient numbers at conspicuous
places;
(c) distribute contraceptive pills, condoms through Healthcare Centres and
Non-Governmental Organizations;
(d) organize sterilization camps from time to time;
(e) distribute iron and vitamin capsules and tablets extensively amongst the
expecting mothers.
(f) give wide publicity to the benefits of having small families; and
(g) undertake such other measures as it may deem fit and expedient for the
purposes of this Act.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act from time to
time.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act as may appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty.
14. The provisions of this Act and of any rules and orders made thereunder shall  have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not, shave as otherwise
expressly provided in this Act, in derogation of any other law for the time being in force in
any part of this country.
16. The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette made rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty.
Duties of the
appropriate
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ours is the second most populous country after China. The booming population has
already crossed the one billion benchmark and currently, it is around one hundred and
twenty-five crores, which is increasing every moment. Having only 2.4 per cent of global
land area, we have more than sixteen per cent of the global population making it the most
densely populated nation of the world. This scenario is compelling, at least half the population
is live in slums and under squalid conditions. The boom has created overcrowding due to
which law and order situation is deteriorating. Unemployment is rising rapidly causing
frustration amongst the unemployed, particularly the youth who are being lured by anti-
national and anti-social elements. There is unparallel transformation of human values, social
institutions and economic structures. Agriculture land holdings are becoming smaller and
smaller. Agriculture is uneconomical and farmers are committing suicides due to this fact.
The housing needs are far beyond the available finances and the shortage is appalling.
Educational facilities are becoming hopelessly poor. Overcrowding  is also causing
environmental degradation. Forests are vanishing to meet the demand for fuel, construction,
furniture and for funeral purposes which has resulted in water shortage and less rain. The
increased level of carbon-dioxide  in the environment is resulting in harmful diseases. The
healthcare facilities are far from satisfactory  and if this trend continues, we can hardly expect
to achieve improved quality of life and the situation will move from bad to worse.
It is, therefore, imperative that effective steps must be taken to check the booming
population and this should be tackled at all levels. A clear message must go across the nation
that since our resources are limited, we have to opt for small families. It is very unfortunate
that despite availability of various birth control measures and several Family Planning
Programmes, the population continues to rise menacingly. An attempt has been made through
this Bill to offer a comprehensive package for the control of booming population.
Hence this Bill.
GIREESH  KUMAR  SANGHI
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clauses 5 and  6 of the Bill provides for various incentives for adopting small families.
Clause 12 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees ten thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one thousand crore may also involve.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of family planning measures by the Central and State
Governments to control the booming population of the nation through incentives and
disincentives so as to ensure that the population is commensurate with its social, economic
and other developments and with the ecological balance and bridge the gap between the
haves and have nots and for achieving quality of life and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2316RS(S5)—03.05.2010.