1
THE MISSING CHILDREN (FASTER TRACKING AND
REUNITING)  BILL,  2015
A
BILL
to provide for faster tracking and reuniting the children who go missing due to
abduction, kidnapping, luring or runaway from their homes and parents, for
creation of Special Cells in Police establishments with specifically trained
personnel to trace missing children, for immediate registration of  FIR, for
flashing photograph and details of missing children in television, newspapers
and social media so as to put in place proper mechanism to trace missing
 children and reuniting them with their near and dear ones and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Missing Children (Faster Tracking and Reuniting)
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Bill No. XXXV of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means, in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) “child” means any human being who is below the age of eighteen years;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall set up Special Cell in the Ministry or Department, as the
case may be, dealing with children to exclusively deal with missing children and put in place
a proper mechanism to trace missing children;
(2) The appropriate Government shall also set up Special Cells, as per the need, in its
Police establishment with specifically trained personnel from the National Police Academy or
any such other organization specialized in imparting training to personnel of Police or Para
military forces, as the case may be, for tracking the missing children.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained  in any other law for the time being in
force,—
(a) It shall be mandatory for every Station House Officer to ensure that the First
Information Report is compulsorily registered immediately on being informed, either in
writing or verbally by anyone, regarding a missing child and the FIR shall be specific
with missing and abducted or kidnapped child and pass on the FIR to Special Cells set
up under section 3 of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
(b) The Special Cell of Police, shall, at the earliest opportunity flash the
photograph and other details of the missing child in all the Television networks and
shall also publish in the newspapers and social media in such manner and with such
details, as may be prescribed.
(c) The Special Cell of the Police shall start its probe with immediate effect to
trace the missing child so as to reunite him with his near and dear ones;
(d) Non-registration or any willful delay in registration of FIR regarding a missing
children shall be a criminal offence under this Act and the incharge of the Police
Station shall be deemed to have committed the offence.
(2) National Police Academy or any other organization referred to in sub-section (2) of
section 3 shall formulate training module for the Police personnel meant for Special Cells and
if need be academic Centres of Universities or Institutes be roped in for this purpose for
tracking of missing children.
(3) The Special Cell while adopting its own methodology of investigation in cases of
missing children may also identify begging spots, take mobile phone numbers of beggars
and put them on surveillance particularly in areas where large number of children have gone
missing identify the children who are begging and whether they are controlled by any group
or leader and whether they resemble missing children probe the known clinics where human
organs are transplanted, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The missing children rescued by the Special Cell of the Police shall be reunited with
their parents or guardians, as the case may be, at the earliest opportunity.
5.  Any Police officer of the Special Cell who is investigating case or cases of missing
children shall have the powers,—
(a) with the assistance, if any, as he may deem fit, to inspect any place at any
reasonable time which he considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this
Act;
(b) to exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Appropriate
Government
to set up
Special cells
for missing
children.
Special
provisions
for missing
children.
Power to
search etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. The offence committed under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of this Act
shall be punishable with imprisonment for one year and also with fine which may extend to
one lakh rupee.
7. The appropriate Government shall formulate rehabilitation and such other welfare
measures for the children covered under this Act who could  not be reinvited with their
families or guardian.
8. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty.
Welfare
measures.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is very unfortunate and sorry state of affairs that a very large number of children go
missing every day in every nook and corner of the country and it is more horrifying that the
National Capital tops the list where 20 children go missing every day and most of them
remain untraceable forcing their parents for endless wait for their return and reunion with
them. It is more shocking that most of these missing children belong to poor families and
when their parents go to Police Station to lodge an FIR they are welcomed by indifferent and
heartless Police personnel who not only refuse to lodge FIR but also insult the hapless
parents and shoot them away instead of making efforts to trace the missing child. This
negligent nonchalance is one major reason for the increasing number of missing children
across the Country. In fact, in the present Police scheme of things, rescue of the missing
child is of lesser moment.
The very large number of missing children also indicate presence of trafficking mafias
in the country who lure and abduct, the children and force them into begging, stealing,
pickpocketing and other crimes after making them drug addicts. The girl child is pushed into
prostitution. It is also apprehended that the missing children might being used in illegal
organ transplantations.
The Supreme Court of India has taken a serious view over the missing children and has
also given directive to the Government. Though of late Delhi Police have made move in this
regard and Ministry of Woman and Child Development has launched a webportal but it is not
sufficient. The Bill propose to set up special cells in the Ministry or Department of the
Government and in the Police establishment exclusively to deal with missing children. The
Police personnel must get appropriate training for this purpose. Non filing of FIR is proposed
to be made a criminal offence with penal provision. The task of rescue is very critical for the
missing children so that they are reunited with their near and dear ones.
Hence this Bill.
RAJ KUMAR DHOOT
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the welfare measures for the children covered
under this Bill. Clause 8 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide
funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to quantify the
expenditure at this stage but it is estimated that a sum of rupee one thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non recurring expenditure of rupee five thousand crore may also involve.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for faster tracking and reuniting the children who go missing due to
abduction, kidnapping, luring or runaway from their homes and parents, for
creation of Special Cells in Police establishments with specifically trained
personnel to trace missing children, for immediate registration of  FIR, for
flashing photograph and details of missing children in television, newspapers
and social media so as to put in place proper mechanism to trace missing
 children and reuniting them with their near and dear ones and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3853RS(S3)—18-12-2015.