THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 16 of the Constitution, after clause (4A), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(4B) Where the total percentage of reservation to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in any State exceeds fifty per cent or is close to fifty per cent,
nothing in the article shall prevent the State from reserving further seats for other
Backward Classes of citizens in Government services even if the total percentage of
seats reserved including seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes exceeds fifty per cent.
3. In article 16 of the Constitution, clause (4B) shall be re-numbered as (4C).
A
S  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2009
Bill No.  XXXVIII of  2009
Short title
and commen-
cement.
Amendment
of article 16.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the State of Tripura, the percentage of ST people is thirty-one and that of SC people
is seventeen per cent the total of the two being forty-eight per cent. It is very close to
fifty per cent. The OBC population in the State is twenty-four per cent. That is why the State
Government cannot provide reservation to the OBC persons on account of the bar of the
upper limit of fifty per cent to the total percentage of reservation in a State. The State
Government have no right to cross that upper limit. The unemployed youth belonging to
OBC are getting seriously deprived of the reservation facilities in the State Government
services. Similar nature of problems is prevalent in some other States of the country also.
This is not a common type of problem. Rather, this is an extraordinary nature of problem for
which extraordinary provision may be permissible. This amendment will go a long way in
providing reservation facility to the OBC people and will, hence, benefit the unemployed
youths belonging to Tripura and some more States. The significance of the amendment is
deep and necessity is inevitable.
Hence this Bill.
MATILAL SARKAR
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*** *** *** *** ***
16. (4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or classes of
posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services
under the State.
(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from considering any unfilled
vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with any
provision for reservation made under clause (4) or clause (4A) as a separate class of vacancies
to be filled up in any succeeding year or years and such class of vacancies shall not be
considered together with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for
determining the ceiling of fifty per cent, reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.
*** *** *** *** ***
3

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Matilal Sarkar, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5149RS(S-5)—4.12.2009.