1
THE  ANDHRA  PRADESH  REORGANISATION  (AMENDMENT)
BILL,  2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment)
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, after section 100, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
100A. Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in this Act, the following
shall be special provisions for the State of Andhra Pradesh, namely:—
(a) Andhra Pradesh-Telangana Council shall be set up by Central
Government on the lines of North-Eastern Council comprising of the
Short title and
commenement.
Insertion of
new Section
100 A.
Bill No. XXXVIII of 2015
Special
provisions for
Andhra
Pradesh State.
6 of 2014
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 7TH AUGUST, 2015

2
Chief Ministers of the two states with the Prime Minister or the Union Home
Minister as its Chairperson to address issues of concern;
(b) Special status shall be granted by Central Government for the state of
Andhra Pradesh for ten years;
(c) Revenue deficit of Andhra Pradesh shall be borne by Central
Government till the State becomes financially viable;
(d) A special package shall be given by Central Government to achieve a
turnaround in the financial health of the State of Andhra Pradesh;
(e) Central assistance package shall be provided for developing backward
areas of Andhra Pradesh particularly in the four districts of Rayalaseema and
three districts of north coastal Andhra Pradesh at par with Bundelkhand and
Koraput-Bolangir-Kalahandi package;
(f) Central assistance shall be provided for the development of the capital
of Andhra Pradesh;
(g) The allocation on Polavaram Project shall be increased by Central
Government for its completion in the stipulated time frame as a national project
as declared;
(h) The Apex Council and the River Management Boards for Godavary
and Krishna shall be operationlised;
(i) Resolution or division of assets relating to boards, corporations, bank
accounts, etc. shall be expedited by the Central Government;
(j) Existing quotas in all government, private, aided or unaided institutions
of higher technical and medical education shall be ensured for a period of ten
years;
(k) Establishment of institutions of national importance like IIT, IIM and
AIIMS in Andhra Pradesh besides a tribal university each in both States shall
be expedited by Central Government;
(l) A separate High Court shall be established for the state of
Andhra Pradesh;
(m) Development of social, physical and industrial infrastructure and
clearly identified projects like new major port at Duggirajupatnam, integrated
steel plant at YSR District, crude oil refinery and petrochemical complex,
Vizag-Chennai industrial corridor, railway zone with Vizag as Headquarters,
metro rail facility for Vizag, Vijayawada-Guntur-Tenali, three international
airports at Vizag, Vijayawada and Thirupathi, improving rail and road
connectivity to the new capital of Andhra Pradesh shall be developed by the
Central Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Andhra Pradesh State Reorganization Act, 2014 provides for taking appropriate
fiscal measures including offer of tax incentives by the Government of India to the successor
States in order to promote industrialisation and economic growth in successor State of
Andhra Pradesh and special development package for the backward regions of the successor
State of Andhra Pradesh, in particular for the districts of Rayalaseema and north coastal
Andhra Pradesh on the lines of Special Plan in Odisha, Bundelkhand, Madhya Pradesh and
Uttar Pradesh;
2. The then Prime Minister announced specific steps to address the concerns of all the
regions of the State particularly of Seemandhra including special category status to the
successor State of Andhra Pradesh for a period of five years so as to put the finances of the
State on a firm footing. Post-bifurcation, the residuary State of Andhra Pradesh has lost
significant resource base and therefore remains at a disadvantage vis-a-vis neighbouring
revenue-surplus States. The fund crunch and resource-wise disadvantage are not the making
of Andhra Pradesh. It was assured by the Government that necessary grants would be
provided in the current budget which has not been done inspite of assurances to support to
the State of Andhra Pradesh on several fronts, including bridging revenue deficit, providing
industrial incentives, special development package for backward areas in seven districts
(four districts of Rayalaseema and three northern coastal districts of Andhra Pradesh),
assistance to State capital development, railway zone for the State and Special Category
status.
Hence this Bill.
 K. V. P.  RAMACHANDRA RAO
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the special status for the State of Andhra Pradesh. The
Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible
to quantify the expenditure at this juncture. However, it is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty
thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one lakh crore may also involve for
creating assets.
4

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
————
(Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2157RS(S-3)—07-08-2015 .