1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After article 3 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"3A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution or any law for the time being in
force, the Legislature of a State shall have the power to make laws for establishing or changing
one or more capitals of the State within its territory and for all matters supplemental, incidental
or consequential thereto."
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022
Bill No. XXXVII of  2022
5
Insertion of
new article 3A.
Power of
Legislature of a
State to
establish or
change one or
more capitals
of the State.
10

2
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
As a matter of practice, the power to decide which territory or territories shall serve as
the capital or capitals of a State has been exercised solely by that State. This common
practice has emerged as a natural extension of the fundamental principle that all matters
involving the internal governance of a State are vested in that State only. Hence over the
Years, all existing and new States have used this power to determine their respective capitals
without any external interference. However, most recently, this decision-making power of the
States was diluted and weakened through judicial overreach. In the case of Rajadhani Rythu
Parirakshnana Samithi v. State of Andhra Pradesh , it was held that the State of Andhra
Pradesh has no legislative competence to change its capital or establish multiple capitals.
This judgment is in stark contrast to the prevailing customary practice whereby States
have been implicitly empowered to determine or change their capital or establish multiple
capitals. For instance, Gujarat changed its capital from Ahmedabad to Gandhinagar in 1970.
Several States have also established more than one capital, including Maharashtra (Mumbai
and Nagpur) and Himachal Pradesh (Shimla and Dharamshala). Hence, it is not unprecedented
for States to change their capitals or establish multiple capitals. Nor has the higher judiciary
interfered with such decisions of the States in the past.
The aforementioned judgment also states that only the Parliament has the competence
to decide the capital of a newly formed State. However, when viewed from the lens of
federalism, the role of the Parliament is merely to provide the new State with a basic model of
governance from which the subsequently elected State legislature can take over. This is
evident from the several State Reorganization Acts passed by the Parliament in the exercise
of its powers under Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution. None of the State Reorganization
Acts passed to date mention the territory that would serve as the capital of the newly created
state(s). The practice has been that a territory decided by the Parliaments serves as a
temporary capital till the elected representatives of the State decide on the new permanent
capital.
However, the legal status of this inherent power of the States has remained unclear as
the Constitution is silent in this regard. Nonetheless, it has become common practice for
States to decide on all matters regarding their capitals and States have continued to exercise
this power unabated since independence.
Hence, in light of the foregoing, this Bill seeks to insert a new provision in Part I of the
Constitution to provide legislative certainty to the implied power of States to establish or
change one or more of their capitals. This amendment will provide much-needed clarity on
this contentious issue, in line with the federal structure of our Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
V . VIJAYASAI  REDDY

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri V . Vijayasai Reddy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—885RS(S3)—08-08-2022.