45 of 1860. 5

As INTRODUCED IN THE RaJyA SABHA

Bill_No. XXXVIII of 2000

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code 1860.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. In section 147 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for the words “two years or with fine or with both”, the words, “ten years or with
fine which shall not be less than rupees twenty thousand or with both” shall be substituted.

ऊँ In section 148 of the principal Act, for the words “three years, or with fine or
with both”, the words “ten years or with a fine which shall not less than rupees one lakh
or with both” shail be substituted.


Amendment of
section 152,

Amendment of
section 153A.

Amendment
section 153B.

4, In section 152 of the principal Act, for the words “three years, or with fine ‘or
with both”, the words “five years with fine of rupees twenty thousand” shall be substituted.

5. In section 153A of the principal Act,— (i) in sub-section (/), for the words “three
years, or with fine or with both”, the words “ten years with fine of not less than rupees one
lakh” shall be substituted.

(ii) In sub-section (2), for the words “five years, and also shall be liable to fine, the
words “ten years and a fine of rupees one lakh” shall be substituted.

6. In section 1538 of the principal Act,— (i) in sub-section (7), for the words “three
years, or with fine or with both, the words “ten years and with fine not less than rupees
one lakh” shall be substituted.

(ii) In sub-section (2) for the words “five years and shall also be liable to fine”, the
words “ten years and a fine of rupees one lakh” shall be substituted.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In the recent past it has been observed that incidents of rioting are taking place
often, and public property is damaged. Public servants who try to control riots are beaten
and sometimes critically injured. Unlawful Assembly of persons with an intention of rioting
sometimes involves killing of number of persons and large scale damage to public property.
Recently many places of worship were attacked and inmates were assaulted resulting in
serious injury and sometimes death. The sentiments of people belonging to these religions
have been deeply hurt.

Keeping in view the gravity of the offence it appears that punishment provided in
Indian Penal Code for rioting and attack on places of worship is meagre. With a view to
preventing such incidents, it is proposed to enhance the punishment.

Hence this Bill.

R. S. GAVAI.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code 1860.

(Shri R.S. Gavai, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1819RS—20-07-2000,