1
THE COMPUSLORY PHYSICAL FITNESS OF CHILDREN THROUGH
SPORTS IN SCHOOLS AND DEVELOPMENT OF SPORTS
INFRASTRUCTURE BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to promote sports education and physical fitness for an all-round development of children
in the country and to develop international standard sports infrastructure in the
country, by making sports a compulsory regular subject in schools and providing
equal opportunity and incentives to sportspersons across the country and for all
matters concerned therewith  and incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the Memorandum of Understanding between India and Netherlands signed
in New Delhi on the Thirtieth day of January, 2014 recognises that India aims to create a
lasting legacy with the development of sports infrastructure for promoting sports, education
and allied areas along with India's ambition to host global sports events in the future:
A
ND WHEREAS the United Nations, in its resolution 58/6 adopted by the General Assembly
and sponsored by India, on the third day of November, 2003, recognises sport as means to
build a peaceful and better world and increased implementation of projects for development
through sport:
Bill No. XXXV  of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28H NOVEMBER, 2014

2
AND WHEREAS the United Nations in its resolution 58/5 adopted by the General Assembly
on the third day of November, 2003 recognises sport as a means to promote education,
health, development and peace:
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said resolution.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act be called the Compulsory Physical Fitness of Children through sports
in Schools and Development of sports Infrastructure Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for coming into force of
different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the commencement
of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
the State, and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Coach" means and includes any person involved with development of skills
of an athlete for the sport;
(c) "Notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression "notify" shall be construed accordingly;
(d) "Physical Fitness" means optimal state of physical, mental health and well-
being to be able to cope with daily needs and the ability to perform ones daily tasks
efficiently; and
(e) "Sports" means the sports specified in the Schedule.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, in consultation with the State
Government,  by notification in the Official Gazette Specify, training in Sports and Physical
Fitness shall be imparted as a compulsory subject in all schools and there shall be endevour
to develop infrastructure of international standard along with over-all development of student
by providing equal opportunities in sports to all Sportspersons, create awareness, reduce
stress and develop skill in sports as a whole in the country to achieve excellence in the
international arena.
4. The appropriate Government shall ensure Capacity and Awareness building
programs in sports through physical education that may include orientation on national
cadets, scouts and guides, sports training and competitive sports along with demonstrations
or workshops to guide students and help in building awareness about sports.
5. The appropriate Government shall issue guidelins to be followed by each school
to,—
(a) treat sports as a regular subject as a part of the curriculum in school, with
separate theory and practical training for the students' mental well-being and Physical
fitness;
(b) make evaluation of the subject through continuous grading and examinations
so that the subject has equal weight-age as other academic subjects;
(c) mandatorily include the result of the subject as part of the regular mark-sheet
obtained by the students in school;
(d) mandatorily allocate a minimum number of hours in a months, for the training
to be impassed to students from sixth to twelfth;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Sports and
Physical
Fitness as a
regular Subject
in Schools.
Guidelines to
be followed by
Schools.
Mandatory
Capacity and
Awareness
Building
Programs.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(e) allow students to choose from various sports with accredited coaches and
coaching facilities:
Provided, that schools may choose to offer separate sports to students,
depending on their infrastructure and accessibility to sports infrastructure.
6. The appropriate Government shall ensure that schools shall have special provisions
for  physically challenged students to,—
(i) engage them into games and less-physically involving sporting activities like
Chess and Carrom.
(ii) arrange for special assistance programs in each school for those physically
challenged students who fail in the module or course:
Provided that the special assistance program for physically challenged students
shall be scheduled before or after regular school hours, to support the students to gain
insights and strive to bring each student on the same platform as against failing them
in the module.
7.  (1) The appropriate Government shall take measure to ensure that the necessary
sports infrastructure is provided or arrangements to avail such infrastructure is made inall
schools which do not possess sufficient sports infrastructure to facilitate the training by,—
(i) facilitating free access to Sports Authority of India infrastructure in the
divisional and district sports complex;
(ii) making necessary transport arrangements for students to avail the nearest
facility accompanied by at least one school sports staff personnel in accordance with
the strength of students in school;
(2) Every school and respective school board shall maintain a record of students
availing sports infrastructure with a view to determine aid, assistance or funds to the respective
schools.
(3) Every divisional or district sports office or the place where the schools are availing
the facilities shall maintain a record for consideration by the appropriate Government while
granting funds for the upgrandation of the divisonal or district sports infrastructure facilities.
8. The appropriate Government shall regulate the selection of sportspersons for
international and national events by selecting who qualify the standard selection criteria, in
relation to international parameters and norms as benchmark provided that the appropriate
Government may authorise the Sports Authority of India for regulating the selection under
this section.
9. The appropirate Govenment shall take necessary measures to spread awareness
about sports education, including the right use of sports medicines, regulations on anti-
doping and other malpractices along with incentivising and promoting sports as a serious
profession.
10. (1) The appropriate Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, shall
mandate that any new infrastructure to be built in the country to be in accordance with
international norms and guidelines as set by the International Olympic Committee for the
development of Sports infrastructure by,—
(a) building both soft and hard infrastructure by taking international standards
as benchmarks for the purpose of easing the accessibility to infrastructure for Sports
and games by Sportspersons;
(b) commissioning sports infrastructure in Divisional, State and National Level,
in rural and urban parts of the country; and
Adequate
access to
sports
infrastructure.
Selection
procedure for
international
and national
sporting
events.
Promoting
sports as a
profession
and creating
awareness
about
antidoping
regulation.
Development
of Sports
infrastructure
according to
international
parameters.
Speical
Provisions for
Physically
Challenged
Students.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(c) commissioning the construction of separate infrastructural facilities for
both men and women in each sporting facility, like toilets and changing rooms etc.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure to provide at least minimum basic
sports infrastructural facilities at the grassroots level, like in villages and small towns to
encourage sportspersons.
(3) The  appropriate Government shall invest in the scaling up of the quality of
infrastructure at major towns and regional centres.
11. The appropriate Government shall frame guidelines to promote talent and give
incentives to students and sportspersons who represent the country and bring laurels at the
national and international level, by—
(a) rescheduling of examinations, compensation of attendance and granting
credits or by providing equitable credit system where in extra credits and grades shall
be given to ensure that the students do not lose out or refrain from taking up sports at
an extra-meritorious level; and
(b) providing job opportunities, preference for government loans, concession
on travel fares and minimum financial benefits.
12. (1) The appropriate Government, shall ensure that Government owned or Public
Sector Undertaking Companies take responsibility for supporting talent and promising
sportspersons who have achieved State, National and International accolades by,—
mandating a quota for employment and funding expenses for meeting sports expenditure
in the requirement of equipments and medical aid for sportspersons;
(2) All such Govt.owned or PSU companies as mentioned in clause (2) shall provide
sports by allowing, not just their employees and sportspersons, but even the general public
and schools to avail their sports infrastructural facilities.
13. The appropriate Govt. shall decrease the audit grants and aids to a school if that
school fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Act.
14. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
16. The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Incentives to
and
promotion of
Sportspersons.
Public Sector
undertakings
to promote
and Support
Sportspersons.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Penalty.

THE  SCHEDULE
[See Section 2C)]
Sl. No. Name of Sport
11. Aero Sports
12. Archery
13. Athletics
14. Atya Patya
15. Aquatics
16. Badminton
17. Ball Badminton
18. Baseball
19. Basketball
10. Billiards and Snooker
11. Bridge
12. Body Building
13. Boxing
14. Carrom
15. Chess
16. Cricket
17. Cycling
18. Cycle Polo
19. Equestrian
20. Fencing
21. Football
22. Golf
23. Gymnastics
24. Handball
25. Hockey
26. Ice Hockey
27. Judo
28. Kabbadi
29. Kayaking and Canoeing
30. Karate Do
31. Kho-Kho
32. Korfball
33. Mallakhamb
34. Mind Sports
5

6
35. Motor Sports
36. Netball
37. Paralympic Sports
38. Polo
39. Power-lifting
40. Rowing
41. Roller Skating
42. Rugby
43. Sepak Takraw
44. Shooting
45. Shooting Ball
46. Soft Ball
47. Soft Tennis Ball
48. Special Olympic Sports
49. Sports for deaf persons
50. Squash Rackets
51. Table Tennis
52. Taekwondo
53. Tennis
54. Tenni-koit
55. Tennis Ball Cricket
56. Ten Pin Bowling
57. Triathlon
58. Throw Ball
59. Tug of War
60. V olleyball
61. Weightlifting
62. Winter Games (Skiing and Snowboarding)
63. Wrestling (Free Style and Greco Roman)
64. Wrestling (Indian Style)
65. Wushu
66. Yachting
Sl. No. Name of Sport

7
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is home to a billion plus population. However, our dismal performance at
International sports like the Olympics, Asian Games and the Common Wealth Games make it
evident that there is an absence of thrust in sports in the country. Clearly, our culture and
attitude  towards sports is a major deterrent towards improving sporting  standards in our
country. Promoting sportpersons while providing equal opportunity, incentives and access
to  sporting facilities is essential, however, changing the attitude of people and bringing
seriousness about sports education and training in physical fitness is of utmost importance.
Moreover, sporting activities are means of a holistic  development for all, a potential tool for
the physical and mental well-being of people by inculcating values of  leadership, team-work,
endurance, and focus along with bringing exposure, helping in skill development and
increasing immunity towards various illnesses that in turn would increase the productivity
of people and hence boost economic development throughout the country.
The United Nations recognises sport as a low-cost and high-impact tool in humanitarian
development and peace-building efforts, the standard of which is increasingly being
recognised. In India the prevalent scenario does not provide for students and sportspersons
to excel in the arena of sports, leave alone emphasizing the importance of sports in physical
fitness. Many schools across the country barely recognise the necessity of including sports
in their schedule. The education system needs to be revamped to give sports an equal
importance in the holistic upbringing of future flag-bearers of the country.
The lack of infrastructural facilities and training of international standards are major
impediments in the process of development of sports in India. Moreover, considering Sports
as  a serious career option comes at the cost of education and job opportunities, falling
attendance, grades and the struggle to earn a livelihood. Added to that is the cost and
struggle to avail sporting facilities in various parts of the country. This shouldn't be used in
excuse and deter the Government to wash their hands off the responsibility of providing for
sporting facility, from the grassroots level, in villages and small towns to upgrade the quality
of infrastrucutre at major towns and regional centres.
This Bill strives to give sports education and physical fitness a status at par  with other
academic subjects taught at schools and hence makes sports education a compulsory module
in all schools across the country, the evaluation of  which would be through continuous
grading and examinations as is the case with other subjects. Moreover, the Bill lays guidelines
for schools to arrange for special assistane programs for those who fair poorly in the evaluation
of the sports module to monitor their progress and physical fitness. The Bill seeks to make
guidelines for the building of such infrastrucutre to meet the benchmark of international
parameters. This is a step towards promoting a culture of sports and making the facility
easily accessible to all sportspersons.
Also, the Bill seeks to give incentives to those who excel in any field of sport by
providing concessions and financial benefits, along with mandating all Public Sector
Undertakings and Enterprises to provide compulsory quota for employment of sportspersons
and make available their sporting infrastructure to all willing sportspersons in the country, as
part of their social responsibility. Creating awareness about sports and physical fitness is
imperative to empower sportspersons and student alike for their overall development, in
order to harness the talent and potential of the youth and bring international acclaim to India.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; VIVEK GUPTA
November 11, 2014

8
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides sports and physical fitness education as a compulsory
and regular subject in schools. Clause 4 of the Bill mandates capacity and awareness building
programmes.  Clause 6 allows for special provisions for physically challenged students to
participate in sports. Caluse 10 of the Bill lays down guidelines to be adhered to while
commissioning sports infrastructure in the country to meet international standard. Clause 14
makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The Bill does involve expenditure towards building of infrastructure
of international standards whenever it commissions the building of any such infrastructure
after the enactment of the Act for Union Territory. The Bill will also involve expenditure
towards infrastructural facilities and awareness programmes.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure which cannot be estimated right
now from the Consolidated Fund of India.

9
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 16 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government, in consultation with the
State Governments, to make necessary rules for making rules, by notification in the Official
Gazette for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details
only. The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to promote sports education and physical fitness for an all-round development of children
in the country and to develop international standard sports infrastructure in the
country, by making sports a compulsory regular subject in schools and providing
equal opportunity and incentives to sportspersons across the country and for all
matters concerned therewith  and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3078RS(S3)—28.11.2014.