THE TRADITIONAL HERBAL MEDICINES (REGULATION OF SALE
AND COMPULSORY EVIDENCE BASED TRIAL) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to regulate the sale of the traditional herbal medicines which are being marketed without
any licence and control under the cover of being manufactured by formulation provided
in the ancient texts and to provide for compulsory listing and verification of ingredients
of traditional herbal medicines and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Traditional Herbal Medicine (Regulation of sale and
compulsory evidence based trial) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority" means the Traditional Herbal Medicine Quality Control and
Verification Authority established under section 6;
(b) “evidence-based trial" means testing of a traditional herbal medicine for its
results of curing any disease wherein its toxicity and adverse effects have also gone
through;
Short title,
extent and
Commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
Bill NO. XXXVIII of 2006
Definitions.
5
10

2
(c) "over the counter (OTC)" means availability of a traditional herbal medicine
in any shop without any prescription by the authorised person;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "traditional herbal medicine" means any formulation being used either in
homoeopathy or ayurvedic system of medicine which has been mentioned in any of
the ancient texts notified by the Central Government under the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940.
3. On and from the appointed day, as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, no traditional herbal medicine shall be
sold or made available over the counter.
4. Every retailer or seller of traditional herbal medicines shall have to obtain a
licence to sell traditional herbal medicines from the Authority in such manner as may
be prescribed.
5. (1) Every manufacturer of traditional herbal medicine shall list the ingredients
of each medicine on the packing of the medicine along with their accurate quantity.
(2) Every manufacturer of traditional herbal medicine shall clearly and boldly
indicate on the packaging of the medicine any side effects and warning of contra-
indications in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish an authority to be known as Traditional Herbal Medicine Quality
Control and Verification Authority for carrying out functions assigned under
this Act.
(2) The Authority shall have its headquarters at Lucknow in the State of
Uttar Pradesh.
(3) The Authority shall have a Chairman who shall be the retired Judge of
High Court and five other members to be appointed by the Central Government.
(4) The terms and conditions of the Chairman and the members of the
Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and
staff as may be required for efficient functioning of the Authority.
(6) The procedure for appointment of the members, their powers and
functions and the procedure of filling up of vacancies shall be such, as may be
prescribed.
(7) The Authority shall have subordinate offices in the capitals of each of
the States and Union Territories of the country.
   (8)  The Authority shall open as many laboratories for the purpose as
may be required for meeting the objectives of this Act:
Provided that the number of laboratories shall not be more than three in
one State or Union Territory, as the case may be.
7. The functions of the Authority shall be,—
(i) to ensure quality control of the traditional herbal medicines;
(ii) to arrange to verify the ingredient of any medicine;
(iii) to act on the complaint received in respect of any medicine;
(iv)  to recommend cancellation of licence for selling of any traditional herbal
medicine;
Act  No. of
1940.
Ban on sale of
traditional
herbal
medicines over
the counter.
Licence to sell
traditional
herbal
medicine for
retailer.
Manufacture to
list the
inpedient on
packing of each
traditional
herbal
medicine.
Establishment
of Traditional
Herbal
Medicine
Quality
control and
verification
Authority.
Functions of
Authority.
Act No. 2 of
1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(v) to make the people aware about its findings of various spurious medicines;
(vi) to conduct survey and inspection and random sample checking of every
manufacturer at least once in a year through its laboratories.
(vii) any other function that may be assigned.
8. The Central Government shall by due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf from time to time, provide adequate funds for the purpose of this Act.
9. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable for imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to ten
lakh rupees.
10. (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act
or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the
time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company
for the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be gulity of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable
to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that
he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of  the company, such director, manager, secretay or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation:— For the purpose of this section:—
(i) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
12. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject and save
aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other law
for the time in force.
14. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Overriding effect of the Act.
Penalty.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Offences to be
congnizable.
Offence by a
company.
Power to
Remove
Difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act No. 2
of 1974
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The market in the urban and semi-urban area in the country is full of traditional herbal
preparations now a days. These medicines claim to cure various ailments from general fatigue
to diabetes to cancer. According to a report, a causal and random checking and testing of
these medicines by the Department of Pharmacology of one of the premium referral hospitals
in Delhi revealed that many of them were contaminated containing steroids which in the
long run could lead to suppression of immune system, growth retardation in children, diabetes
and cataracts. Under the pretext of ancient texts and without any legal requirement of any
licence to sell these medicines, these unchecked traditional medicines are causing serious
ailments to their innocent users. The absence of quality control and mechanism to verify the
ingredients and the efficacy of many of these medicines have lead to the proliferation of the
practice of dispensing these medicines.
There is no doubt about the prescription and formulations available in the ancient text,
but at the same time, these medicines must go through the test for their toxicity and evaluation
studies. To say that herbal drugs do not have any side effects does not hold good as adverse
effects are dependent on the time for which a particular drug is taken and the prescribed
dosage. This argument does not take into account the basic principle that any drug having a
good effect will have an adverse effect too. Therefore, all herbal drugs are not safe in all
circumstances. Some medicines are known to contain heavy metal including mercury and
gold and some homoeopathic and ayurvedic medicines contain arsenic. These have to be
given in minute dosages under constant supervision, which does not happen. The side effects
of any medicine have to be listed on the cover. But manufactures are not even listing the
ingredients of the medicine. Medicine containing steroids and metals including mercury and
arsenic are available over the counter with no warning or contra-indications. Market is flooded
with herbal weight loss medicines, which have been found to be very harmful to kidneys and
at times develop urinary track cancer.
The rationale for not demanding evidence, based trial or efficacy test for traditional
herbal drugs because they have been used for centuries and so they do not need fresh test,
does not hold good as there are many fly by night operators who have taken advantage of
this system. Although there are traditional herbal medicines from reputed companies, but
many a time these are concoctions prepared by quakcs who after duping their patients run
away with money.
Internationally, move towards regulation of traditional herbal medicine has already
been initiated when certain medicines were found to be damaging human organs in some
countries.
Therefore, it is high time that a regulatory mechanism for sale and evidence based trial
may be adopted for traditional herbal medicines so as to obviate the unscrupulous elements
which are taking advantage of the system.
Hence this Bill.
KALRAJ MISHRA

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment of an authority to be known as Traditional
Herbal Medicine Quality Control and Verification Authority for carrying out functions
assigned under this Bill. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall by due
appropriation made in this behalf from time to time, provide adequate funds for the purposes
of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill and the rules relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—506RS(S5)—12.05.2006.
RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the sale of the traditional herbal medicines which are being marketed
without any licence and control under the cover of being manufactured by
formulation provided in the ancient texts and to provide for compulsory
listing and verification of ingredients of traditional herbal medicines
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra, M.P.)