AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XXXVI of 2025 
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AND 
 REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2025  
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a National Environment Management 
and Regulatory Authority for the effective management, regulation 
 and monitoring of the use of environmental resources 
 and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
 India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1)   This Act may be called the National Environment Management  and
Regulatory Authority Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b) ‘Authority’ means the National Environment Management
and Regulatory Authority established under section 3; 
(c) ‘environment’ shall have the same meaning as defined under
section 2(a) of the Environment Protection Act, 1986; 
(d) ‘environment risk assessment’ means a systematic approach
for identification, evaluation, mitigation, and control of hazards that 
could occur as a result of failures in process, procedures, or 
equipment;  
(e) ‘member’ means a Member of the Authority; and
(f) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5 
10 
2
9 of 1986. 
Establishment 
of the National 
Environment 
Management 
and Regulatory 
Authority. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an apex agency, to be known as the National
Environment Management  and Regulatory Authority, to exercise the
powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it
under this Act.
(2) The  Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and
shall, by the said name, sue  and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and it may with
the prior approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other
places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following persons, namely—
(a) a Chairperson, having specialised knowledge and
extensive experience in environmental management, natural 
resources protection, international environment policy, 
environmental risk assessment and related field to be appointed by 
the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) three Members, to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, from amongst 
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have extensive 
professional experience in,– 
(i) international and national environmental policies and
programmes on environment protection, climate change, 
pollution, coastal zone management, environmental risk 
mitigation and natural resource conservation; 
(ii) environmental laws and legal interventions,
constitutional provisions, and international treaties and 
conventional related to   environmental issues; and 
(iii) environmental risks, impact assessment techniques
and procedures and appraisal of projects for enviro nmental 
clearance.  
(5) The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure with
regard to transaction of its business.
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

3 
5 
4. (1)   The Chairperson and every member of the Authority shall  hold office
for  a period not exceeding four years from the date on which they assume
office, or for such period as may be specified  by the Central Government
in this behalf.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as
may be prescribed.
Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of 
Chairperson and 
Members 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 4, the
Chairperson or a Member of the Authority may by writing under his hand 
to the Central Government resign from his office at any time; 
(2) T he  Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the
Chairperson or any member of the Authority, if the Chairperson or as the
case may be, such other member–––
(a) has been adjudged insolvent; or
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or 
(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable
of acting as a member; or 
(e) has, without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority,
remained absent from three consecutive meetings of Authority; 
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest which is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or a Member; or 
(g) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his
office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the interest 
of the office or public interest. 
          Provided that no person shall be removed from office under 
this clause until that person has been given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard in the matter. 
(3) A v acancy  caused under sub-sections (1) and (2) or otherwise shall be
filled by fresh appointment or nomination, as the case may be.
       Provided that the Chairperson or any other member appointed or 
nominated against any casual vacancy in the Authority shall hold 
office only for the remainder of the term of the Chairperson or member 
in whose place he has been appointed or nominated. 
Resignation or 
removal. 
40 
6. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be questioned or shall be
invalid on the ground merely by reason of: 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in its constitution;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or
member thereof; or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the
case. 
Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
proceedings of 
the  Authority. 
45 
5
0 
7. (1) The Central Government shall, from time to time, appoint such
number of officers and staff including experts to the Authority, as may 
be required to assist it in its efficient functioning, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 
(2) The method of recruitment or appointment of officers and staff
including experts, the salaries and allowances payable to them, and 
Officers and 
staff including 
experts of the 
Authority. 

4 
other terms and conditions of their service, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
Members, 
officers and 
staff to be 
public servants. 
8. The Chairperson, Members, officers, staff and experts of the Authority
shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of
the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of sub-
section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
5 
4
5 of 2023. 
Functions of the  
Authority. 
9. The Authority shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely:—
(a) f unction as an autonomous, professional, multidisciplinary
apex authority for managing, regulating and monitoring the protection 
and preservation of our environment  with scientific and analytical 
rigour; 
(b) de sign a comprehensive monitoring and regulatory l andscape
a
nd compliance mechanism for the protection of environmental in the 
country; 
(c) coordinate with various Government departments and
Ministries of the Central and State Governments for cross -sector 
environmental risk assessment and mitigation;       
(d) support the institutions, organisations and individuals who are
engaged in the development of ethical and responsible environmental 
management; 
(e) provide and manage an efficient reporting infrastructure for
national and state -level data flows in order to avoid duplication and 
loss of data; 
(f) carry out independent, objective, and transparent appraisal and
approval of projects for environmental clearances; 
(g) m onitor the implementation of industrial and infrastructura l
projects on a regular basis in order to ensure c ompliance with the 
existing environmental regulations and standards;  
(h) i nvestigate into matters of violation of the environmental
laws and regulations existing in the country and impose appropriate 
penalty on the violators;  
(i) pr ovide technical advice and capacity building trainings
to state level environmental impact assessment authorities;  
(j) carry out and sponsoring investigations and research
relating to the planning and management of environment and 
other preventive aspects o f natural resources management;  
(k) f acilitate the national databases of environmental information
and dissemination thereof including environmental clearances and 
their monitoring; 
(l) promote sustainable development by ensuring that
environmental considerations  are integrated into decision -making at 
various levels;      
(m) recommend to the Central Government or the State
Governments, as the case may be, the steps to be taken for the 
environmental/ecological protection;
   
(n) a dvise the Government on any other matter as may be referred
to it, from time to time; 
(o) present to the Central Government, annually and at such
other times as the Authority may deem fit, reports on its
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

5 
5 
working; 
(p) coordinate with the existing statutory regulators in the
regime of environment protection and devise standard operating 
procedure in cases of overlap of jurisdictions; and 
(q) such other matters as may be prescribed.
10 
15 
10. The Authority shall, while investigating any matter referred to in clause
(h) of section 9, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and, in
particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
from any part of India and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from
any court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses
and documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
 Authority to have 
powers of a Civil 
Court. 
20 
Appropriate 
Government 
 to consult the 
 Authority. 
Central 
Government to 
provide adequate 
funds to the  
Authority. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Accounts and 
audit. 
45 
11. The  appropriate Government shall consult the Authority on all policies
affecting the management and conservation of environment in the country.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament
 by law in this behalf,  provide adequate funds to the
Authority
 for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
13. (1) The Authority shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General
 of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare
 an annual statement of accounts in  such form and manner, at such
time
 of each financial year, and such intervals, as may be prescribed.
(2) The
 accounts of the Authority shall be audited by  the Comptroller and
Auditor
-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure
 incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The
 Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him
in
 connection with the audit of the accounts of the  Authority under this Act
shall
 have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection
with
 such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall
have
 the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to  inspect any of the offices
of
 the  Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as  certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by  him in this behalf,
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the
Central
 Government by the Authority.
14. (1) The  Authority shall prepare every  year, in such form and within such
time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report 
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of
Parliament, the annual report along with a memorandum of action taken or
Annual Report. 

6 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Authority relating to 
the Union and the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of such 
recommendations, within a period of one year from the date of receipt of 
such report. 
(3) Where the  report or any of its part is related to any of the issues
connected with the State Government, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the Governor of that State, who shall in turn cause it to be
laid before the Legislature of the State concerned, along with an
explanatory memorandum  explaining the action taken or proposed to be
taken on the recommendations related to the State, an d the reasons for
non-acceptance, if any, of  such recommendations, within a period of one
year from the date of receipt of such report.
5 
10 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
15. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force. 15 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
17. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
20 
Power to make 
rules. 
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule  made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule  or both Houses
agree that the rule  should not be made, the rule  shall  thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
25 
3
0 
3
5 

7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Rapid industrialization and infrastructure development in the last two decades 
coupled with population growth and urbanization has exerted tremendous pressures 
on the environment. The existing regulatory institutions at the Central and State 
levels have been unable to cope up effectively with the rising environmental 
challenges. It is now well recognized that the gap between the environmental 
regulatory policies and their compliance is becoming wider. The traditional 
systems of environmental regulation exercised through the Union Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Ministry of Environment in the State 
Governments, Central and State Pollution Control Boards etc. have become 
inadequate to address the alarming threats of climate change, global w arming, 
pollution and environmental impacts of largescale infrastructure projects.  The 
existing mechanism of criminal prosecution of environmental offenders has also 
failed to yield the desired results. The regime of environmental clearance which 
took shape through the environment impact assessment notification under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, involves grant of prior clearance to major 
projects by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the State 
Environment Impact Assessmen t Authorities (SEIAAs). While the number and 
complexity of the projects being processed for environmental clearance has 
increased manifold, the capacity and resources available with these agencies have 
remained limited.  
         Here lies the significance of an impartial, independent and non-political apex 
authority to regulate and control all the activities related to environment 
management and conservation.  In 2011, the Honourable Supreme Court in the 
verdict of the Lafarge Umiam Mining Private Ltd. v. The Union of India directed 
the Union Government to set up a national regulator to appraise projects, enforce 
environmental conditions for approvals, and impose penalties on polluters in 
accordance with sub-section (3) of section 3 of the Environment (Prot ection) Act, 
1986. However, this direction hasn’t been implemented even after fifteen years. In 
the past couple of years, the country has witnessed several changes to the 
environmental regulations, particularly regarding clearance mechanisms, with the 
Government advocating for the “ease of doing business.” Several concerns have 
been raised about these changes, especially on the issues of impact assessment, 
inadequate public consultation, lack of transparency and credibility in the 
mechanism, and the non- existence of a proper post -clearance mechanism. This 
further illustrate the need for an independent environmental regulator for 
overseeing, controlling, monitoring and regulating all the concerns related to 
environmental management.  The Bill, therefore, proposes to establish an apex 
body to be called the National Environment Management and Regulatory Authority 
to effectively manage, monitor and regulate the use of environmental resources. 
 Hence , this Bill.     
SANDOSH KUMAR P. 

8 
 
  FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National 
Environment Management and Regulatory Authority (NEMRA)  and for the 
appointment of the Chairperson and other Members thereof. Clause 4 inter alia  
provides for the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members of the NEMRA. Clause 7 provides for the appointment 
of officers a nd staff including experts of the NEMRA as may be considered 
necessary by the Central Government and for the salaries and allowances payable 
to  and other terms and conditions of service of such officers and staff. Clause 9 
lays down the functions of the N EMRA, which inter alia , includes provision of 
technical advice and capacity building trainings to state level environmental impact 
assessment authorities and carry out research relating to the planning and 
management of environment and other preventive aspects of natural resources 
management. Clause 12 provides for the Central to provide adequate funds to 
NEMRA for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. 
 
                      The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non- recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult to estimate the exact quantum of expenditure likely to be involved at this 
stage. 
  
 
 
   
  

9 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
         Clause 17 empowers the Central Government to make such provisions 
through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Bill.  Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make rules carrying out the purposes of this Bill.  
          As the rules or orders rules will relate to matters of procedure and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____
_______ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a National Environment Management and 
Regulatory Authority for the effective management, regulation and 
 monitoring of the use of environmental resources 
 and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—333—08.12.2025. 