22 of 1992,

10

15

As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXXVI of 2001.

1nE FOREIGN TRADE (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2001
A
BILL
to amend the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (J) This Act may be called the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2001.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint.

2. In the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), after Chapter III, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
“CHAPTER IIIA
QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS

9A. (1) If the Central Government, after conducting such enquiry as it deems
fit, is satisfied that any article is imported into India in such increased quantities
and under such conditions so as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to

domestic industry, then, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, impose such
quantitative restrictions on the import of such articles as it may deem fit:

Short title and
commence-
ment.

Insertion of
new Chapter
mA.

Power of

Government to
impose
quantitative
restrictions.


2

Provided that no such quantitative restrictions shall be imposed on an article
originating from a developing country so long as the share of imports of that article
from that country does not exceed three per cent. or where that article originates from
more than one developing countries, then, so long as the aggregate of the imports
from all such countries taken together does not exceed nine per cent. of the total
imports of that article into India.

(2) The quantitative restrictions imposed under this section shall, unless revoked
earlier, cease to have effect on the expiry of four years from the date of such imposition:

Provided that if the Central Government is of the opinion that the domestic
industry has taken measures to adjust to such injury or threat thereof and it is necessary
that the quantitative restrictions should continue to be imposed to prevent such injury
or threat and to facilitate the adjustments, it may extend the period of such imposition:

Provided further that in no case the quantitative restrictions shall continue to
be imposed beyond a period of ten years from the date on which such restrictions
were first imposed.

(3) The Central Government may, by rules provide for the manner in which
articles, the import of which shall be subject to quantitative restrictions under this
section, may be identified and the manner in which the causes of serious injury or
causes of threat of serious injury in relation to such articles may be determined.

(4) For the purposes of this section.—
(a) "developing country" means a country notified by the Central
Government in the Official Gazette for the purposes of this section;
(0) "domestic industry" means the producers—
(i) as a whole of the like article or a directly competitive article in
India; or

(ii) whose collective output of the like articles or a directly
competitive article in India constitutes a major share of the total production
of the said article in India;

(c) "serious injury" means an injury causing significant overall impairment
in the position of a domestic industry;
(व) "threat of serious injury" means a clear and imminent danger of serious
injury.’.
3. In section 19 of the principal Act,—
(0) in sub-section (2), after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ea) the manner in which articles, the import of which shall be subject to
quantitative restrictions, may be identified and the manner in which the causes

of serious injury or causes of threat of serious injury in relation to such articles
may be determined under sub-section (3) of section 9A;";

(ii) in sub-section (3),—
(A) for the words “Every rule and every Order made", the words

“Every notification issued, every rule and every Order made" shall be
substituted;

(B) for the words "the rule" wherever they occur, the words “the
notification or the rule" shall be substituted.

5

10

20

25

35

“45


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 was enacted to provide
for the development and regulation of foreign trade in the overall context of the new trade
policy aimed at increasing productivity and competitiveness and achieving a strong export
performance. As part of the new liberalized economic policy and with a view to fulfilling
international obligations, India continues to remove quantitative restrictions on imports.

2. The Agreement on Safeguards enables member countries to impose quantitative
restrictions by way of emergency action, if imports of such articles are in such increased
quantities as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to domestic producers of like or
directly competitive articles, with a more liberal dispensation for such imports from the
developing countries.

3. It is, therefore, considered necessary to amend the Foreign Trade (Development
and Regulation) Act to enable the Government to impose such quantitative restrictions on
imports in accordance with the Agreement on Safeguards. It is also necessary to empower
the Union Government to make rules to provide for the manner in which articles liable for
import restrictions may be identified and for the manner in which the causes of serious
injury or causes of threat of serious injury in relation to such articles may be determined
and for the manner in which import restrictions may be imposed.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.

New DELut; MURASOLI MARAN.
The 8th March, 2001.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 19 of the principal Act empowering the
Central Government to make rules for the purposes of the Act. Such rules may provide,
inter alia, the manner in which the articles, import for which shall be subject to quantita-
tive restrictions may be identified and the manner in which the causes of serious injury in
relation to such articles may be determined under sub-section (3) of section‘9A.

2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government
are matters of administrative detail or procedure. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.


ANNEXURE

Exrract FROM THE Forticn Trape (DEVELOPMENT AND ReGuLAtion) Act, 1992
(22 oF 1992)

* * * * *
19. (1) * * * * *

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

* * * * *

(3) Every rule and every Order made by the Central Government under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifi-
cation in the rule or the Order or both Houses agree that the rule or the Order should not be
made, the rule or the Order, as the case may be, shali thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule or the Order.

* * * * *

Power to make
rules


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
to amend the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992.

(Shri Murasoli Maran, Minister of Commerce & Industry)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—~7344RS~ 16-03-2001.