1
THE INTERFAITH MARRIAGES BY UNLAWFUL CONVERSION
(PROHIBITION) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to prohibit interfaith marriages by unlawful conversion and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Interfaith Marriages by Unlawful Conversion
(Prohibition) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Family Courts" means the family courts as established under the Family
Courts Act, 1984;
(c) "interfaith marriage" means marriage between persons professing different
religions;
Bill No. XXXVI of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA  SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
66 of 1984.
5
10

2
(d) "offence" means the offence of performing an interfaith marriage for the sole
purpose of unlawful conversion, as per section 5 of this Act;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "religion" means any organized system of worship pattern, faith, belief, worship
or life-style as prevailing in India or any part of it and defined under any law or custom
for the time being in force;
(g) "spouse" means either the husband or wife in the interfaith marriage; and
(h) "unlawful conversion" means convert or attempt to convert any person from
one's own religion to another by use or practice of misrepresentation, force, undue
influence, coercion, allurement or by any fraudulent means and is not in accordance
with the law of the land.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
or in any custom or ritual of any community, religion, tribe or caste, interfaith marriage, which
is done for the sole purpose of unlawful conversion of one spouse, either before or after the
marriage, is hereby prohibited.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the appropriate Government shall issue necessary directions for carrying out the purposes
of this Act, in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. Any interfaith marriage, which is done for the sole purpose of unlawful conversion
of one spouse, either before or after the marriage, shall be declared void by the Family Court
having jurisdiction in the area where such interfaith marriage has taken place, or where
Family Court is not established, the Court having jurisdiction to try such case on a petition
presented by either party thereto against the other party of the marriage, in such manner as
may be prescribed.
5. Whoever performs or takes part in an interfaith marriage which is done for the sole
purpose of causing unlawful conversion of one spouse, either before or after the marriage,
shall be guilty of having committed an offence of performing an interfaith marriage for the
sole purpose of unlawful conversion.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever commits an offence under this Act, shall on conviction by a Court of Law be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment, which shall not be less than five years but which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
7. When an offence is committed under this Act, each of the following persons shall
be deemed to have taken part in committing the offence and to be guilty of the offence,—
(a) every person who actually does the act which constitutes the offence;
(b) every person who aids or abets another person in committing the offence;
(c) every person who does or omits to do any act for the purpose of enabling or
aiding another person to commit the offence; and
(d) any person who counsels, convinces or procures any other person to commit
the offence.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, every
offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable and triable by the
Court of Sessions.
Prohibition
of interfaith
marriages
done for the
sole purpose
of unlawful
conversion.
Interfaith
marriage done
for the sole
purpose of
unlawful
conversion or
vice-versa  to
be declared
void.
Offence of
performing an
interfaith
marriage for
the sole
purpose of
unlawful
conversion.
Penalty.
Parties to the
offence.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
5 of 1973.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Marriage is a part of individual life as well a social issue. Interfaith marriage signifies a
marital union wherein the partners belong to different faiths and religions. These marriages
usually face difficulties in respect of social involvement, social behaviour, adaptation and
acceptance by the families of both spouses as well as the society. Sometimes even the
children of interfaith marriages face challenges and exclusion in society. Some religions
prohibit interfaith marriages, some are silent on the issue, while others allow it with
requirements of ceremony and customs.
Interfaith marriages have recently become a topic of controversy due to the disapproval
of relationships/alliances between Hindus and Muslims, where in some cases non-Muslims
are required to convert to solemnise the marriage. These incidents have attracted
condemnation, harassment and legal action by the involved communities. Such interfaith
marriages are seen as an inherent indication of a forced conversion of one of the spouses,
mostly women.  As per Muslim personal law, in order to get married to a non-Muslim,
conversion of religion is the only way. Interfaith marriages in India are registered under the
Special Marriage Act, 1954.
In recent years, there have been instances of conversion in the name of interfaith
marriages and these instances have caused disturbance and public unrest. The institution of
marriage should not be exploited for the sake of unlawful conversion.
Thus, there is an urgent need to contemplate a law in order to prohibit interfaith
marriages done for the sole purpose of unlawful conversion. There should also be deterrent
punishment for the persons who are responsible for such acts.
Hence, this Bill.
ANIL  SUKHDEORAO  BONDE.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit unlawful conversion for interfaith marriages and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde, M.P .)
RS-P&P S-PMB(E)– 020–11.12.2023.