THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  For article 130 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
“130. (1) The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi and shall have its benches at
Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata with such number of judges as the Chief Justice of India
may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
(2) The Chief Justice of India shall sit in Delhi.
(3) Each bench of the Supreme Court at Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata shall
exercise jurisdiction over such High Courts or territory as the Chief Justice of India
shall, with the approval of the President, decide:
Provided that the seat of the Supreme Court in Delhi shall decide all the issues
relating to Constitutional laws and reference made under article 143 and such other
issues as may be decided by the Chief Justice of India in consultation with the
President.”
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Substitution of
new article for
article 130.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH AUGUST, 2010
Bill No. XXXV of 2010
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Preamble to the Constitution secures to the citizens of India justice — social, economical
and political. Article 130 of the Constitution provides that the Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi
or in such other place or  places as the Chief Justice of India with the approval of President,
from time to time appoint. However, even after sixty years of the coming into force of the
Constitution this enabling provision has not been used by the Chief Justice. There have
been repeated demands from various quarters to have the benches of Supreme Court in other
parts of the country but these demands have not found favour with the Government of the
day. The Law Commission of India in its various reports has recommended for establishment
of benches of the Supreme Court in other cities and the latest report (229th) in this regard has
recommended four cassation benches for North region/zone in Delhi for South region/zone
in Chennai/Hyderabad, for East region/Zone in Kolkata and for western region/zone in
Mumbai to deal with orders/appeal arising out of particular region. It has also recommended
a Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court in New Delhi which will look after matters of law
and Constitution. The report also mentions that there are 55 countries in the world which are
having constitutional court besides the highest court of appeal. The Department related
Parliamentary Committee on Law and Justice and Personnel and Public Grievances in its
several reports has also recommended for the benches of the Supreme Court in order to
ensure speedy and inexpensive justice to the common man. On various fora arguments have
been advanced that New Delhi being situated in one corner of the country causes a lot of
hardships to the litigants to travel all the way down to Delhi from remote corners of the
country along with their lawyers only to find that the hearing for the day has been adjourned.
People come to Delhi for want of justice investing their hard earned money, stay in hotels,
arrange for hefty fee for advocates and the whole amount goes in drain on adjournment of
the case.
It is, therefore high time that benches of Supreme Court should be established in
New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata and the Bench at New Delhi may, in addition, also
look after the constitutional matters.
Hence, this Bill.
KALRAJ  MISHRA
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
130. Seat of Supreme Court.—The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other
place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time
to time appoint.
* * * * *
3

GMGIPMRND—3875RS(S3)—13-08-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the  Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra, M.P.)