1
Bill No. XXXVIII of  2023
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following new article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“16A. Nothing in article 16 or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall
prevent the State from making any special provisions, by law, for the advancement of
any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes, to provide for reservation in matters of employment in private
sector companies, undertakings or institutions.”.
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of new
article 16A.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023 
5
10
Reservation in
matters of
employment in
private sector.

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a country of diverse people and religion. Some people have fared better than
others and therefore the concept of reservation was introduced in the system to bring at par
the marginalized and backward classes of  people. Article 16 prohibits discrimination in
employment in any government office. However, the Government can allow reservation for
any community if they are not adequately represented in services or posts under the State.
In this scenario, when the public sector is shrinking, the provisions for reservation of
posts or appointments for weaker sections of the society, as contemplated under article 16(4)
or under the Mandal Commission Report, are losing their significance, in so far as protection
of the interests of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes are
concerned. Moreover, with the funds being raised as loan from Public Sector Banks for their
capital, and to get land and other services from the State Government at cheap rates, the
private companies have an obligation to provide services including providing employment
opportunities to the community.
Therefore, in order to bring the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward
Classes into the national mainstream, it is proposed that the State shall make special provision
for reservation of posts, or appointments in government service and private sector. The Bill
seeks to insert new article 16A in the Constitution to allow reservation in matters of employment
and job opportunities in private sector companies, undertakings or institutions.
Hence, this Bill.
M. SHANMUGAM.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri M. Shanmugam,  M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E) -122A-17.12.2 023.