1
Bill No. XXXV of  2021
THE ACADEMIC INTEGRITY BILL, 2021
A
BILL
to promote academic integrity in Higher Educational Institutions in the country and to
curb plagiarism by establishing the Central Academic Integrity Authority and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Academic Integrity Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall apply to students, researchers, faculty and staff of all Higher Educational
Institutes in the country;
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent,
application
and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021
5

2
Definition. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Academic Misconduct Panel" means the body constituted to investigate
allegations of plagiarism as described under section 6 of this Act;
(b) "academic integrity" means intellectual honesty in proposing, performing
and reporting any activity, which leads to the creation of intellectual property;
(c) "aggrieved party" means any person, whose academic work such as a research
paper, manuscript, etc. has been dishonestly taken by a student, researcher or faculty
member of an Higher Educational Institute;
(d) "author" includes a student or a faculty or a researcher or staff of Higher
Educational Institution who claims to be the creator of the work under consideration;
(e) "Authority" means the Central Academic Integrity Authority constituted
under section 3 of this Act;
(f) "college" means any institution, whether known as such or by any other
name which provides for a course of study for obtaining any qualification from a
university and which, in accordance with the rules and regulations of such university,
is recognized as competent to provide for such course of study and present students
undergoing such course of study for the examination for the award of such qualification;
(g) "faculty" refers to a person who is teaching or guiding students enrolled in
an Higher Educational Institute in any capacity whatsoever i.e. regular, emeritus,
ad-hoc, guest, temporary, visiting, etc;
(h) "Higher Educational Institution" means an institution of learning including a
university, an institution deemed to be university, a college, an institution of national
importance declared as such by an Act of Parliament, or a constituent unit of such
institution, which is imparting, whether through conduct of regular classes or distance
education systems, higher education after twelve years of schooling leading to the
award of a degree or diploma;
(i) "plagiarism" means an act of academic dishonesty and a breach of ethics and
involves using someone else's work as one's own and also includes data plagiarism
and self plagiarism;
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(k) "researcher" means a person conducting academic or scientific research in
an Higher Educational Institution.
(1) "script" includes research paper, thesis, study, project report, assignment,
dissertation and any other such work submitted for assessment or opinion leading to
the award of degree or publication in print or electronic media by students or faculty or
staff of an Higher Educational Institution, excluding answer scripts submitted in
response to a question paper set by a Higher Educational Institution;
(m) "student" means a person duly admitted and pursuing a programme of study
including a research programme in full time or part-time or distant mode in an Higher
Educational Institution;
Words and expressions used and not defined in these regulations but defined in the University
Grants Commission Act, 1956 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that
Act.
3 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
CHAPTER II
AUTHORITIES UNDER THIS ACT
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority, to be known as
the Central Academic Integrity Authority consisting of the following members, namely:—
(a) Union Minister of State in the Ministry of Education — Chairperson ex-officio;
(b) Union Minister of State in the Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology—Vice-Chairperson ex-officio;
(c) Chairperson, University Grants Commission—Vice-Chairperson ex-officio;
(d) Secretaries of the Union Ministry of Education and Ministry of Electronics
and Information Technology—Members ex-officio;
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it may
consider necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services of
officers and staff of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall take steps to establish the Central Integrated Academic
Database as well as the Central Integrated Plagiarism Software, as referred in section 7 of
this Act.
(2) The Authority shall meet at least twice in a year and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(3) The expenditure incurred to attend meetings by the members referred to in
sub-clauses (a) to (d) of section 3, shall be borne by the Ministries concerned.
5. (1) Every Higher Educational Institution shall constitute a Academic Misconduct
Authority to consider the recommendations of the Academic Misconduct Panel and take
appropriate decisions after giving an opportunity to the accused persons to present their
case.
(2) The Academic Misconduct Authority shall consist of four members namely:—
(i) the Head of the Higher Educational Institution — Chairperson
(ii) the Dean of the Higher Educational Institution — Member
(iii) the Director (Academic Research) or equivalent of the Higher Educational
Institution — Member
(iv) one senior academician not below the rank of Professor in the relevant
discipline from outside the Higher Educational Institution — Member.
(3) The Academic Misconduct Authority shall prescribe the procedure based on
principles of natural justice to be followed by the Academic Misconduct Authority while
investigating allegations of plagiarism.
6. (1) Every Higher Educational Institutions shall constitute an Academic Misconduct
Panel to investigate allegations of plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty.
(2) The Academic Misconduct Panel shall have the power to assess the level of
plagiarism ascertained by Central Integrated Plagiarism software, and recommend penalty
accordingly.
Central
Academic
Integrity
Authority.
Functions of
the Central
Academic
Integrity
Authority.
Academic
Misconduct
Authority.
Academic
Misconduct
Panel.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(3) The Academic Misconduct Panel shall consist of seven members who shall be
senior academicians with a good publication record to be appointed in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(4) The Academic Misconduct Panel shall be headed by a Chairperson, who shall be
an academic functionary of the Higher Educational Institutions.
(5) The Academic Panel shall consist of:—
(a) at least one female senior academician.
(b) at least one senior academician belonging to Schedule Castes or Scheduled
Tribes.
(c) at least one senior academician appointed by the Head of the Higher
Educational Institutions from outside the Higher Educational Institutions.
(d) at least one member shall be an expert, well versed with anti-plagiarism
tools.
(e) one member shall be a reputed academician from the discipline in which the
plagiarism is alleged.
(6) The Academic Misconduct Panel shall follow the principles of natural justice
while deciding about the allegation of plagiarism against the student, researcher, faculty
member or any other employee of Higher Educational Institutions.
(7) The Academic Misconduct Panel shall send the report after investigation
containing its recommendations on penalties to be imposed to the Academic Misconduct
Authority preferably within a period of thirty days from the date of complaint or initiation of
the proceedings in case of suo motu notice.
(8) The Academic Misconduct Panel shall provide a copy of the report to the person(s)
against whom the inquiry report is submitted.
CHAPTER III
D
ATABASE AND PLAGIARISM SOFTWARE
7. (1) The Authority shall, in consultation with senior academicians, create a national
database, called the Central Integrated Database consisting of research papers, dissertations
and thesis submitted by students, researchers and faculty members.
(2) The Authority shall, in collaboration with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, provide access to statistical data and reports on the Central Integrated
Academic Database in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Integrated Academic Database shall be developed in such manner, to
be used as a research database by students, researchers and faculty members of Higher
Educational Institutions and it shall be an open access database in order to foster academic
development.
8. (1) The Authority shall, in consultation with professionals engaged in data analytics
and senior academicians, create an ante plagiarism software which shall have capabilities to
detect:—
(i) similarities by pattern matching method, in order to disclose the amount of
plagiarism in a concerned script; and
(ii) plagiarism in English and all languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of
the Constitution.
(2) The Authority shall ensure that all persons covered by this Act, shall have access
to plagiarism checking tools as part of the Central Integrated Plagiarism Software, in order to
promote academic integrity.
Central
Integrated
Academic
Database.
Central
Integrated
Plagiarism
Software.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
CHAPTER IV
PENALTIES
9. (1) Penalties in cases of plagiarism shall be  imposed on students pursuing studies
at the level of Under Graduate, Post Graduate, Masters, Ph.D. and researchers and faculty
members of the Higher Educational Institutions only after the academic misconduct in question
has been established without doubt and when all avenues of appeal are exhausted.
(2) The Academic Misconduct Authority of the Higher Educational Institution, while
referring to the levels of plagiarism defined in the University Grants Commission (Promotion
of Academic Integrity and Prevention of Plagiarism in Higher Educational Institutions)
Regulations, 2018, shall impose a penalty considering the severity of the Plagiarism, based
on recommendations of the Academic Misconduct Panel which may be as follows:
(a) In case of students:
(i) if similarities are in the range of  10 per cent to 40 per cent, the concerned
student shall not be awarded any marks or credits for the plagiarised script and
he shall be asked to submit a revised script within a stipulated time period
decided by the Academic Misconduct Panel.
(ii) if similarities above 40 per cent to 60 per cent, the concerned student
shall not be awarded any marks or credits for the plagiarised script and he shall
be asked to submit a revised script after a period of one year but not exceeding
eighteen months.
(iii) if similarities above 60 per cent, the concerned student shall not be
awarded any marks or credits for the plagiarised script and his registration for
that particular course shall be cancelled:
Provided that, in case of repeated plagiarism by the concerned student, he
shall be punished for one level higher than the previous level committed by him
and in case the level of plagiarism is the highest, the same punishment shall be
applied:
Provided further that, in case plagiarism is proved on a date later than the
date of award of degree/credit, the Academic Misconduct Authority shall decide
a period for which the degree or the credit shall be kept in abeyance.
(b) In case of researchers and faculty members of Higher Educational Institutions:—
(i) if similarities are in the range of  10 per cent to 40 per cent, the concerned
person shall be asked to withdraw his script and shall be barred from publishing
any work for a minimum period of one year.
(ii) if similarities are above 40 per cent to 60 per cent, the concerned person
shall be asked to withdraw his manuscript submitted for publication and shall be
barred from publishing any work for a minimum period of two years and shall be
denied a right to one annual increment and shall not be allowed to be a supervisor
to any student or scholar for a period of two years.
(iii) if similarities are above 60 per cent, the concerned person shall be
asked to withdraw his manuscript submitted for publication and shall not be
allowed to publish any work for a minimum period of two years and shall be
denied a right to one annual increment and shall not be allowed to be a supervisor
to any student/scholar for a period of two years:
Provided that, in case of repeated plagiarism by the concerned person, he shall be
punished for one level higher than the previous level committed by him and in case the
highest level of plagiarism is repeated, the concerned person shall be dismissed:
Penalties in
case of
plagiarism.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
Provided further that in case plagiarism is proved on a date later than the date of award
of degree or credit, the Academic Misconduct Authority, shall decide a period for which the
degree or the credit shall be kept in abeyance.
(c) In case of any complaint of plagiarism against the Head of an Higher
Educational Institute; the Authority shall take appropriate action after investigating
the complaint under the provisions of this Act.
10. (1) Any party aggrieved by acts of academic dishonesty committed by persons
covered under this Act, may approach the Academic Misconduct Authority with such
complaints.
(2) The Academic Misconduct Authority shall, in accordance with principles of natural
justice, investigate such complaints and furnish a report.
(3) The report, shall be forwarded to the concerned police station, in the form of a
complaint, in case the aggrieved party wishes to seek appropriate remedies under the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 and the Copyright Act, 1957.
11. (1) 1f any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Remedies for
an aggrieved
party.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860.
14 of 1957.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In today's globalised world, academic research plays a significant role in any educational
institution. It is of vital importance, to have knowledge-driven growth, that is based on
innovation and originality of ideas. Research is the pillar that supports the advancement and
flow of knowledge. The quality of such research unequivocally affects the quality of teaching
and learning. This inevitably benefits students that later contribute to the society and the
country.
Academic research refers to the creative process that is undertaken in a methodical
manner in order to augment one's stock of knowledge. It refers to solving problems, both
theoretical and practical, in a scientific and systematic way. However, we see that the Indian
Education system faces a plethora of challenges such as, an emphasis on rote learning,
absence of intellectual simulation, lack of scientific knowledge and most importantly, lack of
training in research methodology.
The University Grants Commission (UGC), is the statutory body charged with the
coordination, determination and maintenance of standards of higher education. While the
UGC has brought in regulations to deal with academic standards from time to time, it has
failed to tackle the issue of low standards with respect to academic integrity. Plagiarism,
publishing in fake journals and adding an author's name to a paper they haven't contributed
to, are few of the many ways research fraud is committed in India. The UGC (Promotion of
Academic Integrity and Prevention of Plagiarism in Higher Educational Institutions)
Regulations, 2018 were brought in with the sole aim of addressing plagiarism by teachers and
students, researchers and faculty at India's universities and colleges. However, these
Regulations have failed to effectively deal with the issue at hand.
This Bill seeks to bring a change to the current set of regulations governing research
methodology and tackle the menace of plagiarism. It would bring in a set of guidelines and
reduce the multiplicity of regulations that exist but do not give clarity on the subject. This
Bill, in Chapter V makes reference to the levels of plagiarism prescribed as per the University
Grants Commission (Promotion of Academic Integrity And Prevention of Plagiarism In Higher
Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2018. To tackle the issues of plagiarism and other
forms of academic fraud this Bill would create an Authority under the Ministry of Education,
enforced with the duty to create an anti-plagiarism software that would not only cover
publications written in English, but also twenty-two languages mentioned in the
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. The current system of Universities using their own set
of guidelines and third-party plagiarism checkers - leads to a lack of uniformity in academic
research as well as the sidelining of publications in vernacular languages, since these checkers
are not equipped to deal with regional languages. Additionally, the Authority would also be
tasked with the responsibility of creating a National Database consisting of all academic
papers, thesis, manuscripts, etc. This Database shall serve as an open-access resource for
every student, researcher and faculty member engaged in academic research.
This Bill, therefore, seeks to bring in much needed changes in order to foster notions
of academic integrity.
DR. FAUZIA KHAN
7

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the Central Academic Integrity
Authority and expenditure to be incurred for salary and allowances.
Clause 7 mandates the establishment of the Central Integrated Academic Database
(CIAD) and Clause 8 provides for the Central Integrated Plagiarism Software (CIPS) . The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore
would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of
about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
9

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to promote academic integrity in Higher Educational Institutions in the country and
to curb plagiarism by establishing the Central Academic Integrity Authority and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
 (Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1341RS(S3)—07-12-2021.