Short title and
commencement.
THE  MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVERS AND OTHER WORKERS
WELFARE FUND BILL,  2023
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Motor Vehicle Drivers and Other Workers Welfare
Fund and to implement measures to promote the welfare of persons engaged
in driving and other workers engaged in motor vehicles used for
commercial purposes and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor V ehicle Drivers and Other Workers Welfare
Fund Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and
for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any provision to the commencement
of this Act, shall, in relation to a State, be construed as a reference to the coming into force
of that provision in that State.
Bill  No. XXXVII of  2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
5

2
Motor Vehicle
Drivers and
Other
Workers
Welfare Fund.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Fund" means the Motor 
V ehicle Drivers and Other Workers Welfare Fund
established under section 3 of this Act;
(b) "motor vehicle drivers" means the persons who are drivers of a motor vehicle
used for commercial purposes, including two-wheelers, three-wheeler autos, four
wheeler taxi, cab, other multi-utility vehicles like tempo and also other commercial
vehicles like lorry, truck, oil tanker, water tanker, dipper, dumper, trailer, either directly
engaged or through any employer, agency, contractor, whether for wages or not, for
transportation of persons, or goods and other materials;
(c) "other workers" means workers like cleaners, driver's assistants who help the
drivers while they are engaged in driving of a motor vehicle and such other supporting
labourers like road-side mechanics, mechanic assistants etc.; and
(d
) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act.
3. ( 1) There shall be established a Fund to be called the Motor Vehicle Drivers and
Other Workers Welfare Fund for the purpose of implementing various measures to promote
the welfare of motor vehicle drivers and other workers engaged in motor vehicles used for
commercial purposes.
(2) The Central Government, shall from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, contribute such sums of money and/or funds, as may be
necessary, to carry out the purposes of this Act.
4. ( 1) The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the expenditure
incurred in connection with measures and facilities which, in the opinion of that Government,
are necessary or expedient to promote the welfare of  drivers and other workers engaged in
motor vehicles of commercial nature; and in particular—
(a) to defray the cost of such measures for the benefit of such persons directed
towards—
(i) the improvement of public health and sanitation, the prevention of
disease and the provision and improvement of medical facilities;
(ii) the provision and improvement of water supplies and facilities for
washing at the rest rooms;
(iii) the provision and improvement of educational facilities;
(iv) the provision and improvement of housing and recreational facilities
including standards of living, nutrition and amelioration of social conditions;
and
(v) the provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and
facilities as may be prescribed;
(b) to grant loan or subsidy to a State Government, or to a local authority or an
employer in aid of any scheme approved by the Central Government for the purposes
connected with the welfare of motor vehicle drivers and other workers;
(c) to pay annually grants-in-aid to a State Government, or to a local authority or
to an agency which satisfies the prescribed criteria (hereinafter to be referred to as
the agency) or to an agency who provides to the satisfaction of the Central Government,
welfare measures and facilities of the prescribed standard for the benefit of motor
vehicle drivers and other workers;
(d
) to meet the allowances, if any
, of the members of the State Advisory
Committees and the Central Advisory Committee constituted under sections 5 and 6
respectively and the salaries and allowances, if any, of persons appointed under
section 8;
Application
of Fund.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
State
Advisory
Committees.
Central
Advisory
Committee.
Power to
co-opt.
(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be
defrayed from the Fund.
(2) The Central Government shall have power to decide whether any particular
expenditure is or is not debitable to the Fund, and its decision shall be final.
5.
(1) The Central Government may constitute as many State Advisory Committees
as it thinks fit, but not exceeding one for each of the States and Union Territories, to advise
the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as
may be referred to it by that Government, including matters relating to the application of
the Fund.
(2) Each State Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons as may be
appointed to it by the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such manner
and for such term as may be prescribed:
Provided that each State Advisory Committee shall include equal number of members
representing the respective State Government, persons providing employment to motor
vehicle drivers, persons engaged in the business of motor vehicles, and trade unions
representing the motor vehicle drivers:
Provided further that at least one member of every State Advisory Committee shall be
a woman.
(3) The Chairman of each State Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central
Government, in such manner and for such term as may be prescribed; and
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all
members of every State Advisory Committee.
6. ( 1) The Central Government may constitute a Central Advisory Committee to
co-ordinate the work of the State Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 and to
advise the Central Government on any matter arising out of the administration of this Act.
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons as may
be appointed to it by the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such
manner and for such term as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Advisory Committee shall include equal number of members
representing the Central Government, persons providing employment to motor vehicle
drivers, persons engaged in the business of motor vehicles, and trade unions representing
the motor vehicle drivers:
Provided further that at least one member of the Central Advisory Committee shall be
a woman.
(3) The Chairman of the Central Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central
Government, in such manner and for such term as may be prescribed; and
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all
members of the Central Advisory Committee.
7. (1) A State Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, at any time
and for such period as it thinks fit, co-opt any person or persons to the Advisory Committee.
(2) A person co-opted under sub-section (1) shall exercise all the powers and functions
of a member under this Act but shall not be entitled to vote.
(3) The State Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, if it considers
it necessary or expedient so to do, invite any person to attend its meeting and when such
person attends any meeting, he or she shall not be entitled to vote thereat.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Power to call
for
information.
8. ( 1) The Central Government may appoint as many Welfare Commissioners, Welfare
Officers, Inspectors and such other officers and staff as it thinks necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct a Welfare
Commissioner to appoint such staff as is considered necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(3) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public servant
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(4) Any Welfare Commissioner, Welfare Officer or Inspector may,—
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he or she may think fit, enter at any reasonable
time, any place which he or she considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the
purposes of this Act;
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his or
her duties; and
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.
9. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial
year, cause to be published in the Official Gazette, a report giving an account of its activities
carried out under this Act during the previous financial year together with a statement of
accounts, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
10. The Central Government may require a State Government or a local authority or any
such agency to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information in
such form and within such period as may be prescribed.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject
to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
(2
) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for—
(a) the manner in which the Fund may be applied for the measures and facilities
specified in sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b) the composition of the S
tate Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory
Committee constituted under sections 5 and 6 respectively, the manner in which the
members thereof shall be chosen, the term of office of such members, the allowances,
if any, payable to them, and the manner in which the State Advisory Committees and
the Central Advisory Committee shall conduct their business;
(c) the recruitment, conditions of service and the duties of all persons appointed
under section 8;
(d
) the power that may be exercised by a 
Welfare Commissioner, a Welfare
Officer or an Inspector under section 8;
(e) the furnishing to the Central Government by a State Government or a local
authority or any such agency of such statistical and other information as may be
required to be furnished under section 10;
(f) the forms in which and the period within which statistical and other information
are to be furnished under clause (e); and
(g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed, or provided for, by
rules under this 
Act.
45 of 1860.
Annual report
of the
activities
financed
under the Act.
Power to
make rules.
Appointment
of Welfare
Commissioners,
etc., and their
powers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(3) In making any rule under clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (2), the Central Government
may direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees:
Provided that the Central Government shall have the power to condone any such
breach, as it may deem fit.
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India has the fourth largest automobile industry in the world. It has also become the
third largest automobile market in the world, surpassing Japan and Germany. It provides
significant contribution to the nation's Gross Domestic Product. However, the working
conditions of drivers of commercial vehicles like All India Permit trucks, heavy loaders,
multi-utility vehicles like tempo, and other commercial vehicles like lorry, truck, oil tanker,
water tanker, dipper, dumper, trailer etc. are pathetic. There are crores and crores of
commercial drivers working in the unorganized sector in the country, who are engaged in
transportation of goods and materials, including two-wheeler bike drivers enaged by
platforms like Swiggy, Zomato, and such other gig workers who are not covered under with
any welfare schemes, health insurance or social security.
This Bill seeks to establish a Motor Vehicle Drivers Welfare Fund to provide for
implementing the requisite social security measures and welfare activities for the motor
vehicle drivers and other workers engaged in this field including health insurance, safety,
education, recreation and other amenities.
Hence, the Bill.
M. SHANMUGAM.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of Motor V ehicle Drivers and Other
Workers Welfare Fund which would be utilized to carry out activities for the welfare of motor
vehicle drivers and other workers.
Clause 4 of the Bill specifies the purposes for which the Fund can be spent.
Clause 5 provides for establishment of State Advisory Committees and clause 6 for the
establishment of Central Advisory Committee, for which expenditure would be incurred by
the respective offices as also for payment of allowances to the members of the
Committee.
Clause 8 provides for the appointment of Welfare Commissioners, Welfare Officers
and Inspectors by the Central Government whose establishment expenditure will be met by
the Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve certain amount of expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible at this stage to give the exact amount estimated
for the purpose of implementation of this Bill. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees
six hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules
may be made, which inter alia, includes application of fund, composition of State Advisory
Committees, Central Advisory Committee, recruitment and conditions of service of members
of the Advisory Committees, powers to be exercised by the Welfare Commissioner, Welfare
Officer or Inspector and the procedure to be followed for furnishing of information.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure or
administrative details, and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Motor Vehicle Drivers and Other Workers Welfare
Fund and to implement measures to promote the welfare of persons engaged
in driving and other workers engaged in motor vehicles used for
commercial purposes and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri M. Shanmugam, M.P .)
RS–P&PS–PMB(E)–0057–12.12.2023.