1
THE PERSONAL BANKRUPTCY (DECLARATION AND
REHABILITATION) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for mechanism through which a person unable to pay off debts can declare
bankruptcy and subject himself to rehabilitation and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Personal Bankruptcy (Declaration and Rehabilitation)
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the appropriate Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for coming
into force of different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
Bill No. XXXVII of 2015
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 7TH AUGUST, 2015

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “bankruptcy” means the legal status of an individual citizen who is unable
to pay his creditors;
(c) “creditor” means an individual, a bank, a non-banking financial intermediary
or any such registered or non-registered institution that does the banking function of
accepting deposits and lending money, to which a person owes money;
(d) “debt” means an amount owed to a creditor for funds borrowed;
(e) “debtor” means an individual citizen who owes money to a creditor;
(f) “defaulter” means any debtor who do not repay the debt despite adequate
liquidity;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(h) “secured creditor” means any creditor who has the legal right to take a
specific property of the debtor and sell it in case of default in payment;
(i) “tribunal” means the special Bankruptcy Tribunal established under section 3
of this Act;
(j) “trustee” means an officer attached to a tribunal under section 5 of this Act;
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNAL
3. (1) The appropriate Governments shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Special Bankruptcy Tribunal with effect from such date as may be prescribed,
attached to every district court for exercising the jurisdiction, power and authority
conferred on such tribunals under this Act (2) the tribunal shall consist of;
(a) a Chairperson, appointed by the appropriate Government, who has served
as Judge of the H.C. for a period not less than five years; and
(b) not less than three judicial members, appointed by the appropriate
Government, who have served as judicial officers for at least five years in Civil Court
or District Court of any State.
4. (1) The Chairperson and the judicial members of the tribunal shall hold office for
a term of five years and shall be eligible for re-appointment only once.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the judicial members
shall be such as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
5. Every tribunal shall have one trustee who shall take charge of the property of the
debtor who has applied to be declared as bankrupt, attached to the tribunal and who shall
reduce every property of the debtor to cash, except the properties listed as “exempt
properties” in Section 14 of this Act, and distribute it to creditors within three months of
such application.
6. The appropriate Governments shall provide such number of officers and staff to
assist the tribunal in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The appropriate Governments may, in consultation with the Chairpersons of the
tribunal, make rules regulating the practices and procedures of the tribunal;
Definitions.
Composition
of the
Tribunal.
Term Salaries
and
Allowances of
Members.
Trustee to
reduce
property to
cash and
distribute
among
creditors.
Appointment
of other
officers to
the tribunal.
Appropriate
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
CHAPTER III
DECLARING BANKRUPTCY
8. A debtor under the purview of this Act, can not file for bankruptcy if;
(i) he transfers his property or any part thereof with the intent to defeat or delay
his creditors;
(ii) he transfers his property, or any part thereof, which would be void as a
fradulent preference, under this Act or any other enactment for the time being in force,
if he were to be adjudged an insolvent;
(iii) he intends to defeat or delay his creditors by departing or remaining out of
the territories to which the respective Act extends or departs from his dwelling house
or usual place of business or otherwise absent himself or if the debtor secludes
himself so as to deprive his creditors of the means of communicating with him;
(iv) he gives notice to any of his creditors that he has suspended, or that he is
about to suspend, payment of his debts; or
(v) he is sentenced to imprisonment by any court;
9. A debtor shall be entitled to file a bankruptcy petition if,—
(i) he is a non-wilful defaulter;
(ii) his debts amount to rupees 10,000 or more; or
(iii) he is under arrest or imprisonment for payment of money; or
(iv) an order of attachment has been made against his property.
10. A debtor, entitled to file a bankruptcy petition, shall do so before the Special
Bankruptcy Tribunal of the district where he resides.
11. Each bankruptcy petition shall be in writing, duly signed and verified in the
manner as may be prescribed and each petition shall contain:
(i) a statement that the debtor is unable to pay his debts;
(ii) the place where he ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally
works, or, if he has been arrested or imprisoned, the place where he is in custody;
(iii) the Court order under which he has been arrested or imprisoned, or an order
which has been made for the attachment of his property;
(iv) the amount and particulars of all pecuniary claims against him, together
with the names and residences of his creditors;
(v) the amount and particulars of his property, a specification of the value of all
such property not consisting of money, the place or places at which any such property
is located ; and
(vi) a statement whether the debtor has on any previous occasion filed a petition
to be adjudged an insolvent and in that case—
(a) if such petition has been dismissed, the reasons for such dismissal, or
(b) if the debtor has been adjudged an insolvent, concise particulars of
the insolvency, including a statement whether any previous adjudication has
been annulled and, if so, the grounds therefore.
12. (1) A creditor shall file a bankruptcy petition against his debtor, only if he is of the
opinion that the debtor is a wilful defaulter;
Declaration
of
bankruptcy
by a debtor.
Entitlement
for filing
bankruptcy.
Petition to be
filed in
appropriate
jurisdiction.
Contents of
the petition.
Creditor to
file
bankruptcy
petition.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(2) Every bankruptcy petition presented by a creditor or creditors shall set forth the
full particulars of the debtor and shall also specify,—
(i) the act of insolvency committed by such debtor, together with the date of its
commission;
(ii) the amount and particulars of his or their pecuniary claim or claims against
such debtor.
However, provided no ]bankruptey petition shall be filed against corporations, joint
ventures, companies or partnerships under this Act;
(3) The procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 with respect to the
admission of complaints, shall so far as it is applicable, be followed in the case of bankruptcy
petitions;
(4) No petition, whether presented by a debtor or a creditor, shall be withdrawn
without the leave of the court.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROCEDURE AT THE TRIBUNAL
13. (1) Subject to the conditions specified in this Act, once a creditor or debtor files a
petition of bankruptcy after following the procedures laid down in this Act, the tribunal may
issue an order adjudging bankruptcy of the debtor.
(2) The tribunal shall fix a date for hearing of the petition after receiving a bankruptcy
petition, such that the notice of such an order, fixing the date of hearing shall be served to
the debtor as well as the creditors;
(3) On the day fixed for the hearing of the petition or on any other day to which the
hearing is postponed, the debtor or creditor shall prove before the tribunal that he is
entitled to file the petition:
(a) Where the debtor is the petitioner, he shall furnish such documents to prove
that he is a non-wilful defaulter;
(b) Where the creditor is the petitioner, he shall furnish such documents to
prove that the debtor is a wilful defaulter.
(4) The tribunal shall, if deemed necessary and sufficient cause shown, grant time to
the debtor or creditor to produce further evidence on the case;
(5) The tribunal shall dismiss the petition, after due examination of the documents and
other evidences, if in the case of the petition being filed by:
(a) a debtor, and the tribunal is not satisfied that he is not a non-wilful defaulter;
(b) a creditor, if the tribunal is not satisfied that the debtor is not a wilful
defaulter;
(6) The tribunal shall order an enquiry to be conducted to establish that the current
monthly income of the debtor is not higher than a desired limit as decided by the tribunal,
given that such income is not above the median income of the State where the debtor
resides;
(7) If the petition, after due examination of evidence, is accepted, then the tribunal
shall issue an Order of Bankruptcy adjudging the debtor as bankrupt, and the copy of such
an order shall be served both on the debtor and the creditor/creditors.
14. Once the order is made, the tribunal shall entrust the properties, if any, of the
debtor, with the trustee of the tribunal, except the exempt properties which include:
(a) the house of the debtor;
(b) the area  where the house is built;
5 of 1908.
Procedure for
adjudging
bankruptcy of
debtor.
Power to
entrust
property with
trustee and
list of exempt
properties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(c) the essential utilities and utensils required for the house, as prescribed in
the rules made under this act; and
(d) the essential instruments to continue his work/job in the case of debtors
who are farmers, carpenters and the like.
15. The trustee shall be responsible to liquidate the propertise to money, in the
manner as may be prescribed, and distribute the money to the creditors in such order of
preference, fully secured creditors, partly secured creditors to the extent they are secured,
realization expenses and remuneration of the trustee, preferential creditors and unsecured
creditors:
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the power of any secured creditor to
realise his security, in the manner as he would have been entitled otherwise.
16. ( 1) If after the distribution is completed, the debtor is required to obtain a
certificate of dischrage from the tribunal, such that, the tribunal, for the issue of such a
certificate, shall be convinced that the default in payments by the debtor was not wilful and
the conduct of the debtor has been satisfactory during the tribunal proceedings;
(2) On obtaining the certificate of discharge, the unpaid debts are cancelled and the
debtor is liberated from the demands of his creditors;
(3) The time taken from the filing of the petition to the issue of the certificate of
discharge shall not be more than 3 months:
Provided that if the tribunal has reasons to believe that the procedure of liquidating
the properties of the debtor should take more time, on the request of the trustee, the tribunal
shall grant an additional time not exceeding one month for the completion of all procedures.
(4) The certificate of discharge, shall not be release to the debtor from;
(a) any debt due to the Government;
(b) any debt or liability incurred by any means of fraud or fraudulent breach of
trust to which be is party;
(c) any debt or liability in respect of which he was obtained forbearance by any
fraud to which he was a party; or
(d) any liability under an order for maintenance made under section 125 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
CHAPTER V
R
EHABILITATION
17. After the issue of the order of bankruptcy, the debtor, his immediate relatives and
his properties shall be protected from all coercive methods, physical and emotional, of the
creditors or anyone intermediately thereof;
18. The appropriate Government shall constitute a Bankruptcy rehabilitation Fund as
may be prescribed made under this Act to help revive declared bankrupts, within a year of
enactment of this act, and ensure that;
(i) every person who is declared bankrupt by the tribunal by order of bankruptcy,
shall be provided with the minimum social benefits by the appropriate Government;
and
(ii) the debtor, if the tribunal feels necessary, shall be recommended to be given
loan from the bankruptcy rehabilitation fund of the appropriate Government, at an
interest rate as may be prescribed by the tribunal.
19. (1) A debtor, who is declared bankrupt with no properties except his house to pay
off debts, shall be required to submit a proposal outlining his plan to pay off the debts,
(i) the plan may be submitted to the tribunal within 3 months of him being
declared bankrupt; and
Responsibility
of trustee to
liquidate
properties.
Certificate of
Discharge.
2 of 1974.
Protection to
Debtor and
kin.
Bankruptcy
Rehabilitation
Fund.
Plan to pay off
debt in case of
no properties
except exempt
properties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(ii) the plan shall pay off debts within a time period of 3 years or as deemed right
by the tribunal;
(iii) the tribunal, if satisfied with the proposal, shall allow an extension of the
said time period, to issue his certificate of discharge;
(2) If the debtor is a farmer and declared bankrupt, an extension of at least two years
shall be given to the farmer to pay off his debts and issue his certificate of discharge:
Provided that the default in payment of a debtor is caused by natural calamities, the
tribunal shall recommend the creditors for a moratorium for the payments of the debtor.
CHAPTER VI
CIVIL RECORD AND PENALTY
20. After issue of the order of bankruptcy by the trinbunal, the record of bankruptcy
shall remain on the debtors credit record and civil record till the next seven years along with
the certificate of discharge if issued under section 16.
21. Whoever make any mis-representation in the statement of Bankruptcy in the
credit or civil record shall be punished with imprisonment for one month and also with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees:
Provided that all sums realised by way of fines shall be credited in the Bankruptcy
Rehabilitation Fund.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
22. (1) The Presidency-Towns Insolvency Act, 1909 and the Provincial Insolvency
Act, 1920 are hereby repealed.
(2) The repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any Act in which such
enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to and this Act shall not affect the
validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or suffered, or any
right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy or
proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty,
obligation, liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any
past act or thing;
23. The Central Government will from time to time, provide, after  due appropriation
made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for crrying out the purposes
of this Act.
24. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the appropriate
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
25. The appropriate Government, may be notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Record of
Bankruptcy
in civil and
credit record.
Misrepresen-
tation of
Statement of
Bankruptcy
or other
records as a
purnishable
offence.
Repeal and
Saving.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
3 of 1909
5 of 1920.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

7
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India’s ranking fell from 109 to 132 among 185 economies in 2012 when it comes to
ease of resolving insolvency issues according to the World Bank. Personal Bankruptcy
laws help people who are no longer in a position to pay off their debts and are distressed
due to coercive methods used by creditors, thus unable to make a fresh start. The personal
bankruptcy framework in India is weak and barely has provisions for any statutes, apart
from the few passed almost over a century ago, during the British regime, namely, The
Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 and The Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909. The Bill
repeals the two archaic laws.
In the context of massive growth of different types of loans, credit card usage and the
like, the law should also be progressive and effective. Bankruptcy and insolvency is specified
in the entry 9 of the concurrent list of the Seventh Schedule of the constitution of India. The
Centre as well as the State Government have the power to legislative on the same and both
share responsibility to take to task the matter of bankruptcy. The Bill is an attempt to make
a comprehensive legislation regarding personal bankruptcy. It vests upon the appropriate
Government to establish Special Tribunals to admit petitions of Bankruptcy and issue
notices to hear cases of personal bankruptcy.
The Bill lays down the guidelines for functioning of the tribunal as well as safeguards
to rehabilitate debtors and make for a transparent, expeditious and just procedure for settling
debt. There are separate provisions for farmers who are debtors, in which case, the legislation
is comparatively liberal with regard to the allocation of time. The record of bankruptcy will
be present in the civil and credit record of the person for a period of 7 years from the date of
issue of the order of bankruptcy by the tribunal along with the Certificate of Discharge.
The Bill also provides for a Bankruptcy Rehabilitation Fund for the revival of those
declared bankrupt along with imposing penalty in the form of fine or imprisonment, or both
in the event of misrepresentation of the Statement of Bankruptcy in the civil and credit
record of any person. The remuneration earned thereof would be deposited in the Bankruptcy
Rehabilitation Fund.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK GUPTA

8
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of this Bill requires the Central Government to set up special tribunals to hear
cases of personal bankruptcy. Clause 18 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a
Bankruptcy Rehabilitation Fund by the Central Government. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted,
will involve a non-recurring expenditure towards establishing tribunals and the rehabilitation
fund of around one hundred crore rupees.
The Bill will also involve a recurring expenditure towards the salaries of those serving
at the tribunal and for maintenance of records and proceedings amounting to ten crore
rupees annually. Clause 23 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted will
involve therefore expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India which as of we can not
be precisely estimated.

9
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 25 of this Bill gives power to the appropriate Government to make necessary
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for mechanism through which a person unable to pay off debts can declare
bankruptcy and subject himself to rehabilitation and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2153RS(S3)—07-08-2015.