1
Bill No. XXXVI of 2012
THE RURAL ELECTRIFICATION AUTHORITY BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Rural Electrification Authority to ensure
uninterrupted electricity supply to farmers for their agricultural activities and for
providing at least one bulb connection to every dwelling in rural India and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rural Electrification Authority Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON
THE 23RD NOVEMBER, 2012
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Authority" means the Rural Electrification Authority established under
section 3;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Rural Electrification
Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform such duties and functions
assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of not more than five members appointed by the Central
Government from amongst the persons having domain, knowledge and professional expertise
in the field of power generation, electrical maintenance, distribution and agriculture of
whom at least two shall be from amongst the farmers.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint one of the members to be the Chairman of
the Authority.
(4) The head office of the Rural Electrification Authority shall be in Delhi.
(5) The Authority may appoint  a Secretary and such number of officers and employees
as it considers necessary on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(6) The qualifications and experience, term of office and allowances of the members,
officers and employees of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. The powers and function of the Authority shall, inter alia, include,—
(i) to develop a sound, adequate and uniform National Rural Electrification Policy;
(ii) to provide uninterrupted power supply to the farmers for irrigation and other
agricultural purposes;
(iii) to provide uninterrupted power supply to the village and cottage industries
and village artisans engaged in self-employment in villages;
(iv) to provide at least one bulb connection of electricity in every dwelling unit
of each village in the country;
(v) to give attention to the drought prone areas by establishing power units for
power generation under public private partnership exclusively to cater the requirements
of the rural sector in the country;
(vi) to carry out the investigations and to collect and record the data pertaining
to the generation, distribution and utilisation of power in the rural sector and the
development of the power resources in the rural areas;
(vii) to co-ordinate the activities of the national and state planning agencies
particularly in relation to the control and utilisation of power resources for the rural
sector;
(viii) to advise the Government and other agencies on production, distribution
and utilisation of power and such other related matters from time to time.
5. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law, adequate funds for the rural electrification works to be
undertaken by the Authority and for the administrative expenses of the Authority.
Definitions.
9 of 1910
54 of 1948
Establishment
of the Rural
Electrification
Authority.
Powers and
functions of
the Authority.
Funds for the
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. The Authority shall have a Fund to be called the Rural Electricity Development
Fund to which all moneys received from the Central and State Governments for the purposes
of rural electrification and from all other sources such as the rural consumers, private
sector generating electricity for rural sector, etc. shall be credited and all payments by the
Authority towards electrification expenditure shall be made therefrom.
7. The Authority shall establish new power generating stations in any area in which
it is required by any scheme of the Authority.
8. The Authority may supply electricity to the farmers at such subsidised rates as may
be prescribed from time to time.
9. It shall be the duty of the Authority to provide one bulb connection and supply of
electricity thereto free of cost to the Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe and Other Backward
Class including minorities and below poverty line families residing in rural areas of the
country.
10. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to and not in derogation of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and the Electricity
(Supply) Act, 1948.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Rural
Electricity
Development
Fund.
Authority to
establish new
power
generating
stations.
Authority to
provide
electricity at
subsidised rates
to farmers.
One Bulb
connection to
be free of cost
for the
Scheduled
Caste,
Scheduled
Tribe and
Other
Backward
Class including
minorities and
below poverty
line residing in
rural areas.
Effect of other
laws.
Power to make
rules.
9 of 1910
54 of 1948
10
15
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is facing an acute shortage of power in the industrial sector, the agricultural
sector and the household. Our power stations are producing electricity much below their
generating capacity whereas the demand for electricity is increasing day-by-day in all the
sectors. It has been observed that while distributing the electricity, the Electricity Boards
and Undertakings give priority to the urban areas and the industrial sector thereby neglecting
the rural areas particularly the agricultural sector. Very often it has been seen that the electricity
meant for rural areas is diverted to the urban areas. Nobody bothers when the electricity is
cut off to the rural areas for days together even if the crops of the hapless farmers are drying
in the absence of the water.
Seventy per cent. of the population of the country is living in villages and lacks
facilities to live a decent life and sufficient earning to meet both ends. This compels the new
generation to migrate to towns. This migration is not only disturbing the development of the
towns, but also destabilising the village economy. It is the need of the day that all
infrastructural facilities and employment opportunities be provided to promote the young
generation in their development at the place of their stay only. As most of the population in
the country is engaged in agriculture and agriculture-related small and cottage industries, it
is our bounden duty to give uninterrupted. power supply to the agricultural sector. It is also
necessary to provide at least one bulb connection to every household including every
dwelling unit in the country. To achieve these objects, it is proposed to establish a Rural
Electrification Authority to provide electricity exclusively to the rural areas and uninterrupted
electricity supply to the agricultural sector including drought prone areas and give at least
one bulb connection to every household in the villages.
Hence this Bill.
SHADI  LAL  BATRA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the Rural Electrification Authority.
Clause 5 provides that Central Government shall provide funds to the Authority. Clause 6
provides for creation of a rural electricity development fund to which the Central and State
Governments shall contribute for the purposes of rural electrification and from all others
sources such as rural consumer, private sector generating electricity for rural sector  etc.
shall be credited.
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that Rural Electrification  Authority shall establish new
power generation station. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India and it is difficult to calculate the expense at this juncture. A non-recurring
expenditure of rupees one hundred crore may also involve from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Rural Electrification Authority to ensure uninterrupted
electricity supply to farmers for their agricultural activities and for providing at least one
bulb connection to every dwelling in rural India and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Shadi Lal Batra, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3502RS(3)—26-11-2012.