THE PLAY SCHOOLS (REGULATIONS) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of play schools and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Play Schools (Regulations) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such a date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointed day" means the date of the commencement of this Act;
Bill No. XXXV of 2017
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 15TH DECEMBER, 2017

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means, in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "authority" means the Play Schools Education Authority constituted by
appropriate Government under section 3;
(d) "play school" means any elementary or kindergarten school or formative
centre or institution including private schools imparting pre-school or nursery education
to children before their enrolment in the first standard; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under the Act.
3. (1) With effect from the appointed day, the appropriate Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an authority to be known as the Play Schools
Education Authority to regulate within its territorial jurisdiction, the functioning of play
schools and conditions of service of teachers and other staff working in such schools.
(2) The authority shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the appropriate Government; and
(b) a maximum of ten members to be appointed by the appropriate Government:
Provided that the number of members shall, in no case, be less than six at any given time.
(3) The Chairperson and other members referred to in sub-section (2) shall be chosen
from amongst the persons who have special knowledge and at least ten years of experience
in the field of education.
(4) The term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff to
assist the authority, as it, considers necessary, for its efficient and effective functioning.
4.  (1) It shall be the duty of the authority to regulate the functioning of play schools
and conditions of service of teachers and other staff, under its jurisdiction.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the authority may,—
(a) fix the student-teacher ratio;
(b) put a ceiling on the tuition fee and other charges;
(c) fix the hours of duty of teachers and other staff;
(d) monitor the funds collected by the schools;
(e) suggest the type of infrastructure to be maintained and the safety conditions to be
ensured;
(f ) prescribe curriculum and extra-curricular activities;
(g) require setting up of a grievance redressal mechanism; and
(h) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
5. The Authority may, with the previous approval of the appropriate Government,
make regulations consistent with this Act for regulating minimum qualifications for recruitment
and the conditions of service of teachers of play schools.
6. The salary, allowances, medical facilities, pension, gratuity, provident fund and
other benefits of teachers of play school shall not be less than those of teachers of
corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Constitution
of the Play
Schools
Education
Authority.
Function of
the Authority.
Power to
make
regulation.
Salary,
allowances
and other
benefits to
teachers.

3
7. No play school shall charge a tuition fee or collect other charges or receive payments,
in excess of the amounts specified by the authority:
Provided that every play school shall obtain prior approval of the authority for charging
tuition fee or collecting other charges, exceeding the amounts specified by the authority.
8.  If the appropriate Government, on receipt of a report from the authority, is satisfied
that the managing committee of any play school has failed to perform its duties imposed on
it by or under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder and it is expedient in the
interest of the school education to close down such school, it may, after giving reasonable
opportunity of being heard to the managing committee of the school, order closing down of
such school for such period as it may consider appropriate.
9.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law or rules made thereunder for the time being in force.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section after the expiry of two
years from the appointed day.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
11. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Fee and other
Charges.
Closing down
of Play
Schools.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The pre-schooling and early childhood care is predominantly prevalent in the private
sector. The play schools have mushroomed all over the country, especially in urban areas.
Foundation of mental and physical development of little children is laid in play schools. In
the absence of any regulatory framework, complaints of parents and non-Government
organisations are not addressed by these schools. As play schools are laying foundation for
the child's future, they should be governed by an appropriate legislation.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to regulate the functioning of play schools in the country not
only to ensure quality education and guidance in play schools but also to protect the
guardians from unnecessary exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  T.  SUBBARAMI  REDDY
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall, within its territorial
jurisdiction, constitute Play Schools Education Authority to regulate the functioning of the
play schools. The expenditure relating to the States shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of Union territories shall
be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that sum of rupees two crores
will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty lakh is also likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Play Schools Education Authority to regulate the
minimum qualifications or recruitment and conditions of teachers and other staff of play
schools. Clause 11 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are
matters of administrative details and procedure and as such, the delegation of Legislative
powers is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2893RS(S3)—15.12.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of play schools and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy,  M.P.)