Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of  section 2.
G:\BILL 2002\RS/666RS PM5
THE MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to amend the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (Amendment)
Act, 2002.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act),—
(i) in clause (a), for the word "lunatic", the words "mentally ill person" shall be
substituted;
(ii) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(b) "mentally ill person" means a person who is in need for treatment by
reason of any mental disorder other than mental retardation;'.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 4), in clause ( a), for the word
"lunatic", the words "mentally ill person" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of  section 3.
Bill No. XXXV of 2002
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
34 of 1971.
5
10
15

2
4. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“4. No termination of pregnancy shall be made in accordance with this Act at
any place other than—
(a) a hospital established or maintained by Government, or
(b) a place for the time being approved for the purpose of this Act by
Government or a District Level Committee constituted by that Government
with the Chief Medical officer or District. Health officer as the Chairperson of
the said Committee:
 Provided that the District Level Committee shall consist of not less
than three and not more than five members including the Chairperson as
the Government may specify from time to time.
5. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section ( 2) and the Explanation thereto, the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, the
termination of pregnancy by a person who is not a registered medical practitioner
shall be an offence punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years under that
Code, and that Code shall, to this extent, stand modified.
(3) Whoever terminates any pregnancy in a place other than that mentioned
in section 4, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years.
(4)  Any person being owner of a place which is not approved under
clause (b) of section 4 shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven
years.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "owner"
in relation to a place means any person who is the administrative head or
otherwise responsible for the working or maintenance of a hospital or place, by
whatever name called, where the pregnancy may be terminated under this Act.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, so much of the provisions
of clause ( d) of section 2 as relate to the possession, by registered medical
practitioner, of experience or training in gynaecology and obstetrics shall not
apply.".
45 of 1860.
2
Substitution of
new section
for section 4.
Place where
pregnancy
may be
terminated.
Amendment
of section 5.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 legalised termination of pregnancy
on various socio-medical grounds. This Act is aimed at eliminating abortion by untrained
persons and in unhygienic conditions, thus reducing maternal morbidity and mortality.
2. In 1997, an expert group was constituted to review the aforesaid Act with a view to
making it more relevant to the present environment. The National Commission for Women
also suggested certain amendments in the Act to remove provisions which were
discriminatory to women. Taking into consideration the suggestions of the National
Commission for Women and experience gained in the implementation of this Act, the
expert group recommended certain amendments to the Act.
3. Accordingly, the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (Amendment) Bill, 2002
provides for—
(i) substituting the word "lunatic" by the words "mentally ill person";
(ii) amending section 4 with a view to delegating powers to the Government to
approve places for medical termination of pregnancy and constituting District Level
Committees to be headed by the Chief Medical Officer/District Health Officer;
(iii) amending section 5 so as to prescribe punishment of rigorous imprisonment
of not less than two years and extending up to seven years—
(a) to clinics which are not authorised to conduct abortions; and
(b) to persons who are not registered medical practitioners with requisite
experience or training for terminating pregnancy.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW DELHI; C. P. THAKUR.
The 13th April, 2002.
3

4
G:\BILL 2002\RS/666RSPM5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY ACT, 1971
(34 OF 1971)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “guardian” means a person having the care of the person of a minor or a
lunatic;
(b) “lunatic” has the meaning assigned to it in section 3 of the Indian Lunacy
Act, 1912;
* * * * *
3. (1) * * * * *
(4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, or,
who, having attained the age of eighteen years, is a lunatic, shall be terminated except with
the consent in writing of her guardian.
* * * * *
4. No termination of pregnancy shall be made in accordance with this Act at any
place other than—
(a) a hospital established or maintained by Government, or
(b) a place for the time being approved for the purpose of this Act by
Government.
5. (1) * * * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, the termination of
a pregnancy by a person who is not a registered medical practitioner, shall be an offence
punishable under that Code, and that Code shall, to this extent, stand modified.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, so much of the provisions of clause
(d) of section 2 as relate to the possession, by a registered medical practitioner, of experience
or training in gynaecology and obstetrics shall not apply.
* * * * *
Definitions.
When
pregnancies
may be
terminated by
registered
medical
practitioners.
Place where
pregnancy
may be
terminated.
Sections 3 and
4 when not to
apply.
4 of 1912.
45 of 1860.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971.
————
(Dr. C.P. Thakur, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—666RS—29.04.2002.