THE INDIAN FOREST (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Forest Act, 1927.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Forest (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
chapter V , for section 35 the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“35. The State Government shall not exercise any control over any forest or land
not being the property of State Government except in accordance with law passed by
Parliament for the purpose.”
3. For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“36. The State Government shall frame rules for the purpose of carrying out the
objects of this chapter.”
4.  Section 37 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
5.  Section 38 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Short title, and
commencement.
Bill No. XXXVI of 2016
Substitution
of new
section for
section 35.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 36.
Omission of
section 37.
Omission of
section 38.
5
15
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH AUGUST, 2016

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Indian Forest Act, 1927 provides for Reserved Forests, Village Forests and Protected
Forests. However, Chapter V of the Act contain section 35 to 38 to regulate forest and lands
which are not the property of the State Government, popularly called as ‘Private Forests’.
Some States Governments have started doing surveys to identify Private Forests.
However, during the surveys carried, vast areas of plantations, agriculture, horticulture,
garden lands have been included and identified as ‘Private Forest’. In most of the cases,
owners of land, which have been declared as Private Forests, are not aware that their lands,
have been so declared. Before the start of these surveys no policy guidelines were announced
by the State Governments, who were entrusted with the duty of doing survey.
In a number of cases, the land which is covered by ‘Private Forests’ is a mixed land
where agriculture, horticulture, plantations, garden lands exists side by side. Hence, there is
an urgent need to enact an exhaustive legislation on forests combining the Indian Forest
Act, 1927 and the Forests (conservation) Act, 1980 and all other related Acts.
However, in any case, no land should be declared as ‘Private Forests’, without enacting
any legislation on the subject as, the present practice of notifying Private Forests, amounts
to criminal trespass, which should be halted.
Hence this Bill
SHANTARAM NAIK
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN FOREST ACT, 1927
(NO. 16 OF 1927)
** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **
CHAPTER V
35. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulate or
prohibit in any forest or waste-land:—
(a) the breaking up or clearing of land for cultivation;
(b) the pasturing of cattle; or
(c) the firing or clearing of the vegetation.
when such regulation or prohibition appears necessary for any of the following
purposes:
(i) for protection against storms, winds, rolling stones, floods and avalanches;
(ii) for the preservation of the soil on the ridges and slopes and in the valleys of
hilly tracts, the prevention of land slips or of the formation of ravines, and torrents, or
the protection of land against erosion, or the deposit thereon of sand, stones or
gravel;
(iii) for the maintenance of a water-supply in springs, rivers and tanks;
(iv) for the protection of roads, bridges, railways and other lines of communication;
(v) for the preservation of the public health.
(2) The State Government may, for any such purpose, construct at its own expense, in
or upon any forest or waste-land, such work as it thinks fit.
(3) No notification shall be made under sub-section (1) nor shall any work be begun
under sub-section (2), until after the issue of a notice to the owner of such forest or land
calling on him to show  cause, within a reasonable period to be specified in such notice, why
such notification should not be made or work constructed, as the case may be, and until his
objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of the same, have been heard
by an officer duly appointed in that behalf and have been considered by the State Government.
36. (1) In case of neglect of, or wilful disobedience to, any regulation or prohibition
under section 35, or if the purposes of any work to be constructed under the section so
require, the State Government may, after notice in writing to the owner of such forest or land
and after considering his objections, if any, place the same under the control of a Forest
Officer, and may declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act relating to reserved
forests shall apply to such forest or land.
(2) The net profits, if any, arising from the management of such forest or land shall be
paid to the said owner.
37. (1) In any case under this Chapter in which the State Government considers that,
in lieu of placing the forest or land under the control of a Forest Officer, the same should be
acquired for public purposes, the State Government may proceed to acquire it in the manner
provided by the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).
(2) The owner of any forest or land comprised in any notification under section 35 may,
at any time not less than three or more than twelve years from the date thereof, require that
such forest or land shall be acquired for public purposes, and the State Government shall
require such forest or land accordingly.
Protection of
forests for
special
purposes.
Power to
assume
management
of forests.
Expropriation
of forests in
certain cases.
3

4
38. (1) The owner of any land or, if there more than one owner thereof, the owners of
shares therein amounting in the aggregate at least two-thirds thereof may, with a view to the
formation or conservation of forests thereon, represent in writing to the Collector their
desire.
(a) that such land be managed on their behalf by the Forest Officer as a reserved
or a protected forest on such terms as may be mutually agreed upon; or
(b) that all or any of the provisions of this Act be applied to such land.
(2) In either case, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
apply to such land such provisions of this Act as it thinks suitable to the circumstances
thereof and as may be desired by the applicants.
** ** ** ** ** ** **
Protection of
forests at
request of
owners.

GMGIPMRND—2252RS(S3)—05.08.2016.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Forest Act, 1927.
————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P .)