1
THE INDIAN NATIONAL ARMY REGIMENT BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution and regulation of a new army regiment to be known
as the Indian National Army Regiment for defending the borders of India against
all foreign enemies and in honour of the members of Indian
National Army of the Azad Hind Fauj and for
matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian National Army Regiment Bill, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. XXXV of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 22ND JULY, 2022
5

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the Context otherwise requires,—
(a) "battalion" means the unit of the Regiment constituted as a battalion by
the Central Government;
(b) "Commandant" when used in any provision of the Act, with respect to
any unit of the Regiment means the officer whose duty is under the rules of
discharge with respect to that unit, the functions of a Commandant in regard to
the matters of the description referred to in that provision;
(c) "Criminal Court" means a court of ordinary criminal Justice in any part of
India;
(d) "Deputy-Inspector General" means a Deputy Inspector General of the
Regiment appointed under section 4;
(e) "Director General" means the Director-General of the Regiment appointed
under section 4;
(f) "Government" means the Central Government;
(g) "Inspector-General" means the Inspector-General of the Regiment
appointed under section 4;
(h) "notification" means notification published in the Official Gazette;
(i) "offence" means any act or omission punishable under this Act and
includes a civil offence;
(j) "officer" means a person appointed or in pay as an officer of the Regiment
but does not include a subordinate officer or an under officer;
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(1) "Regiment" means Indian National Army Regiment constituted under
section 3;
(m) "regiment custody" means the arrest or confinement of a member of the
Regiment according to rules;
(n) "rule" means, a rule made under this Act;
(o) "Security Regiment Court" means a court for trial of offences under the
Act, to be converted in such manner as may be prescribed;
(p) "superior officer" when used in relation to a person subject to this Act,
means—
(i) any member of the Regiment to whose command such person is for
the time being, subject in accordance with the rules; and
(ii) any officer of higher rank or class or of a higher grade in the same
class; and includes when such person is not an officer, a subordinate officer
or an under officer of higher rank, class or grade;
(q) "subordinate officer" means a person appointed or in pay as Subedar-
Major, as a Sub-Inspector of the Regiment; and
(r) "under-officer" means a Head Constable, Naik and Lance Naik of the
Regiment.
3. ( 1) There shall be an armed Regiment of the Union called the Indian National
Army Regiment with its headquarter situated in Kalimpong district, in the State of
West Bengal to ensure the security of the country.
Constitution
of the Indian
National Army
Regiment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Regiment shall be constituted in
such manner as may be prescribed and the conditions of service of the members of the
Regiment shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. ( 1) The general superintendence, direction and control of the Regiment shall
vest in and be exercised by the Central Government and subject thereto and to the
provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder, the command and superintendence
of the Regiment shall vest in an officer to be appointed by the Central Government as
the Director-General of the Regiment.
(2) The Director-General shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be
assisted by such member of the rank of Inspector General, Deputy Inspector General,
Commandants and other officers as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The persons to be enrolled to the Regiment, the mode of enrolment and the
procedure for enrolment shall be such as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the rules made thereunder,
every person who has, for a continuous period of three months been in receipt of pay
as a person enrolled under this Act and borne on the rolls of the Regiment shall be
deemed to have been duly enrolled.
6. Every member of the Regiment shall be liable to serve in any part of India as
well as outside India as and when required by the Government during his term of
engagement.
7. No member of the Regiment shall be at liberty, —
(a) to resign his appointment during the term of this engagement; or
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of this appointment,
except with the prior permission in writing of the prescribed authority.
8. Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during the pleasure of the
President.
9. Subject to the provisions of this Act and rules, the Central Government may
dismiss or remove any person from service.
10. A subordinate officer or an under-officer or other enrolled person who is
retired, discharged, released, removed or dismissed from service shall be presented by
the officer, to whose command he is subject, with a certificate in the language which is
the mother tongue of such person and also in Hindi or English language setting forth—
(a) the authority terminating his service;
(b) the cause for such termination; and
(c) the full period of his service in the Regiment.
11. (1) The Director-General or any Inspector General may dismiss or remove from
the service or reduce to a lower grade or rank or ranks any person subject to this Act
other than an officer.
(2) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector General or any prescribed
officer may dismiss or remove from the service any person under his command other
than an officer or subordinate officer of such rank or ranks as may be prescribed.
(3) Any officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector General or any prescribed
officer may reduce to a lower grade or rank or ranks any person under his command
except an officer or a subordinate officer.
Direction and
control of the
Regiment.
Enrolment to
the Regiment.
Liability for
service outside
India.
Resignation
and withdrawal
from the post.
Tenure of
service.
Termination
of service by
Central
Government.
Certificate of
termination of
service.
Dismissal,
removal or
reduction by
the Director
General and by
other officer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(4) The exercise of any power under this section shall be subject to the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
12. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences,
that is to say,—
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other person to cause any
mutiny in the Regiment or in the Army, Naval or Air Forces of India or any forces
co-operating therewith; or
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavor to
suppress the same; or
(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny
or of any intention to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not without delay,
give information thereof to his commandant or other superior officer; or
(e) endeavors to seduce any person in the Regiment or in the Army, Naval or
Air Forces of India or any forces co-operating therewith from his duty or allegiance
to the Union,
shall, on conviction by a Security Regiment Court, be liable to suffer death or
such less punishment as is mentioned in this Act.
13. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences
that is to say—
(a) absents himself without leave; or
(b) without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him; or
(c) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time appointed at the
parade or place fixed for exercise or duty; or
(d) when on parade, or on the line of march without sufficient cause or
without leave from his senior officer, quits the parade or line of march; or
(e) without leave from his senior officer or without due cause, absents himself
from any school when duly ordered to attend there,
shall, on conviction by a Security Regiment Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend upto five years.
14. Any officer, subordinate officer or under officer applies criminal force on a
person that holds such a post as is under this Act or misbehave with him, shall on
conviction by a Security Regiment Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend upto ten years.
15. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences
that is to say—
(a) commits extortion; or
(b) without proper authority exacts from any person money, provisions or
service,
shall, on conviction by a Security Regiment Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend upto ten years.
16. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences,
that is to say—
(a) make a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing
or having reason to believe such accusation to be false; or
Mutiny.
Absence
without leave.
Misbehaviour
with a senior
officer.
Extortion and
corruption.
False
accusations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(b) in lodging a complaint against any person subject to this Act makes any
statement affecting the character of such person, knowing or having reason to
believe such statement to be false, or knowingly and willfully suppresses any
materials facts,
shall, on conviction by a Security Regiment Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned.
17. Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in such manner as to show a
willful defiance of authority any lawful command given personally by his senior officer
in the execution of his office whether the same is given orally or in writing or by signal
or shall on conviction by a Security Regiment Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend upto twenty years or such less punishment as a provided
in this Act.
18. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences,
that is to say—
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as witness before a Security
Regiment Court, willfully or  without reasonable excuse makes default in
attendance; or
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a
Security Regiment Court to be taken or made; or
(c) refuses to provide or deliver any document in his power or control legally
required by a Security Regiment Court to be produced or delivered by him; or
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question which he is by law
bound to answer; or
(e) is guilty of contempt of the Security Regiment Court by using insulting
or threatening language or by causing any interruption of disturbance in the
proceedings of such court,
shall on conviction by a Security Regiment Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is mentioned in
this Act.
19. (1) Punishment may be inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons
subject to this Act and convicted by Security Regiment court according to the scale
following, that is to say—
(a) death; or
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life of any other lesser term
but excluding imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Regiment
Custody; or
(c) dismissal from service; or
(d) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Regiment custody;
or
(e) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or a place in the list of
their rank in the case of under-officer; or
(f) forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part of the
service for the purpose of promotion; or
(g) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any
other prescribed purpose; or
Disobedience
to Senior
Officer.
Offence
relating to
Security
Regiment
Court.
Punishment
awardable by
Security
Regiment
Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(h) fine in respect of civil offences; or
(i) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of person below the
rank of an under-officer; or
(j) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months
for an offence committed in active duty; or
(k) forfeiture in case of person sentenced to dismissal from service of all the
arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time to
such dismissal; or
(l) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage
occasioned by the offence for which he is convicted is made good.
(2) Each of the punishment specified in sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to be
inferior in degree to every punishment preceding it in the above scale.
20. A Commandant or such officer as is with the consent of the Central Government,
specified by the Director-General may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a
person subject to this Act, otherwise than as an officer or a subordinate officer who is
charged with an offence under this Act and award such person to the extent prescribed,
one or more of the following punishment, that is to say—
(a) imprisonment in Regiment custody upto twenty-eight days; or
(b) detention upto twenty-eight days; or
(c) confinement to the lines upto twenty-eight days; or
(d) extra guards or duties; or
(e) deprivation of any special position or special employments or any acting
rank or reduction to a lower grade of pay; or
(f) forfeiture of good service and good conduct pay; or
(g) severe reprimand or reprimand; or
(h) fine upto fourteen days pay in any one month; or
(i) deduction from his pay of any sum required to make good such
compensation for any expense, loss, damage, or destruction caused by him to the
Central Government or to any building or property.
21. (1) An officer who is not below the rank of Deputy Inspector General or any
other officer specified by the Director General with the consent of the Central Government
shall initiate proceedings against any subordinate officer or one of the rank of
subordinate officer who is the accused of any offence under this Act, in the prescribed
manner and shall award one or more punishment of the following punishments, that is
to say—
(a) forfeiture of seniority or in the case of any of them whose promotion
depends upon the length of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of
promotion for a period not exceeding twelve months, but subject to the right of
the accused previous to the award to elect to be tried by a Security Regiment
Court; or
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand; or
(c) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage
occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted is made good.
(2) In every case in which punishment has been awarded under sub-section ( 1),
certified true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded in the prescribed manner by
Minor
Punishment.
Punishment to
persons of and
below the rank
of subordinate
officer by
Deputy
Inspector
General and
others.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
the officer awarding the punishment to the prescribed senior authority who may, if the
punishment awarded appears to him to be illegal, unjust or excessive, cancel, vary or
remit the punishment and make such other direction as may be appropriate in the
circumstances of the case.
22. (1) Whenever any weapon or part of a weapon or ammunition, forming part of
the equipment of a unit of the Regiment, is lost or stolen, an officer not lower than the
rank of the commandant of a battalion may, after making such enquiry as he thinks fit
and subject to such rules, impose a collective line upon the subordinate officers, under-
officers and men of such a unit or upon so many of them, as in his judgment be held
responsible for such loss or theft.
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage on the pay of the individuals on
whom it falls.
23. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
24. The Central Government may give such directions to the Government of State
concerned within the territorial jurisdiction of a State for carrying out in the State any
provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder.
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Collective
fines.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to give
directions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Indian National Army also known as Azad Hind Fauj, under the command of
Netaji Subash Chandra Bose, led an epic fight for liberation of India through Myanmar.
Indian National Army Regiment shall honour and keep alive the great contribution of
the Azad Hind Fauj and also inspire this Regiment.
Indian National Army Regiment may form brigades in the name of great soldiers of
Indian National Army such as Captain Mohan Singh Battalion, Rash Behari Bose
Battalion, Netaji Subash Chandra Bose Battalion, and so on and so forth. The ideals
and sacrifices of The Indian National Army soldiers shall inspire this Regiment for time
immemorial.
The women wing of the Indian National Army Regiment may be called Rani of
Jhansi Battalion, just as it were in Azad Hind Fauj. This Battalion shall uphold the
women power and bravery of Indian women to defend the nation.
Every Indian irrespective of sex, caste, creed or religion, etc. shall be eligible to
join this truly complete Indian specific regiment, belonging to all Indians as a whole.
Upholding the concept of article 16 of the Constitution of India in both letter and spirit,
no citizen shall be discriminated on the basis of race, caste, religion, creed, descent or
place of birth in respect of joining this Regiment.
Indian National Army Regiment shall not only strengthen the security of the
borders but will also act as a gesture of respect to the great sacrifices and values of
Azad Hind Fauj.
Hence, this Bill.
SHANTA  CHHETRI
8

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Indian National Army
Regiment. Clause 4 provides for appointment of certain officers of the Regiment.
Clause 23 lays down that Central Government shall provide requisite funds for carrying
out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. At this juncture, it is not possible to quantify the funds
that may be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
10

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution and regulation of a new army regiment to be known as
the Indian National Army Regiment for defending the borders of India against
all foreign enemies and in honour of the members of Indian
National Army of the Azad Hind Fauj and for
matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Shanta Chhetri, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—650RS(S3)—25-07-2022.