AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. XXXVII of 2024 
THE ASHA WORKERS (REGULARIZATION OF 
SERVICE AND OTHER BENEFITS) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for regularization of the services of ASHA workers by 
 giving them the status of a permanent employee of the 
 Government and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
      BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth  Year of the Republic of 
I
ndia  as follows:– 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the ASHA Workers (Regularization of Service
and Other Benefits) Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
b
y notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, and 
commencement. 
 
10 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "ASHA worker" means Accredited Social Health Activist working
as community health worker deployed as a part of the National Health
Mission of the Government of India;
Definitions. 

2 
(b) “Committee” means the Committee for Welfare of ASHA workers
constituted under section 5 of this Act; and
(c) " prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Regularization of 
services of ASHA 
workers. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, take all such steps as may be necessary to regularize th e
s
ervices of ASHA workers and confer the status of not less than that
of Group 'C' employees of the Central Government on all such ASHA
workers who are serving in the National Health Mission immediately
before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every ASHA worker, whose service has been regularized, shall be
entitled to such tenure, terms and conditions of service including
remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal
benefits as are available to Group "C" or above employees of the
Central Government, as the case may be.
(3) E
very ASHA worker deployed after the commencement of this Act 
shall be conferred the status of not less than that of a Group 'C'
employee of the Central Government and shall be entitled to all other
benefits as mentioned in sub-section (2).
 
5 
 
 
10 
 
15 
Accommodation 
to ASHA workers. 
4. The Central Government shall take steps to provide residential
accommodation to all the ASHA workers within the vicinity of their
workplace, in such manner as may be prescribed.
 
20 
Committee for 
welfare of ASHA 
Workers
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Committee to be known as the Committee for
Welfare of ASHA workers for the purpose of socio -economic
development of ASHA workers and to advise the Central Government 
on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of,-
(i) a  Chairperson;
(ii) a Vice-Chairperson; and
(iii) three Members;
to be appointed by the Central Government. 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of
officers and staff, as it may deem fit, to assist the Committee in
carrying out the duties assigned to it under this Act.
(4) The qualifications and experience, term of office, salaries,
remuneration and other allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Members 
and officers and staff of the Committee, shall be such as ma y be 
prescribed. 
(5) The Committee shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
2
5 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
Duties of the 
Committee
6. It shall be the duty of the Committee to—
(a) investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
provided for ASHA workers under any law in force at the time of the
commencement of this Act, or under any other law for the time being
in force or under any order of the Central or State Government and to
evaluate the working of such safeguards and to present to the 
Central
 
45 

3 
 
5 
 
10 
1
5 
Government, annually and at such other intervals, as the Commission 
may deem fit, reports on the working of those safeguards;  
(b
) inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of
rights and safeguards of the ASHA workers as received by it, in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(
c) advise the Central Government on the socio -economic
development of the ASHA workers and to evaluate the progress of
their development;
(d
) bring about synergy between technology and public policy and
recommend measures for enhancing the income and employment
potential of ASHA workers through training and reforms in the health 
sector; and
(
e) discharge such other functions, as it may consider necessary, in
relation to the protection, welfare, development and advancement of
ASHA workers and any other matters incidental to the above -said
duties.
 
20 
2
5 
7. The Committee shall, while investigating any matter referred to it in under
clause (b) of section 6, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit
and, in particular in respect of the following matters, namely,–
(a
) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any
pa
rt of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court
or office; 
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses a nd
documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribe.
Committee to 
have powers of 
Civil Court 
 
30 
 
35 
8. (1) The Committee shall prepare every year, in such form and within such
time as may be prescribed by the Central Government an annual report
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(2
) The Central Government shall ca use the annual report of the
Committee to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a
memorandum of action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations of the Committee and the reasons for non-acceptance of 
the recommendations, if any, within a period of one year from the date of
receipt of such report
(s).
Annual Reports. 
 
40 
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law on this behalf, grant such sums of money to the
Committee, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
Central 
Government to 
provide 
adequate funds 
to the 
Committee. 
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 

4 
Power to remove 
difficulties.
11.
Power to make 
rules.
12.
If any difficulty arises i n giving effect t o the pr ovisions of this A c t, t he 
Central G overnment m ay m ake s uch o rder or gi ve s uch direction, n ot 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary 
or expedient for removing such difficulty.
(1)
The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make r
ules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House o f Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions afores
aid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
ASHA workers, the Accredited Social Health Activists, are working under the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as part of the National Health Mission 
contributing remarkable service in the h ealth sector. The ASHA workers work as a 
link between the Department of Health & Family Welfare and the common man to 
create awareness and promote health activities in the country. The contributions of 
ASHA workers help to improve the health standards of the country. They are 
promoters of various schemes of the Central Government and State Governments and 
ensuring the health of the common man. However, they do not have job security and 
the honorarium given to them is not sufficient to sustain their living expenses.  This 
may, in the long term, adversely affect the effective implementation of various health 
programmes of the Government  including the I ntegrated Child Development 
Scheme. Therefore, considering the importance of their duties and service, it is 
imperative to take necessary steps for their upliftment.  
Th
e Bill provides for regularization of the services of ASHA workers by giving 
them the status of a permanent employee of the Government. It also proposes to 
establish a  Committee for Welfare of ASHA workers for the purpose of socio-
economic development of ASHA workers.  
    Hence this Bill. 
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for regulari zation of the services of ASHA 
workers and confers the status of not less than that of Group 'C' employees of the 
Central Government on all such workers. It also provides for such tenure, terms 
and conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund, 
retirement and other terminal benefits to the ASHA workers , as are available to 
Group ‘C’ employees of the Central Government. Clause 4 of the Bill stipulates 
that the Central Government shall take steps to provide housing facilities to all 
ASHA workers and helpers within the vicinity of their workplace. C lause 5 
provides for the constitution of the Committee for Welfare of ASHA workers for 
the purpose of socio- economic development of ASHA workers ; appointment of 
a Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson and Members therei n; appointment of such 
number of officers and staff as are required to assist the Committee and the salary 
and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of their service.  
Clause 9 provides that the Central Government, shall after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the 
Committee, as it may think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted , would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees three 
hundred crore is likely to be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also 
likely to be involved. 

7 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make provisions 
through an order or direction to remove any difficulties likely to arise in giving 
effect to the provisions of the Bill, if enacted. Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purpose of the Bill. As the 
orders and rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative 
powers is of a normal character 

RAJYA SABHA 
__________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for regularization of the services of ASHA workers by 
giving them the status of a permanent employee of the  
Government and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
__________ 
(Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)-023-10.02.2025 