1
THE VICTIMS OF ACID ATTACK, SEXUALLY ABUSED AND
TRAFFICKED GIRLS AND WOMEN (COMPENSATION
AND REHABILITA TION) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation measures to be undertaken and payment of adequate
compensation by the Central and State Governments to the victims of acid attacks,
sexually abused or raped and trafficked girls and women from weaker sections
and tribal and rural areas pushed for working as domestic maids or into
flesh trade by the placement agencies, pimps and traffickers and for
making it mandatory for the State to bear all costs of treatment
including cosmetic and other requisite surgeries for all
such victims and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
WHEREAS various criminal laws for the time being inforce in the country provide for
the penalty and criminal procedure to be followed against the accused of acid attack or rape
Bill No. XXXVI of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2015

2
or gangrape or trafficking and pushing girls and women into prostitution and such other
offences;
AND WHEREAS most of such laws are silent on the rehabilitation of the victims, huge
amounts required for their treatment including several surgeries including cosmetic surgeries
for acid attack victims and the adequate financial assistance to withstand the trauma and
lead a respectable life in the society;
NOW THEREFORE, it has become necessary to provide for the compensation and
rehabilitation of victims of acid attack, sexually abused and trafficked girls and women by the
State.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Acid Attack, Sexually Abused and Trafficked
Girls and Women (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "fund" means the National Abused and Attacked Girls and W omen
Rehabilitation and welfare fund established under section 4;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "sexually abused" means where rape or gangrape is committed on a girl or
women, as the case may be;
(e) "trafficking" includes procuring, luring or supplying a girl or women, as the
case may be, for forced domestic work or forcing into prostitution or any unlawful and
immoral purpose;
(f) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or the Immoral Traffic
(Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those
Acts.
3. (1) The Central Government shall promote and undertake such measures as it
thinks fit and appropriate and take various other rehabilitation and welfare measures for the
victims of acid attack, sexually abused and trafficked girls and women throughout the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the
rehabilitation and welfare measures referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) setting up of one stop crisis centres at conspicuous places in different parts
of the country for extending necessary help and facilities to girls and women covered
under this Act, by the Police and other agencies;
(b) extending all required medical facilities including surgeries of all kinds
irrespective of their numbers for acid attack and rape victims and with all medicines,
bandages, and indoor and outdoor facilities till they are fully cured and counselling
by specialists to the victims;
(c) making ex-gratia payment of not less than rupees five lakh to every victim of
acid attack or rape covered under this Act;
(d) rehabilitation measures such as employment in Government or its
organizations through reservation and other means or for making them self employed,
through Vocational training;
(e) such other facilities as may be prescribed;
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Rehabilitation
and welfare
measures for
the victims of
acid attack,
sexually
abused and
trafficked girls
and women.
45 of  1860.
2 of 1974.
104 of
1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the official
Gazette, establish a Rehabilitation and welfare Fund to be called the National Abused and
Attacked Girls and Women Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act
with initial corpus of rupees thirty thousand Crore to be provided by the Central Govern-
ment by due appropriation made by law by Parliament in this behalf and thereafter the
Central Government and Governments of the State shall contribute to the Fund to such
extent and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The fund shall also comprise money received from body corporates and financial
institutions of both domestic and international ones, individuals and bodies through
donations etc.
(3) All money received in the fund shall be defrayed for the purposes of this Act in
such manner as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall establish and run such number of shelter homes
as it may deem necessary for the girls and women covered under this Act who may opt for
living in such shelter homes and such girls and women shall be lodged in these shelter
homes with necessary facilities of daily life, as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, from time to time, provide adequate funds to the Governments of the States
and to the Fund, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
8. The Central Government may give such directions in writing to any State Government
as may appear to it to be necessary for carrying out excution in the State any of the provisions
of this Act or of any rule made thereunder.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being applicable to girls and women covered uner this Act.
11. The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Establishment
of National
Abused and
Attacked Girls
and Women
Rehabilitation
and Welfare
Fund.
Establishment
of shelter
homes.
Central
Government
to provide
funds for the
purposes of
the Act.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to issue
direction.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Of late, it is a matter of serious concern that crimes against girls and women
have increased manifold in our country particularly the cases of rapes and gangrapes
and acid attacks on the girls and women. Two years back, the brutual gangrape and
killing of Nirbhaya had shaken the entire Nation after which the law was amended to
make it more deterrent but despite that hardly any day goes without reports of rapes
and gangrapes being committed in the national capital and rest of the country.
These days the national capital is often referred to as the rape capital. The
victim of rape feels the trauma of being raped throughout her life and unfortunately
most of them do not lead a normal life. The society also blames the rape victims and
they remain unmarried and if rape is committed on a married woman she is normally
disowned by her husband and inlaws. In this backdrop of backlash, many rape victims
take the extreme step of committing suicide which ultimately help the accused. Here
counselling, financial assistance and rehabilitation becomes more important so that
the rape victims become courageous to see the accused behind the bars.
Similarly, cases of acid throwing on girls and women are on the rise. The acid
thrown on a girl or woman many a times kills her but if, she survives that is more
horrifying. Her face is disfigured, loses her eyes and other body parts are severely
burnt. Apart from suffering extreme pain and agony she has to undergo many surgeries,
bandages and medication which require huge money which most of the victims are
unable to bear and they are left to fend for themselves. For these hapless acid attack
victims financial assistance, free medication and cosmetic surgeries and rehabilitation
becomes all the more necessary.
Then, these days girls belonging to poverty stricken families of rural areas and
tribals areas are lured and trafficked to urban areas by showing them dreams of good
life and employment opportunities and are sold to so called Placement agencies who
further sell them to people for household chores and for forced prostitution. Even if,
Police rescue them these unfortunate girls and women also require rehabilitation and
other welfare measures.
This Bill also seeks to set up a National Abused and Attacked Girls and Women
Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund for the victims of acid attack, sexually abused and
trafficked girls and women apart from providing other welfare and rehabilitation
measures.
RAJKUMAR DHOOT

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill, provides for the rehabilitation and welfare measures for the girls
and women covered under this Bill. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a
Fund with initial corpus of rupees thirty thousand crore by the Central Government. Clause 6
makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty five thousand crore may involve
as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees twenty thousand crore may also involve as non recurring expenditure.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation measures to be undertaken and payment of adequate
compensation by the Central and State Governments to the victims of acid attacks,
sexually abused or raped and trafficked girls and women from weaker sections
and tribal and rural areas pushed for working as domestic maids or into
flesh trade by the placement agencies, pimps and traffickers and for
making it mandatory for the State to bear all costs of treatment
including cosmetic and other requisite surgeries for all
such victims and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3855RS(S3)—18-12-2015.