15

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXXV of 2001

THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 2001
A
BILL

to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (7) This Act may be called the Compulsory Voting Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Representation of the People Act,
1951 or any other law for the time being in force every voter shall exercise his right to vote
compulsorily when called for by the Election Commission in an election to Lok Sabha or
Legislative Assembly of a State as the case may be:

Provided that a voter may be exempted from exercising his right to vote only when
he becomes incapable of voting due to sickness or infirmity and unable to move or he 15
physically incapacitated from an illness of a serious nature and produces a medical certifi-
cate from a registered medical practitioner testifying to such incapacity.

3. Whoever intentionally fails to exercise the right to vote shall on conviction by a
court of law, be liable to a fine of rupees five hundred or imprisonment for one week or
with both,

Short title,
extent and

Compulsory
voting by


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In a democratic country it is duty of every citizen of India to exercise his right of
vote in elections. In many constituencies the number of votes polled in the elections is
many a times less than 50%. Several persons deliberately refuse to exercise the franchise.
Several villages are boycotting the elections deliberately without any valid reasons. In
order to strengthen the democratic process and to make the representatives more account-
able, it should be made mandatory for all voters in the voters’ list to vote in the election.
Exemption is being given to the voters who are physically not able to vote. Failure to vote
will lead to penal consequence.

Hence this Bill.
९. P. THIRUNAVUKKARASU


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
concerned therewith.

(Shri C.P. Thirunavukkarasu, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—7268RS—14.03.2001.