THE  GRAM  NYAYALAY AS  BILL, 2007
___________
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
___________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
    1. Short title, extent and commencement.
    2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
GRAM NYAYA L AYA
    3. Establishment of Gram Nyayalayas.
    4. Headquarters of Gram Nyayalaya.
    5. Appointment of Nyayadhikari.
    6. Qualifications for appointment.
    7. Constitution of cadre of Nyayadhikaris of Gram Nyayalayas.
    8. Removal of Nyayadhikari.
    9. Terms and conditions of Nyayadhikaris.
   10. Nyayadhikari not to participate in proceedings in which he is interested.
   11. Nyayadhikari to hold mobile courts and conduct proceedings in villages.
   12. Seal of Gram Nyayalaya.
CHAPTER III
J
URISDICATION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF GRAM NYAYALAYA
   13. Limits of jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas.
   14. Criminal jurisdiction.
   15. Civil jurisdiction.
   16. Power to amend Schedules.
   17. Gram Nyayalaya to have exclusive civil and criminal jurisdiction in certain
matters.
   18. Certain disputes not to be tried by Gram Nyayalayas.
   19. Gram Nyayalayas to close a case in certain circumstances.
   20. Limitation.
   21. Transfer of pending cases.
   22. Duties of ministerial officers.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROCEDURE IN CRIMINAL CASES
   23. Gram Nyayalaya to follow summary procedure.
   24. Pronouncement of judgment.
   25. Power of Gram Nyayalayas to transfer cases.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill  No. XXXVII  of  2007

CLAUSES
26. Legal aid to parties.
   27. Power to compound cases.
   28. Gram Nyayalayas not to take cognizance of certain offences.
   29. Power of Gram Nyayalayas to order amount of fine to be applied for certain
expenses.
CHAPTER V
PROCEDURE IN CIVIL CASES
   30. Duty of Gram Nyayalaya to make efforts for conciliation and settlement of civil
disputes.
   31. Appointment of Conciliators.
   32. Procedure generally.
   33. Special procedure in civil disputes.
   34. Transfer of civil disputes.
   35. Payment of interest in money decrees.
   36. Power of the Gram Nyayalaya to issue commissions.
CHAPTER VI
PROCEDURE GENERALLY
    37. Proceedings to be in the official language of the State.
   38. Evidence to be on oath.
39. Gram Nyayalayas to have the power of Judicial Magistrate of the first class for
summoning any person.
CHAPTER VII
APPEALS
40. Appeal in criminal cases.
41. Appeal in civil cases.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
42. Cases pending in or disposed of by other courts.
43. Assistance of police to Gram Nyayalayas.
44. Nyayadhikaris and employees, etc., to be public servants.
45. Inspection of Gram Nyayalayas.
46. Power to remove difficulties.
47. Power of High Court to make rules.
48. Power of State Government to make rules.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
(ii)

1
THE GRAM NYAYALAYAS BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas for the purposes of providing   access
to justice, both civil and criminal, to the citizens  at the grass-roots  level and  to
ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen  by reason
of social, economic or other disabilities and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:–
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the State of
Nagaland, the State of Arunachal Pradesh, the State of Sikkim and to the tribal areas.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill  No. XXXVII  of  2007

Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression “tribal areas” means the areas
specified in Parts I, II, IIA, and III of the table below paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution within the State of Assam, the State of Meghalaya, the State of Tripura and the
State of Mizoram, respectively.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
published in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Gram Nyayalaya” means a subordinate court established under sub-section
(1) of section 3;
(b) “Gram Panchayat” means an institution (by whatever name called) of self-
government constituted, at the village level, under article 243B of the Constitution, for
the rural areas;
 (c) “High Court” means, —
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State;
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdiction of the High
Court for a State has been extended by law, that High Court;
(iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the highest Court of criminal
appeal for that territory other than the Supreme Court of India;
(d) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notified”  shall be construed accordingly;
(e)  “Nyayadhikari” means the presiding officer of a Gram Nyayalaya appointed
under sub-section (2) of section 5;
 (f) “Panchayat at intermediate level” means an institution (by whatever name
called) of self-government constituted, at the intermediate level, under article 243B of
the Constitution, for the rural areas in accordance with Part IX of the Constitution;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator
thereof appointed under article 239 of the Constitution and any reference to “Governor”
shall be construed as a reference to the administrator of such Union territory;
(i) all other words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the  Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have
the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Codes.
CHAPTER II
G
RAM NYAYA L AYA
3. (1) The State Government shall, for securing access to justice, both civil and criminal
at the grass-roots level to the citizens, by notification, establish one or more Gram Nyayalayas
for every Panchayat at intermediate level or a group of contiguous Panchayats at intermediate
level in a district or where there is no Panchayat at intermediate level in any State, for a group
of contiguous Gram Panchayats:
Provided that where the State Government is of opinion that there is a need to establish
additional Gram Nyayalayas for any Panchayat at intermediate level it shall, in consultation
with the High Court, by notification, establish such additional Gram Nyayalayas as it deems
fit.
(2) The Gram Nyayalayas established under sub-section (1) shall be in addition to the
civil and criminal courts established under any other law for the time being in force.
(3) A Gram Nyayalaya shall be the lowest court of subordinate judiciary in the State.
2
Definitions.
Establishment
of Gram
Nyayalayas.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.

3
4. The headquarters of every Gram Nyayalaya shall be located at the headquarters of
the intermediate Panchayat in which the Gram Nyayalaya is established or such other place
as may be notified by the State Government.
5. (1) Every Gram Nyayalaya established under sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be
presided over by a Nyayadhikari.
(2) The Nyayadhikari shall be appointed by the Governor of the State in consultation
with the High Court in accordance with the rules made in this behalf.
6. (1) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Nyayadhikari unless he—
(a) is eligible to be appointed as a Judicial Magistrate of the first class; and
(b) belongs to the cadre of Nyayadhikaris constituted by the Governor in
consultation with the High Court under section 7.
(2) While appointing a Nyayadhikari, representation shall be given, as far as practicable,
to the members of the Scheduled Castes and  Scheduled Tribes, women and any other
classes or communities as may be specified by the State Government from time to time.
7. The Governor shall, in consultation with the High Court, constitute a cadre of
Nyayadhikaris comprising of persons with integrity and fulfilling the following, namely:—
(a) he should possess a degree in law from a recognised University;
(b) he should not be more than forty-five years of age at the time of appointment;
(c) he should have proficiency in at least one official language of the State other
than English.
8. (1) A Nyayadhikari may be removed from his office on the ground of incompetence,
gross negligence, corruption, malfeasance or conduct unbecoming of a Nyayadhikari.
(2) Any person who has been removed from the office of Nyayadhikari shall be ineligible
for appointment under the Government.
9.  The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service
of the Nyayadhikaris shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
10.  The Nyayadhikari shall not participate in the proceedings of the Gram Nyayalaya
if he has any interest or is involved in the subject matter of the dispute pending consideration
or is related to one of the parties to the proceeding and in such a case the Nyayadhikari shall
refer the matter to the District Judge or Sessions Judge, as the case may be, for transfer of the
case to any other Gram Nyayalaya.
11. (1) The Nyayadhikari shall periodically visit the villages falling under his jurisdiction
and conduct proceedings (including taking of evidence, deciding of cases and the holding
of mobile court if considered necessary) at any place which it considers is in close proximity
to the place where the parties ordinarily reside or where the whole or part of the cause of
action had arisen:
Provided that where the Gram Nyayalaya decides to hold mobile court outside its
headquarters, it shall give wide publicity as to the date and place where it proposes to hold
mobile court.
(2) The State Government shall extend all facilities to the Gram Nyayalaya including
the provision of vehicles for holding mobile court and additional security for the Nyayadhikari
while conducting proceedings outside its headquarters.
12.  Every Gram Nyayalaya established under this Act shall use a seal of the court in
such form and dimensions as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Headquarters
of Gram
Nyayalaya.
Nyayadhikari
to hold mobile
courts and
conduct
proceedings in
villages.
Seal of Gram
Nyayalaya.
Appointment of
Nyayadhikari.
Qualifications
for appointment.
Constitution
of cadre of
Nyayadhi-
karis of Gram
Nyayalayas.
Removal of
Nyayadhikari.
Terms and
conditions of
Nyayadhikaris.
Nyayadhikari
not to
participate in
proceedings in
which  he is
interested.

4
CHAPTER III
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF GRAM NYAYA L AYA
13. The State Government shall, by notification,  define the local territorial limits of the
jurisdiction of any Gram Nyayalaya in consultation with the High Court and may, from time
to time, depending on the workload, alter or readjust the local territorial limits in like manner.
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
or any other law for the time being in force, the Gram Nyayalaya may take cognizance of an
offence on a complaint or on a police report and shall—
(a) try all offences specified in Part I of the First Schedule; and
(b) try offences and grant relief specified under the enactments specified in Part
II of that Schedule:
Provided that where the Gram Nyayalaya, at any stage of the trial, is of the opinion that
the accused should be sentenced to imprisonment exceeding one year, it may forward the
case to the court of session for referring it to the court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Gram Nyayalaya shall
also try all offences under the Central Acts where—
(i) the maximum punishment provided for is  imprisonment not exceeding one
year, whether with or without fine;
(ii) the punishment provided for  is only fine;
(iii) the offences are compoundable, whether with or without the  permission of
the court,  under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or under any other law for the
time being in force.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2), the Gram Nyayalaya
shall also try all such offences or grant such relief under the State Acts by including them in
Part III of the First Schedule.
15. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force and subject to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and sub-section (2),
the Gram Nyayalayas shall have jurisdiction to try all original suits and proceedings of such
categories and subject to such pecuniary limits as may be notified by the High Court from
time to time.
 (2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall be the lowest court of competent jurisdiction to hear
and dispose of suits of a civil nature falling under the classes of disputes specified in the
Second Schedule.
16. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so
to do, it   may, by notification, add to or omit any item from the First Schedule or the Second
Schedule, as the case may be, and thereupon the First Schedule, or the Second Schedule, as
the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
 (3) If the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it
may, in consultation with the High Court, by notification, add to any item in Part III of the
First Schedule or Part III of the Second Schedule or omit from it any item  in respect of which
the State Legislature is competent to make laws and thereupon the First Schedule or the
Second Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
(4) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 3) shall be laid before the State
Legislature.
Limits of
jurisdiction
of Gram
Nyayalayas.
Criminal
jurisdiction.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Civil
jurisdiction.
Power to
amend
Schedules.
5 of 1908.

5
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or any other law for the time being in force and subject to
the provisions of this Act, a Gram Nyayalaya shall have exclusive jurisdiction in respect of
disputes covered by the subject matters specified in sections 14 and 15.
18. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 13, section 14 or section 15, the
Gram Nyayalaya shall not have jurisdiction to take cognizance of the following classes of
disputes, namely:–
(a) a dispute by or against the Central  Government or the State Government or
a public servant for anything which is in good faith  done or purported to have been
done by him in his official capacity;
(b) a dispute where one of the parties is a minor or a person of unsound mind;
(c) any claim cognizable by revenue courts.
19. If the Nyayadhikari is satisfied that it is necessary in the interest of justice to close
a case, it may, on its own motion or on an application by either party to the civil dispute, pass
orders closing the case, and advise the parties to approach the appropriate civil court in
respect of matters relating to any complicated issue of fact or law which should be decided
by any other competent court of law:
Provided that whenever a case is closed by the Nyayadhikari under this section, the
period for which the case has been pending in it shall be excluded for the purposes of
computing the period of limitation.
20. The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, and the provisions of Chapter XXXVI
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall be applicable to the Gram Nyayalaya.
21.(1) The District Court may, with effect from such date as may be notified, transfer all
the cases pending before the court subordinate to it, both civil and criminal,  to the Gram
Nyayalaya competent to hear and try.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya may in its discretion continue with the cases from the stage at
which it was pending before the court from which it was transferred or it may de novo hear or
try the case, as the case may be.
22. (1) The State Government shall determine the nature and categories of the officers
and other employees required to assist the Gram Nyayalaya in the discharge of its functions
and provide the Gram Nyayalaya with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of the
officers and other employees of the Gram Nyayalaya shall be such as may be prescribed by
the State Government.
(3) The officers and other employees of a Gram Nyayalaya shall perform such duties as
may, from time to time, be assigned to them by the Nyayadhikari.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROCEDURE IN CRIMINAL CASES
23.  ( 1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the rules made thereunder shall apply to the proceedings in
respect of criminal cases triable by the Gram Nyayalaya under this Act.
 (2) While exercising criminal jurisdiction, the Gram Nyayalaya shall follow the procedure
for summary trials and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply accordingly.
(3) The trial of offences by the Gram Nyayalaya under this Act shall be, as far as may
be, on a day-to-day basis and every case shall be disposed of within a period of ninety days
from the date of its institution.
Gram
Nyayalaya to
have exclusive
civil and
criminal
jurisdiction in
certain matters.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.
Certain disputes
not to be tried
by Gram
Nyayalayas.
Gram
Nyayalayas
to close a case
in certain
circumstances.
Limitation.
Transfer of
pending cases.
Duties of
ministerial
officers.
Gram
Nyayalaya
to follow
summary
procedure.
36 of 1963.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

6
24. (1) The Gram Nyayalaya shall pronounce its judgment within one week from the
last date of its hearing.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall deliver a copy of its judgment immediately to both the
parties free of cost.
(3) The Gram Nyayalaya shall, in cases where imprisonment has been awarded, forward
copies of the judgment along with the warrant of commitment to the officer-in-charge of the
jail concerned, the police station concerned, and the Sessions Judge having jurisdiction.
25. If at any stage of the proceedings it appears to the Gram Nyayalaya that the case
is one which ought to be tried by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any other superior
court, or if at the close of a trial, the Gram Nyayalaya is of the opinion that the accused is
guilty and that he ought to receive a punishment more severe than that which the Gram
Nyayalaya is empowered to impose, it shall submit the case to the appropriate Magistrate
having jurisdiction who shall transfer the case to his own court and proceed according to
law.
26. (1) The State Government shall appoint in each Gram Nyayalaya one or more
advocates for the purpose of conducting the criminal cases in the Gram Nyayalaya.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, in a criminal proceeding before the Gram Nyayalaya, the complainant may,
engage an advocate of his choice and at his expense to present the case of the prosecution
with the leave of the Gram Nyayalaya.
(3) The State Legal Services Authority, constituted under section 6 of the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987, shall prepare a panel of advocates and assign at least two of them to
be attached to each Gram Nyayalaya so that their services shall be readily available to the
parties, if they so desire.
27. Any offence cognizable by a Gram Nyayalaya under this Act may be compounded
with its permission, if such offence is compoundable with or without the permission of the
court under any law for the time being in force.
28. The Gram Nyayalaya shall not take cognizance of any offence which is punishable
with imprisonment for more than one year or if the accused has been previously convicted
and sentenced to suffer imprisonment for a term of one year or more.
29. In imposing any fine, the Gram Nyayalaya may direct that the whole or any portion
of the fine recovered shall be applied—
(a) towards defraying the expenses incurred in the case by the complainant; or
(b) in giving compensation to the victim of an offence or to a person for any
material loss or damage caused to him by reason of commission of the offence.
CHAPTER V
P
ROCEDURE IN CIVIL CASES
30. (1) In every suit or proceeding of a civil nature instituted endeavour shall be made
by the Gram Nyayalaya in the first instance, where it is possible to do so, consistent with the
nature and circumstances of the case, to assist, persuade and conciliate the parties in arriving
at a settlement in respect of the subject matter of the suit or proceeding, as the case may be,
and for this purpose a Gram Nyayalaya may, subject to the rules made by the High Court in
this behalf, follow such procedure as it may deem fit.
(2) If, in any suit or proceeding, at any stage, it appears to the Gram Nyayalaya that
there is a reasonable possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Gram Nyayalaya
may adjourn the proceedings for such period as it thinks fit to enable them to make attempts
to effect such a settlement.
Pronouncement
of judgment.
Power of Gram
Nyayalayas to
transfer cases.
Legal aid to
parties.
Power to
compound
cases.
Gram
Nyayalayas
not to take
cognizance
of certain
offences.
Power of Gram
Nyayalayas to
order amount
of fine to be
applied for
certain
expenses.
Duty of Gram
Nyayalaya to
make efforts
for concilia-
tion and
settlement of
civil disputes.
2 of 1974.
39 of 1987.

7
(3) Where any proceeding is adjourned under sub-section ( 2), the Gram Nyayalaya
may in its discretion refer the matter to one or more conciliators for effecting a settlement
between the parties.
(4) The power conferred by sub-section (2) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation
of, any other power of the Gram Nyayalaya to adjourn the proceedings.
31.(1)  For the purposes of section 30, the District Judge shall, in consultation with the
District Magistrate,  prepare a panel consisting of the names  of  social workers at the village
level having integrity for appointment as Conciliators who posses such  qualifications and
experience as may be prescribed by the High Court.
(2) The sitting fee and other allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions
of engagement of Conciliators shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
32.
 (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, and the rules made thereunder, the
Gram Nyayalaya shall be deemed to be a civil court and shall have all the powers of such
court for dealing with the suits of a civil nature.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the rules of evidence as laid down in the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other
provisions of this Act and any rule made by the High Court, the Gram Nyayalaya shall have
the power to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times of its
proceedings.
(3) In respect of matters of a civil nature for which no express provision has been made
in this Act, the High Court may, by rules, provide for them.
33. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law relating to the court fee,
any person desirous of settlement of any dispute or matter of a civil nature referred to in the
Second Schedule may make an application to the Gram Nyayalaya in such form and in such
manner as may be prescribed by the High Court and accompanied by a fee of one hundred
rupees or such other amount as may be prescribed by the High Court from time to time.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya shall issue a notice accompanied by a copy of the application
served on the opposite party in such manner as may be prescribed by the High Court fixing
a date for his appearance or to file a written reply.
(3) After the opposite party files his written reply, the Gram Nyayalaya shall fix a date
for hearing and inform all the parties to be present in person or through their advocates or
authorised agents.
(4) On the date fixed for hearing the Gram Nyayalaya shall hear both the parties in
regard to their respective contentions and if the dispute does not require recording of any
evidence, pronounce the decision.
(5) In case any of the parties to the dispute desires to produce oral or documentary
evidence, or both, and the Gram Nyayalaya is of the opinion that the dispute involves
questions of fact which have to be decided by recording oral or documentary evidence for a
just decision, the Gram Nyayalaya shall record the summary of evidence, if any, on a date
fixed for hearing.
(6) Notwithstanding that the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
shall not be applicable to civil disputes or claims before the Gram Nyayalaya, the Gram
Nyayalaya shall, for the purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a claim or dispute in respect of the
following matters, namely: —
(i) summoning and enforcing attendance of any person or witness and examining
him on oath;
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material
object producible as evidence;
Appointment
of
Conciliators.
Procedure
generally.
Special
procedure in
civil disputes.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.
5 of 1908.

8
(iii) receiving of evidence on affidavits;
(iv) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte;
(v) any other matter which may be prescribed by the State Government.
(7) The Gram Nyayalaya shall have the power to proceed ex parte if any of the parties
does not appear.
(8) In regard to any incidental matter that may arise during the course of the
proceedings, the Gram Nyayalaya shall adopt such procedure as it may deem just and proper
in the interest of justice.
(9) The proceedings shall, as far as is practicable, be consistent with the interests of
justice and the hearing shall be continued on a day to day basis until its conclusion, unless
the Gram Nyayalaya finds the adjournment of the hearing beyond the following day to be
necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.
(10) The Gram Nyayalaya shall pronounce the judgment within a period of ninety days
from the date of statement of claim application, and within one week of the last day of hearing
of the case.
(11) The judgment shall contain the number of the application, the names of the
parties, the particulars of the claim, the points for determination, the summary of evidence
adduced on either side, if any, and the findings reached by the Gram Nyayalaya.
(12) A copy of the order shall be delivered to both the parties within three days on
payment of such fees as may be prescribed by the State Government.
34. The District Judge having jurisdiction may, on an application made by any party or
when there is considerable pendency with one Gram Nyayalaya or whenever he considers it
necessary in the interests of justice, transfer any case pending before a Gram Nyayalaya to
any other Gram Nyayalaya within his jurisdiction.
35. (1) Where in any claim for money due the Gram Nyayalaya passes an order for
payment of money, it may also order payment of interest thereon at a rate not exceeding
twelve per cent. per annum from the date of the claim statement application till the date of
payment.
(2) The Gram Nyayalaya may, if it deems fit, d irect payment in instalments with or
without interest.
36. The Gram Nyayalaya shall have all the powers of the civil court to issue commission
and the provisions of sections 75 to 78 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply as if
for the words “the Court” or “any Court” referred to therein, the words “the Gram Nyayalaya”
had been substituted.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROCEDURE GENERALLY
37. The proceedings before the Gram Nyayalaya and its judgment shall, as far as
practicable, be in one of the official languages of the State other than the English language.
38. The evidence given orally before a Gram Nyayalaya shall be on oath or on solemn
affirmation.
39. (1) The Gram Nyayalaya shall have the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first
class in respect of all matters relating to summons, securing the presence of witnesses,
attendance of persons confined or detained in prisons, production of any material evidence
including any records, title deeds, agreements, contracts, and any other thing, object or
such relevant material as it may deem fit.
Transfer of
civil disputes.
Payment of
interest in
money decrees.
Power of
the Gram
Nyayalaya
to issue
commissions.
5 of 1908.
Proceedings to
be in the official
language of the
State.
Evidence to be
on oath.
Gram
Nyayalayas to
have the power
of Judicial
Magistrate of
the first class
for summoning
any person.

9
(2) Where any person has been given notice or summon to appear before the Gram
Nyayalaya, the Gram Nyayalaya shall record his statement and thereafter the Gram Nyayalaya
may dispense with his attendance at the hearing of the case.
CHAPTER VII
A
PPEALS
40. (1) An appeal against any order or sentence passed by a Gram Nyayalaya in a
criminal matter shall lie to the Court of Sessions exercising jurisdiction over the area within
which the Gram Nyayalaya is situated, within thirty days of the passing of such order or
sentence.
(2) An appeal preferred under sub-section ( 1) shall be heard and disposed of by an
Assistant Sessions Judge subordinate to the Sessions Judge within six months from the
date of filing of the appeal.
(3) The Assistant Sessions Judge may, pending disposal of the appeal, direct the
suspension of the sentence or order appealed against.
(4) The decision of the Assistant Sessions Judge under sub-section (2) shall be final
and no appeal or revision shall lie from the decision of the Assistant Sessions Judge.
41. (1) An appeal against any final order or judgment passed by a Gram Nyayalaya in
a civil matter shall lie to the District Court exercising jurisdiction over the area within
which the Gram Nyayalaya is situated within thirty days of the passing of such order or
judgment.
(2) An appeal preferred under sub-section (1) shall be heard and disposed of by the
Senior Civil Judge subordinate to the District Judge, within six months from the date of filing
of the appeal.
(3) The District Court may, pending disposal of the appeal, direct the suspension of
the order or judgment appealed against.
(4) The decision of the Senior Civil Judge under sub-section (2) shall be final and no
appeal or revision shall lie from the decision of the Senior Civil Judge.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
42. (1) The Gram Nyayalaya shall not try any civil matter which is the subject matter of
any proceeding pending or disposed of by a competent court unless it is a pending case
transferred to it by the District court under section 21.
(2) Where a case is pending in any court against an accused person in respect of any
offence or where an accused person has been tried for any offence, the Gram Nyayalaya
shall not take cognizance of any such offence or on the same facts, or any other offence of
which the accused might have been charged or convicted.
43. (1) Every police officer functioning within the local limits of jurisdiction of a Gram
Nyayalaya shall be bound to assist the Gram Nyayalaya in the exercise of its lawful authority.
(2) Whenever the Gram Nyayalaya, in the discharge of its functions, requests revenue
or police officer or a Government servant to provide assistance to the Gram Nyayalaya, he
shall be bound to provide such assistance.
44. The Nyayadhikaris and the officers and other employees of the Gram Nyayalayas
shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of
this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Appeal in
criminal cases.
Appeal in civil
cases.
Cases pending
in or disposed
of by other
courts.
Assistance of
police to Gram
Nyayalayas.
Nyayadhikaris
and  employees,
etc., to be
public servants.45 of 1860.

10
45. The District Judge shall authorise any Senior Civil Judge or Assistant Sessions
Judge to inspect the Gram Nyayalayas within his jurisdiction once in every six months or
such other period as the High Court may specify and issue such instructions, as he considers
necessary and submit a report to the High Court.
46. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
 Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
47. (1) The High Court may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular and without generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
 (a) the receipt and custody of all documents and records by or on behalf of the
Gram Nyayalaya and the grant of judgment, orders and other records;
(b) the place and the manner in which the proceedings of the Gram Nyayalaya
shall be conducted;
(c) the manner in which any process is issued by the Gram Nyayalaya;
(d) the particulars of the registers and records to be maintained by the Gram
Nyayalaya;
(e) the conduct of training programme for the Nyayadhikaris and Conciliators of
the Gram Nyayalayas;
(f) the supervision and inspection of the Gram Nyayalayas in respect of specified
matters;
(g) rules regulating the procedure for assisting, persuading or conciliation of
parties in arriving at a settlement in a suit or proceeding under sub-section ( 1) of
section 30;
 (h) the detailed procedure for conduct of civil suits under sub-sections  ( 1)
and (3) of section 30;
(i) the conditions which a person shall fulfil to be eligible to be included in the
panel of Conciliators under sub-section (1) of section 31;
(j) the form and the manner of service of notice under sub-section ( 1) of
section 33;
(k) any other matter  not being a matter specified in section 48 in respect of
which rules are required to be made by the High Court  for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
48. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the rules relating to appointment of the Nyayadhikari under sub-section (2)
of section 5;
(b
) the salary and allowances  payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of Nyayadhikaris under  section 9;
Inspection
of Gram
Nyayalayas.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of High
Court to make
rules.
Power of State
Government
to make rules.

11
 (c) the form and dimensions of the seal of the Gram Nyayalaya under section 12;
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the officers and other employees of the Gram Nyayalayas under sub-section
(2) of section 22.
(e) the sitting fee and other allowances payable to and the other terms and
conditions of engagement of Conciliators under sub-section (2) of section 31;
(f)  the fee payable in respect of copies of orders of the Gram Nyayalaya under
sub-section (12) of section 33;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed  or in respect of which rules are
required to be made by the State Government.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
MGIPMRND—1514LAW(S-5)—16-04-2007.

THE FIRST  SCHEDULE
[See sections 14 and 16]
PART I
OFFENCES UNDER  THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (45 OF 1860)
(i) Sections 109 to 113 in so far as they relate to the offences mentioned at sub-
item  (ii).
(ii) Sections 120B (relating to any other criminal conspiracy), 137, 138, 140, 143, 149,
150, 151, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158 (being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly
or riot except in case of  going with arm),  160, 163, 166, 168, 171, 171E, 171F, 171G, 171H,
171-I, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177 (relating to knowingly furnishing false information to
a public servant), 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 190, 202, 225B, 228, 264,
265, 266, 267, 269, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286,
287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 294, 294A, 296, 297, 298, 309, 323, 334, 336, 337, 341, 342, 352, 357,
358, 374, 417, 426,  434, 447, 448, 482, 486, 489, 489E, 491, 508, 509 and 510.
(iii) Sections 125, 324, 332, 353, 379, 427, 428, 429, 430, 431, 432 and 504.
PART II
OFFENCES AND RELIEF UNDER THE OTHER CENTRAL ACTS
(i) The Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955  (22 of 1955).
(ii) The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 (19 of 1976).
(iii) The Protection of W omen from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005).
(iv) The  Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (9  of 1948).
(v) The  Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).
(vi) Order for maintenance of Wives, Children and Parents under Chapter IX of
the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
(vii) The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976).
PART III
OFFENCES UNDER THE STATE ACTS
(To be notified by the concerned State Government )
12

THE SECOND  SCHEDULE
[See sections 15 (2) and 16]
PART I
SUITS OF A CIVIL NATURE
 WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF GRAM NYAYALAYAS
(i) Civil Disputes:
(a) Right to purchase of property;
(b) Use of common pasture;
(c) Regulation and timing of taking water from irrigation channel.
(ii) Property Disputes:
(a) Village and farm houses (Possession);
(b) Water channels;
(c) Right to draw water from a well or tube well.
(iii) Other Disputes:
(a) Claims under the  Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (9  of 1948);
(b) Claims under the  Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936);
(c) Money suits either arising from trade transaction or money lending;
(d) Disputes arising out of the partnership in cultivation of land;
(e) Disputes as to the use of forest produce by inhabitants of Gram Panchayats.
PART II
CLAIMS AND DISPUTES UNDER THE CENTRAL ACTS NOTIFIED UNDER SUB-
SECTION (1) OF SECTION 14 BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
PART III
CLAIMS AND DISPUTES UNDER THE STA TE ACTS
NOTIFIED UNDER SUB-SECTION (2) OF SECTION 14 BY THE STATE GOVERNMENT
(To be notified by the concerned State Government )
13

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Access to justice by the poor and disadvantaged remains a worldwide problem despite
diverse approaches and strategies that have been formulated and implemented to address it.
In our country, article 39A of the Constitution directs the State to secure that the operation
of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular,
provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or
other disabilities.
2. In the recent past, the Government has taken various measures to strengthen judicial
system, inter alia, by simplifying the procedural laws; incorporating various alternative
dispute resolution mechanisms such as arbitration, conciliation and mediation, conducting
of Lok Addalts, etc. These measures are required to be strengthened further.
3. The Law Commission of India in its 114th Report on Gram Nyayalaya suggested
establishment of Gram Nyayalayas so that speedy, inexpensive and substantial justice could
be provided to the common man. The Gram Nyayalayas Bill, 2007 is broadly based on the
recommendations of the Law Commission. The Gram Nyayalaya is to be the lowest court of
subordinate judiciary in the State in respect of criminal and civil jurisdiction. The Presiding
Officer of Gram Nyayalaya i.e. Nyayadhikari will periodically visit the villages falling under
his jurisdiction and conduct proceedings at any place which he considers is in close proximity
to the place where the parties ordinarily reside. The Gram Nyayalaya will function as mobile
court. In order to make the system of participatory justice a reality, legal aid and mechanism
of  conciliation at the grass-roots level would be a part of  Gram Nyayalaya.
4. Justice to the poor at their door step  is a dream of the poor. Setting up of Gram
Nyayalaya (at the headquarters of intermediate Panchayat) with mobility in the rural areas
would bring to the people of rural areas speedy, affordable and substantial justice.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; H. R. BHARDWAJ.
The 8th May, 2007.
14SERVER 5 \ BILL2007 \ LAW \ 1514LAW

Notes on clauses
Clause 1.— This clause provides for the short title of the proposed legislation, its
extent and commencement. The proposed legislation shall not be applicable to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir, the States of Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim and the tribal
areas specified in Parts I, II, IIA and III of the table below paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution within the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
Clause 2.— This clause seeks to define certain expressions used in the Bill. The
definitions of the terms ‘‘Gram Nyayalaya”, “Gram Panchayat”, “High Court”, “Panchayat at
intermediate level”, are some of them. A “Panchayat at intermediate level” means an institution
(by whatever name called) of self-government constituted at the intermediate level, under
article 243B of the Constitution, for the rural areas in accordance with the provisions of Part
IX of the Constitution.
Clause 3.— This clause provides for the establishment of one or more Gram Nyayalayas
by the State Government.
Sub-clause (1) provides that for the purpose of securing access to justice, both civil
and criminal at the grass-roots level to the citizens of India, the State Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, establish one or more Gram Nyayalayas for every Panchayat
at intermediate level or a group of contiguous Panchayats at intermediate level in a district or
where there is no Panchayat at intermediate level in any State, for a group of contiguous
Gram Panchayats. This sub-clause also empowers the State Government to establish, in
consultation with the High Court, additional Gram Nyayalayas for any Panchayat at
intermediate level if it is of opinion to do so.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalayas shall be in addition to the civil and
criminal courts established under any other law for the time being in force.
Sub-clause (3) provides that a Gram Nyayalaya constituted under the proposed
legislation shall be the lowest court of subordinate judiciary in the State.
Clause 4.— This clause provides that the headquarters of the Gram Nyayalaya shall
be located at the headquarters of the Panchayat at intermediate level in which the Gram
Nyayalaya is established. However, the State Government is competent to notify any other
place as the headquarters of a Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 5.— This clause seeks to provide for the appointment of the Presiding Officer
of a Gram Nyayaylaya. Sub-clause (1) provides that every Gram Nyayalaya established
under the proposed legislation shall consist of a Nyayadhikari. Sub-clause (2) provides that
the Nyayadhikari shall be appointed by the Governor of the State in consultation with the
High Court in accordance with the rules made in this behalf.
Clause 6.— This clause seeks to provide for the qualifications of a person to be
eligible to be appointed as a Nyayadhikari of a Gram Nyayalaya. Sub-clause (1) provides that
a person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Nyayadhikari unless he belongs to the
cadre of Nyayadhikaris constituted by the Governor in consultation with the High Court and
such person is eligible to be appointed as a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
Sub-clause (2) provides that while appointing the Nyayadhikari the State Government
shall provide, as far as practicable,  representation to the members of the Scheduled Castes,
the Scheduled Tribes, women and to any other classes or communities as may be specified
by it from time to time.
15

16
Clause 7.— This clause seeks to provide for the constitution of a cadre of Nyayadhikaris
of the Gram Nyayalayas in a State. The cadre of Nyayadhikaris which may be constituted by
the Governor in consultation with the High Court shall consist of persons of integrity with
not more than forty-five years of age at the time of appointment. Such persons should
possess a degree in law from a recognised University and should have proficiency in at least
one official language of the State other than English.
Clause 8.— This clause seeks to provide for the removal of Nyayadhikaris. Sub-
clause (1) provides that a Nyayadhikari may be removed from office on the ground of
incompetence, gross negligence, corruption, malfeasance or conduct unbecoming of a
Nyayadhikari.
Sub-clause (2) provides that a person who has been removed from office of Nyayadhikari
shall be ineligible for appointment under the Government.
Clause 9. — This clause seeks to empower the State Government to determine, by
rules, the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of
the Nyayadhikaris.
Clause 10.— This clause seeks to provide that the Nyayadhikari shall not participate
in certain proceedings before the Gram Nyayalaya. The Nyayadhikari shall not participate in
the proceedings of the Gram Nyayalaya if he has any interest or is involved in the subject
matter of the dispute pending consideration or is related to one of the parties to the proceeding
and in such a case the Nyayadhikari shall refer the matter to the District Judge or Sessions
Judge, as the case may be, for transfer of the case to any other Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 11.— This clause seeks to empower the Nyayadhikari to hold mobile courts
and to conduct proceedings in villages.
Sub-clause (1) seeks to provide that the Nyayadhikari shall periodically visit the villages
falling under his jurisdiction and conduct proceedings (including taking of evidence, deciding
of cases and the holding of mobile court if considered necessary) at any place which he
considers is in close proximity to the place where the parties ordinarily reside or where the
whole or part of the cause of action had arisen. In conducting such mobile courts outside the
headquarters of a Gram Nyayalaya the Nyayadhikari has to give wide publicity as to the date
and place where it proposes to hold mobile court.
Sub-clause (2) seeks to provide that the State Government shall be required to extend
all facilities to the Gram Nyayalaya including the provision of vehicles for holding mobile
court and additional security for the Nyayadhikari for enabling him to conduct the proceedings
outside the headquarters of the Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 12.— This clause seeks to provide for the seal of the Gram Nyayalaya. The
State Government shall, by rules, determine the form and dimensions of the seal of the Gram
Nyayalaya.
Clause 13.— This clause seeks to empower the State Government to fix the local limits
of jurisdiction of the Gram Nyayalaya in consultation with the High Court. It also empowers
the State Government in like manner readjust the territorial limits of the Gram Nyayalayas
depending on the work load of such Nyayalayas.
Clause 14.— This clause seeks to lay down the criminal jurisdiction of the Gram
Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the time being in force, the Gram Nyayalaya
shall be competent to take cognizance of an offence on a complaint or on a police report and
shall try all offences specified in Part I of the First Schedule to the proposed legislation and
shall also try offences and grant relief specified under the enactments specified in Part II of
that Schedule. However, where the Gram Nyayalaya is of the opinion that the accused
should be sentenced to imprisonment exceeding one year, it may forward the case to the
Court of Session for referring it to the court of competent jurisdiction.

17
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall also try all offences under the
Central Acts where —
(i) the maximum punishment provided for is imprisonment not exceeding one
year, whether with or without fine;
(ii) the punishment provided for is only fine;
(iii) the offences are compoundable, whether with or without the permission of
the court, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or under any other law for the
time being in force.
Sub-clause (3) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clauses (1)
and (2), the Gram Nyayalaya shall also try all such offences or grant such relief under the
State Acts by including them in Part III of the First Schedule to the proposed legislation.
Clause 15.— This clause seeks to lay down the civil jurisdiction of the Gram Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force and subject to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and
sub-clause (2), the Gram Nyayalayas shall have jurisdiction to try all original suits and
proceedings of such categories and subject to such pecuniary limits as may be notified by
the High Court from time to time.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall be the lowest court of competent
jurisdiction to hear and dispose of suits of a civil nature falling under the classes of disputes
specified in the Second Schedule to the proposed legislation.
Clause 16.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government as well as the
State Government to amend the Schedules to the Act as per their legislative competence of
Parliament and State Legislatures respectively.
Sub-clause (1) provides that if the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary
or expedient so to do, it  may, by notification in the Official Gazette , add to or omit any item
from the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as the case may be, of the proposed legislation
and thereupon the First Schedule, or the Second Schedule, as the case may be, shall be
deemed to have been amended accordingly.
Sub-clause (3) provides that if the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary or
expedient so to do, it may, in consultation with the High Court, by notification, add to any
item in Part III of the First Schedule or Part III of the Second Schedule or omit from it any item
in respect of which the State Legislature is competent to make laws and thereupon the First
Schedule or the Second Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended
accordingly.
Sub-clauses (2) and  (4) provides that every notification issued under sub-section (1)
by the Central Government and under sub-section (3) by the State Government shall be laid
before Parliament and the State Legislature respectively.
Clause 17.— This clause seeks to provide that the Gram Nyayalayas shall have
exclusive civil and criminal jurisdiction in certain matters. It provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, or any other law for the time being in force and subject to the provisions of this Act, a
Gram Nyayalaya shall have exclusive jurisdiction in respect of disputes covered by the
subject matters specified in sections 14 and 15 of the proposed legislation.
Clause 18.— This clause seeks to provide that the Gram Nyayalayas shall not try
certain disputes. It provides that notwithstanding anything contained in proposed section
13, section 14 or section 15, the Gram Nyayalaya shall not have jurisdiction to take cognizance
of the certain classes of disputes . They are—

18
(a) disputes by or against the Central Government or the State Government or
public servants for anything which is in good faith done or purported to have been
done by them in their official capacity;
(b) a dispute where one of the parties is a minor or a person of unsound mind;
and
(c) any claim cognizable by revenue courts.
Clause 19.— This clause seeks to empower the Nyayadhikaris to close cases in certain
circumstances. It provides that if the Nyayadhikari is satisfied that it necessary in the interest
of justice to close a case, it may, on its own motion or on an application by either party to the
civil dispute, pass orders closing the case, and advise the parties to approach the appropriate
civil court in respect of matters relating to any complicated issue of fact or law which should
be decided by any other competent court of law. However, whenever a case is closed by the
Nyayadhikari under this clause , the period for which the case has been pending in the Gram
Nyayalaya shall be excluded for the purposes of computing the period of limitation.
Clause 20.— This clause provides for the period of limitation. It provides that the
provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, and the provisions of Chapter XXXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall be applicable to the proceedings before the Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 21.— This clause provides for transfer of pending cases in subordinate courts.
Sub-clause (1) seeks to provde that the District Court may, with effect from such date
as may be notified, transfer all the cases pending before the court subordinate to it, both civil
and criminal, to the Gram Nyayalaya competent to hear and try.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya may in its discretion continue with
the cases from the stage at which it was pending from the court from which it was transferred
or it may de novo hear or try the case, as the case may be.
Clause 22.—This clause deals with the duties of ministerial officers of the Gram
Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the State Government shall determine the nature and
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Gram Nyayalaya in the
discharge of its functions and provide the Gram Nyayalaya with such officers and other
employees as it may think fit.
Sub-clause (2) seeks to empower the State Government to determine by rules the
salaries and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of the officers and
other employees of the Gram Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (3) seeks to empower the Nyayadhikari to assign from time to time the
duties to be performed by the officers and other employees attached to a Gram Nyayalaya.
Clause 23.— This clause seeks to provide that the Gram Nyayalayas shall follow
summary procedure.
Sub-clause (1) seeks to provide that subject to the provisions of sub-clause (2), the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the rules made thereunder shall
apply to the proceedings in respect of criminal cases triable by the Gram Nyayalaya under
the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) provides that while exercising criminal jurisdiction, the Gram Nyayalaya
shall follow the procedure for summary trials and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both
inclusive) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply accordingly.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the trial of offences by the Gram Nyayalaya shall be as far
as may be, on a day-to-day basis and a case shall be disposed of within a period of ninety
days from the date of its institution.

19
Clause 24.— This clause deals with the pronouncement of judgment by the Gram
Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall pronounce its judgment within
one week from the last date of its hearing.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall deliver a copy of its judgment
immediately to both the parties free of cost.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall, in cases where imprisonment
has been awarded, forward copies of the judgment along with the warrant of commitment to
the officer-in-charge of the jail concerned, the police station concerned, and the Sessions
Judge having jurisdiction.
Clause 25.— This clause deals with the power of Gram Nyayalayas to transfer certain
cases. It provides that if at any stage of the proceedings it appears to the Gram Nyayalaya
that the case is one which ought to be tried by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any
other superior court, or if at the close of a trial, the Gram Nyayalaya is of the opinion that the
accused is guilty and that he ought to receive a punishment more severe than that which the
Gram Nyayalaya is empowered to impose, it shall submit the case to the appropriate Magistrate
having jurisdiction who shall transfer the case to his own court and proceed according to
law.
Clause 26.— This clause seeks to provide for legal aid to the parties.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the State Government shall appoint in each Gram
Nyayalaya one or more advocates for the purpose of conducting the criminal cases in the
Gram Nyayalaya.
Sub-clause (2) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in a criminal proceeding before the Gram Nyayalaya,
the complainant may, engage an advocate of his choice and at his expense to present the
case of the prosecution with the leave of the Gram Nyayalaya.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the State Legal Services Authority constituted under
section 6 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 shall prepare a panel of advocates and
assign at least two of them to be attached to each Gram Nyayalaya so that their services
would readily be available to the parties, if they so desire.
Clause 27.— This clause deals with the power of the Gram Nyayalaya to compound
certain offences. It provides that any offence cognizable by a Gram Nyayalaya under the
proposed legislation may be compounded with its permission, if such offence is compoundable
with or without the permission of the court under any law for the time being in force.
Clause 28.— This clause seeks to lay down that the Gram Nyayalayas shall not take
cognizance of certain offences.   It provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall not take cognizance
of any offence which is punishable with imprisonment for more than one year or if the
accused has been previously convicted and sentenced to suffer imprisonment for a term of
one year or more.
Clause 29.— This clause deals with the power of Gram Nyayalayas to order amount of
fine to be applied in meeting certain expenses. It provides that in  imposing any fine, the Gram
Nyayalaya may direct that the whole or any portion of the fine recovered shall be applied
towards defraying the expenses incurred in the case by the complainant or in giving
compensation to the victim of an offence or to a person for any material loss or damage
caused to him by reason of commission of the offence.
Clause 30.— This clause seeks to lay down the duties of Gram Nyayalayas to make
efforts for conciliation and settlement of civil disputes.
Sub-clause (1) provides that in every suit or proceeding of a civil nature instituted
endeavour shall be made by the Gram Nyayalaya in the first instance, where it is possible to

20
do so, consistent with the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist, persuade and
conciliate the parties in arriving at a settlement in respect of the subject matter of the suit or
proceeding, as the case may be, and for this purpose a Gram Nyayalaya may, subject to the
rules made by the High Court in this behalf, follow such procedure as it may deem fit.
Sub-clause (2) provides that if, in any suit or proceeding, at any stage, it appears to the
Gram Nyayalaya that there is a reasonable possibility of a settlement between the parties, the
Gram Nyayalaya may adjourn the proceedings for such period as it thinks fit to enable them
to make attempts to effect such a settlement.
Sub-clause (3) provides that where any proceedings is adjourned under sub-clause (2)
the Gram Nyayalaya may in its discretion refer the matter to one or more conciliators for
effecting a settlement between the parties.
Sub-clause (4) provides that the power conferred by sub-clause (2) shall be in addition
to, and not in derogation of, any other power of the Gram Nyayalaya to adjourn the
proceedings.
Clause 31. — This clause seeks to provide for appointment of conciliators.
Sub-clause (1) provides that for the purposes of clause 30, the District Judge shall, in
consultation with the District Magistrate, prepare a panel consisting of the names of social
workers at the village level having integrity for appointment as Conciliators who possess
such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by the High Court.
Sub-clause (2) empowers the State Government to make rules laying down the rate of
the sitting fee and other allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
engagement of Conciliators.
Clause 32.— This clause seeks to provide for the procedure generally.
Sub-clause (1) provides that subject to the other provisions of the proposed legislation
and the rules made thereunder, the Gram Nyayalaya shall be deemed to be a civil court and
shall have all the powers of such court for dealing with the suits of a civil nature.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall not be bound by the procedure
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the rules of evidence as laid down in the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and
subject to the other provisions of the proposed legislation and any rule made by the High
Court, the Gram Nyayalaya shall have the power to regulate its own procedure including the
fixing of places and times of its proceedings.
Sub-clause (3) provides that in respect of matters of a civil nature for which no express
provision has been made, the High Court may, by rules, provide for them.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to provide for a special procedure in civil disputes.
Sub-clause (1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
relating to the Court fee, any person desirous of settlement of any dispute or matter of a civil
nature referred to in the Second Schedule may make an application to the Gram Nyayalaya in
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the High Court and accompanied by
a fee of one hundred rupees or such other amount as may be prescribed by the High Court
from time to time.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall issue a notice accompanied by
a copy of the application served on the opposite party in such manner as may be prescribed
by the High Court fixing a date for his appearance or to file a written reply.
Sub-clause (3) provides that after the opposite party files his written reply, the Gram
Nyayalaya shall fix a date for hearing and inform all the parties to be present in person or
through their advocates or authorised agents.

21
Sub-clause (4) provides that on the date fixed for hearing the Gram Nyayalaya shall
hear both the parties in regard to their respective contentions and if the dispute does not
require recording of any evidence, pronounce the decision.
Sub-clause (5) provides that in case any of the parties to the dispute desires to produce
oral or documentary evidence, or both, and the Gram Nyayalaya is of the opinion that the
dispute involves questions of fact which have to be decided by recording oral or documentary
evidence for a just decision, the Gram Nyayalaya shall record the summary of evidence, if
any, on a date fixed for hearing.
Sub-clause (6) provides that notwithstanding that the procedure laid down in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall not be applicable to civil disputes or claims before the
Gram Nyayalaya, the Gram Nyayalaya shall, have the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a claim or dispute in respect of the
following matters, namely: —
(i) summoning and enforcing attendance of any person or witness and examining
him on oath;
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material
object producible as evidence;
(iii) receiving of evidence on affidavits;
(iv) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte;
(v) any other matter which may be prescribed by the State Government.
Sub-clause (7) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall have the power to proceed
ex parte if any of the parties does not appear.
Sub-clause (8) provides that in regard to any incidental matter that may arise during
the course of the proceedings, the Gram Nyayalaya shall adopt such procedure as it may
deem just and proper in the interest of justice.
Sub-clause (9) provides that the proceedings shall, as far as is practicable, be consistent
with the interests of justice and the hearing shall be continued on a day to day basis until its
conclusion, unless the Gram Nyayalaya finds the adjournment of the hearing beyond the
following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Sub-clause (10) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall pronounce the judgment
within a period of ninety days from the date of statement of claim application, and within one
week of the last day of hearing of the case.
Sub-clause (11) provides that the judgment shall contain the number of the application,
the names of the parties, the particulars of the claim, the points for determination, the summary
of evidence adduced on either side, if any, and the findings reached by the Gram Nyayalaya.
Sub-clause (12) provides that a copy of the order shall be delivered to both the parties
within three days on payment of such fees as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Clause 34.— This clause seeks to provide for transfer of civil disputes. It provides
that the District Judge having jurisdiction may, on an application made by any party or when
there is considerable pendency with one Gram Nyayalaya or whenever he considers it
necessary in the interests of justice, transfer any case pending before a Gram Nyayalaya to
any other Gram Nyayalaya within his jurisdiction.
Clause 35.— This clause seeks to provide for payment of interest in case of money
decrees.
Sub-clause (1) provides that where in any claim for money due the Gram Nyayalaya
passes an order for payment of money, it may also order payment of interest thereon at a rate

22
not exceeding twelve per cent. per annum from the date of the claim statement application till
the date of payment.
Sub-clause ( 2) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya may, if it deems fit, direct payment in
instalments with or without interest.
Clause 36.— This clause seeks to provide for the powers of the Gram Nyayalayas to
issue commissions. It provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall have all the powers of the civil
court to issue commission and the provisions of sections 75 to 78 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 shall apply as if for the words “the Court” or “any Court” referred to therein,
the words “the Gram Nyayalaya” had been substituted.
Clause 37.— This clause seeks to provide for the use of the official language of the
State in proceedings before the Gram Nyayalayas. It provides that the proceedings before
the Gram Nyayalaya and its judgment shall, as far as practicable, be in one of the official
languages of the State other than the English language.
Clause 38.— This clause seeks to provide that the evidence give orally before a Gram
Nyayalaya shall be on oath or on solemn affirmation.
Clause 39.— This clause seeks to provide that the Gram Nyayalayas shall have the
powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class in summoning of persons.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall have the powers of a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class in respect of all matters relating to summons, securing the
presence of witnesses, attendance of persons confined or detained in prisons, production of
any material evidence including any records, title deeds, agreements, contracts, and any
other thing, object or such relevant material as it may deem fit.
Sub-clause (2) provides that where any person has been given notice or summons to
appear before the Gram Nyayalaya, the Gram Nyayalaya shall record his statement and
thereafter the Gram Nyayalaya may dispense with his attendance at the hearing of the case.
Clause 40.— This clause seeks to provide for appeals in criminal cases.
Sub-clause (1) provides that an appeal against any order or sentence passed by a
Gram Nyayalaya in a criminal matter shall lie to the Court of Sessions exercising jurisdiction
over the area within which the Gram Nyayalaya is situated, within thirty days of the passing
of such order or sentence.
Sub-clause (2) provides that an appeal preferred under sub-section (1) shall be heard
and disposed of by an Assistant Sessions Judge subordinate to the Sessions Judge within
six months from the date of filing of the appeal.
Sub-clause (3) provides that an  Assistant Sessions Judge may, pending disposal of
the appeal, direct the suspension of the sentence or order appealed against.
Sub-clause (4) provides that the decision of the Assistant Sessions Judge under sub-
section (2) shall be final and no appeal or revision shall lie from the decision of the Assistant
Sessions Judge.
Clause 41.— This clause seeks to provide for appeals in civil cases.
Sub-clause (1) provides that an appeal against any final order or judgment passed by
a Gram Nyayalaya in a civil matter shall lie to the District Court exercising jurisdiction over
the area within which the Gram Nyayalaya is situated within thirty days of the passing of
such order or judgment.
Sub-clause (2) provides that an appeal preferred under sub-section (1) shall be heard
and disposed of by the Senior Civil Judge subordinate to the District Judge, within six
months from the date of filing of the appeal.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the District Court may, pending disposal of the appeal,
direct the suspension of the order or judgment appealed against.

23
Sub-clause (4) provides that the decision of the Senior Civil Judge under sub-clause
(2) shall be final and no appeal or revision shall lie from the decision of the Senior Civil Judge.
Clause 42.— This clause seeks to make certain provisions in respect of cases pending
in or disposed of by other courts.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the Gram Nyayalaya shall not try any civil matter which is
the subject matter of any proceeding pending or disposed of by a competent court unless it
is a pending case transferred to it by the District Court under clause 21.
Sub-clause (2) provides that where a case is pending in any court against an accused
person in respect of any offence or where an accused person has been tried for any offence,
the Gram Nyayalaya shall not take cognizance of any such offence or on the same facts, or
any other offence of which the accused might have been charged or convicted.
Clause 43.— This clause seeks to provide for assistance of police to Gram Nyayalayas.
Sub-clause (1) provides that every police officer functioning within the local limits of
jurisdiction of a Gram Nyayalaya shall be bound to assist the Gram Nyayalaya in the exercise
of its lawful authority.
Sub-clause (2) provides that whenever the Gram Nyayalaya, in the discharge of its
functions, requests revenue or police officer or a Government servant to provide assistance
to the Gram Nyayalaya, he shall be bound to provide such assistance.
Clause 44.— This clause seeks to provide that the Nyayadhikaris and employees of
the Gram Nyayalaya, etc.,  shall be public servants. It provides that the Nyayadhikaris and
the officers and other employees of the Gram Nyayalayas shall be deemed, when acting or
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of the proposed legislation would be
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 45.— This clause seeks to provide for inspection of Gram Nyayalayas. It
provides that the District Judge shall authorise any Senior Civil Judge or Assistant Sessions
Judge to inspect the Gram Nyayalayas within his jurisdiction once in every six months or
such other period as the High Court may specify and issue such instructions, as he considers
necessary and submit a report to the High Court.
Clause 46.— This clause empowers the Central Government to issue orders published
in the Official Gazette making such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the
proposed legislation for removing difficulties in giving effect to it provisions. Such orders
could be issued within three years from the date of commencement of the proposed legislation.
It also provides for laying of such orders before each House of Parliament.
Clause 47.— This clause seeks to empower the High Courts to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the proposed legislation. These are mainly matters of procedure.
Clause 48— This clause confers power on the State Government to make rules for
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the matters
in respect of which rules may be made by the State Government shall be published in the
Official Gazette and be laid before the State Legislature.

24
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to establish one or more Gram
Nyayalayas for every Panchayat at intermediate level or  for a group of contiguous Panchayats
at intermediate level in every district to exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction. Every
Gram Nyayalaya shall be presided over by a Nyayadhikari. Clause 9 empowers the State
Governments to lay down, by rules, the salary and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the Nyayadhikaris. Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the
State Government to determine the nature and categories of the officers and other employees
required to assist a Gram Nyayalaya in the discharge of its functions and to lay down rules
specifying the salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of service
of, the other officers and employees of the Gram Nyayalayas. Clause 26 empowers the State
Government to appoint  one or more advocates for each Gram Nyayalaya for the purpose of
conducting the criminal cases before each such Gram Nyayalaya. Clause 31 of the Bill
empowers the State Government to determine the sitting fees and other allowances payable
to, and the other terms and conditions of engaging Conciliators.
2. The Central Government will meet the entire non-recurring expenditure and the
recurring expenditure for first three years will be shared between the Central and State
Government, following which, it will be met by the concerned State Governments. At present
it will not be possible to work out the exact expenditure that may be required.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 47 empowers the High Courts to make, by notification in the Official Gazette,
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may provide for. These matters
inter alia include the receipt and custody of all documents and records by or on behalf of
the Gram Nyayalaya and the grant of judgment, orders and other records, the place and the
manner in which the proceedings of the Gram Nyayalaya shall be conducted, the manner in
which any process is issued by the Gram Nyayalaya, the particulars of the registers and
records to be maintained by the Gram Nyayalaya, the conduct of training programme for the
Nyayadhikaris and Conciliators of the Gram Nyayalayas, the supervision and inspection of
the Gram Nyayalayas in respect of specified matters, rules regulating the procedure for
assisting, persuading or conciliation of parties in arriving at a settlement in a suit or proceeding
under sub-clause (1) of clause 30, the detailed procedure for conduct of civil suits under sub-
clauses (1) and (3) of clause 30, the conditions which a person shall fulfill to be eligible to be
included in the panel of Conciliators under sub-clause (1) of clause 31and the form and the
manner of service of notice under sub-clause (1) of clause 33;
2. Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to make, by notification in
the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may be
made. These matters inter alia include the rules relating to appointment of the Nyayadhikari
under sub-clause (2) of clause 5, the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms
and conditions of service of Nyayadhikaris under clause 9, the form and dimensions of the
seal of the Gram Nyayalaya under clause 12, the salaries and allowances payable to and the
other terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Gram
Nyayalayas under sub-clause (2) of clause 22, the sitting fee and other allowances payable
to and the other terms and conditions of engagement of Conciliators under sub-clause (2) of
clause 31and  the fee payable in respect of copies of orders of the Gram Nyayalaya under
sub-clause (12) of clause 33.
3.  The rules made by the State Government are required to be laid before the State
Legislature.
4. The matters in respect of rules may be made either by the High Court or by the State
Government are matters of administrative details or of procedure and it is not possible to
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
25
SERVER 5 \ BILL2007 \ LAW \ 1514LAW

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas for the purposes of providing access
to justice, both civil and criminal, to the citizens at the grass-roots level and to
ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason
of social, economic or other disabilities and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Hans Raj Bhardwaj Minister of Law and Justice)
MGIPMRND—2141RS(S5)—9-5-2007.