AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAIYA SABHA

But No, XXXVI oF 1999

THE ADMINISTRATORS-GENERAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
A

BILL
further to amend the Administrators-General Act, 1963.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may called the Administrators-General (Amendment) Act, 1999.
2. In section 9, section 10, section 29 and section 36 of the Administrators-General

Act, 1963, for the words “fifty thousand”, wherever they occur, the words “two lakhs” shall
5 be substituted.

Short ttle

Amendment of
sections 9, 10,
29 and 36 of
Act 45 of 1963


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Section 29 of the Administrators-General Act, 1963 provides for issue of a certificate
to a claimant claiming assets of a deceased otherwise than as a creditor. However, a
certificate can be granted by the Administrator-Gencral under this section only in cases
where the assets left by the deceased person (excluding any sum of moncy deposited in a
Government savings bank or any provident fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 1925
applies) did not at the date of the death exceed in value in the whole the monetary limit
specified in the section. In the Act as originally cnacted in 1963, the monctary limit specified
in the section was only Rs. 5,000. The Act was amended in 1972 and 1983 enhancing the
said monetary limit from Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 15,000 and from Rs. 15,000 to Rs. 50,000
respectively.

2. Representations have since been received for enhancing the aforesaid monetary
limit in section 29 of the Administrators-Gencral Act, 1963 from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 2,00,000
‘on account of the decrease in the moncy value and also the escalation of value of assets. It
is, therefore, proposed to increase the monetary limit from Rs. 50,000, as at present, to
Rs. 2,00,0000 by suitably amending the reference to monetary limit in sections 9, 10, 29
and 36 of the said Act.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deva, RAM JETHMALANI.
The 26th November, 1999,


39 of 1925.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ADMINISTRATORS-GENERAL ACT, 1963
(45 oF 1963)

* * * *
9.) It

(a) any peron has died leaving within any State assets exceeding rupees fifty
thousand in value, and

(b) (whether the obtaining of probate of his will or letters of administration to
his estate is or is not obligatory), no person to whom any court would have jurisdic-
tion to commit administration of such assets has, within one month after his death,
applied in such State for such probate, or letters of administration, and

(c) (in cases where the obtaining of such probate or letters of administration is
not obligatory under the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1925), no person
has taken other proceedings for the protection of the estate,

the Administrator-General of the State in which such assets are, may, subject to any rules
made by the State Government, within a reasonable time after he has had notice of the death
of such person, and of his having left such assets, taken such proceedings as may be neces-
sary to obtain from the High Court letters of administration of the estate of such person.

(2) The Administrator-General shall not take proceedings under this section unless
he is satisfied, that there is apprehension of misappropriation, deterioration or waste of such
assets if such proceedings are not taken by him or that such proceedings are otherwise
necessary for the protection of the assets.

10. (/) Whenever any person has died leaving assets within any State exceeding
rupees fifty thousand in value, and the High Court for that there is imminent danger of
misappropriation, deterioration or waste of such assets, requiring immediate action, the
High Court may, upon the application of the Administrator-General or any person interested
in such assets or in the due administration thereof, forthwith direct the Administrator-
General—

(a) to collect and take possession of such assets, and

(b) to hold, deposit, realise, sell or invest the same according to the directions
of the High Court, and, in default of any such directions, according to the provisions
of this Act so far as the same are applicable to such assets

(2) Any order of High Court under sub-section (/) shall entitle the Administrator-
General—

(a) to maintain any suit or proceedings for the recovery of such assets;

(6) if he thinks fit, to apply for letters of administration of the estate of such
deceased person;

(c) to retain out of the assets of the estate any fees chargeable under rules made
under this Act; and

(बी) to reimburse himself for all payments made by him in respect of such assets
which a private administrator might lawfully have made.

* * * * *

Right of
Administrator-
General to
apply for
administration
of estates.

Power of
Administrator-
General to
collect and
hold assets

immediate
action 15


In what cases
Administrator-
General may
grant certificate.

Administrator-
General not
bound to take
out administra-
tion on account
of assets for
which he has
granted certifi-
cate:

CHAPTER IV
GRANT OF CERTIFICATE,

29. (1) Whenever any person has died leaving assets within any State and the Admin-
istrator-General of such State is satisfied that such asscts, excluding any sum of money
deposited in a Government Savings Bank or in any provident fund to which the provisions
of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, apply, did not at the date of death exceed in the whole
fifteen thousand rupees in value, he may grant to any person, claiming otherwise than as a
creditor to be interested in such assets or in the due administration thereof, a certificate
under his hand entitling the claimant to receive the assets therein mentioned left by the
deceased within the State, to a value not exceeding in the whole fifty thousand rupees.

(2) No certificate under this section shall be granted before the lapse of one month
from the death unless before the lapse of the said one month the Administrator-General is
requested so to do by writing under the hand of the executor or the widow or other person
entitled to administer the estate of the deceased and he thinks fit to grants it,

(3) No certificate shall be granted under this section—

() where probate of the deceased's will or letters of administration of his estate
has or have been granted; or

(ii) in respect of any sum of money deposited in a Government Savings Bank or
in any provident fund to which the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925,
apply.

* * * * *

36. The Administrator-General shall not bound to take out letters of administration of
the estate of any deceased person on account of the assets in respect of which he grants any
certificate under section 29 or section 30, but he may do so if he revoke such certificate
under section 29 or section 30, but he may do so if revokes such certificate under section
33, or ascertains that the value of the estate exceeded fifty thousand rupees.

* * * * *

19 of 1925

19 of 1925.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Administrators-General Act, 1963.

(Shri Ram Jethmalani, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs) -

MGIP(PLU)—2084RS—26.11.1999