AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. XXXV of 2025 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE PROMOTION OF 
SCIENTIFIC TEMPER BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for the 
promotion of scientific temper in the country and  
for matters connected therewith 
 or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for the Promotion of
Scientific Temper Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b) “Commission” means the National Commission for the
Promotion of Scientific Temper established under section 3; 
(c) ‘educational institutions” means all schools, colleges,
professional institutions that impart education and learning; 
(d) ‘Fund’ means the Fund for the Promotion of Scientific
Temper 
(e) constituted under section 10;
(f) ‘humanism’ means a rational outlook that attaches prime
importance to human potential and reason rather than religious 
dogmas and superstitions;  
(g) “scientific temper” means a way of life which focusses on
the search for truth and new knowledge, the refusal to accept anything 
without testing and trial, the capacity to change previous conclusions 
in the face of new evidence and the reliance on observed fact and not 
on pre-conceived theory; 
(h) "member" means a Member of the National Commission for
the Promotion of Scientific Temper established under section 3; and 
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5 
10 
15 
20 
Constitution 
of the 
National 
Commission 
for the 
Promotion of 
Scientific 
Temper.
3. (1)  With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be
established, for the purposes of this Act, a Commission, to be known as
the National Commission for the Promotion of Scientific Temper, to
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned
to, it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable 
and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi and
the Commission may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government, establish offices at other places in the country as it may 
deem necessary, for the efficient discharge of the duties assigned to it 
under the Act.  
(4) The Commission shall consist of the following persons,
namely— 
(a) a Chairperson, having specialised knowledge,
outstanding contribution and eminence in the field of 
scientific enquiry, critical thinking, technological innovation 
and related areas to be appointed by the Central 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) three Members, to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed, from 
amongst the persons of eminence, ability, integrity and 
standing who have extensive professional experience in,– 
(i) the a pplication  of science and critical thinking
in education, curriculum, media, work place and 
related fields; 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

3 
5 
10 
15 
(ii) organisations and institutions working for the
promotion of science policy, scientific temper, science 
education, popular science and grassroot level 
innovations; 
(iii) conceptualising and developing innovative
programmes for popularising science, development of 
critical thinking and rational approach; or 
(iv) formulating and implementing science and
technology policies of the State and Central 
Governments. 
(c) one Member-Secretary who shall be a senior member
of the Indian Civil Service, having at least ten years of 
professional experience in the management and 
administration of matters related to f ormulation or 
implementation of  science policy, to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
20 
4. (1) The Chairperson and members of the Commission shall hold office for
such period not exceeding four years from the date on which they assume
office, or for such period as may be specified by the Central Government in
this behalf.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and members shall be such as
may be prescribed.
Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of the 
Chairperson 
and Members of 
the 
Commission. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 4, the
Chairperson or a member other than the Member-Secretary, appointed under 
clause (3) of sub-section (4) of section 3, may by writing under his hand to 
the Central Government resign from his office at any time; 
(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the
Chairperson or any member of the Commission, if the Chairperson or as the
case may be, such other member––
(a) has been adjudged insolvent; or
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or 
(d) refuses to act or has become physically or mentally incapable
of acting as a member; or 
(e) has, without obtaining leave of absence from the
Commission, remained absent from three consecutive meetings of 
Commission; 
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest which is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or a member; or 
(g) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his
office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the interest 
of the office or public interest. 
  Provided that no persons hall be removed from office under this 
clause until that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in the matter. 
Resignation or 
removal. 

4 
(3) A vacancy caused under sub-sections (1) and (2) or otherwise shall be
filled by fresh appointment or nomination, as the case may be:
Provided that the Chairperson or any other member appointed or 
nominated against any casual vacancy in the Commission shall hold office 
only for the remainder of the term of the Chairperson or member in whose 
place he has been appointed or nominated. 
5 
Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate 
proceedings 
of the 
Commission.
6. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be
invalid on the ground merely by reason of:
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the
Commission; 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or
member of the Commission; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not
affecting the merits of the case. 
10 
Officers, 
experts and 
other 
employees of 
the 
Commission.
7. (1) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and
staff including experts to the Commission, as may be considered 
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The method of recruitment of officers and staff including experts, the
salary and allowances payable to them, and other terms and conditions
of their service, shall be such as may be prescribed.
15 
20 
Members, 
officers and 
staff of the 
Commission 
to be public 
servants. 
8. The Chairperson, Members, officers and staff including experts of the
Commission shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance
of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning
of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 45 of 2023. 
Functions of 
the 
Commission.
9. The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely:—
(a) promote and encourage scientific temper, humanism and the
spirit of enquiry in all educational institutions- both public and private, 
workplaces and other spheres of society in which people interact with 
each other; 
(b) cultivate curiosity-driven approach, critical thinking,
questioning, logic and rational decision making amongst students, 
work force and the general public; 
(c) foster, promote, and sustain, by all appropriate means, the
cultivation of science, critical thinking and reasoning in all its aspects 
- pure, applied, and educational;
(d) encourage individual initiatives for the acquisition and
dissemination of knowledge, and for the discovery of new knowledge, 
in an atmosphere of academic freedom; 
(e) promote scientists and innovators in all realms of societal life
and offer proper recognition of their achievement; 
(f) promote the concept of ‘scientific temper’ as a compulsory
part of the school curriculum and encourage students to understand the 
practical and applied aspects of the concept in everyday life;  
(g) trigger changes in the mindset and value systems to
recognise, respect and reward performances which create wealth from 
science and technology derived knowledge; 
(h) strive for building a strong scientific workforce and
developing educational programs to train scientists and technicians; 
(i) formulate a comprehensive national policy for promoting
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 

5 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
scientific temper in the country, and design a strategic action plan, and 
guidelines for the implementation, and monitoring and evaluation 
activities based on the national policy framework;  
(j) perform such functions regarding the formulation and
implementation of schemes for the promotion of scientific temper and 
critical thinking as may be assigned to it by the appropriate 
Government; 
(k) coordinate with various Government departments, both of
the Central and State Governments, as may be required, for creating 
technological tools, educational materials and awareness techniques 
for the promotion of scientific temper including audio and video 
records and interviews of Nobel Laureates;     
(l) conduct in-depth research to suggest to the appropriate
Government better ways for ensuring the fostering of scientific 
temper in the country;  
(m) support the institutions, organisations and individuals who
are engaged in the promotion of popularising science and scientific 
thinking in the country;  
(n) enquire into any complaints concerning the promotion of
science in the country and to recommend to the appropriate 
Government the action to be taken in such matters; 
(o) act as a national-level grievance redressal mechanism in
matters related to the propagation of superstitions and dangerous 
beliefs among the society;       
(p) advise the appropriate Government in any other matter as
may be referred to it, from time to time; 
(q) present to the Cen tral Government, annually as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon its working; and 
(r) such other matters, as may be prescribed.
30 
35 
40 
10. The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to inclauses
(n) and (o) of section 9, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and,
in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
from any part of India and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Commission to 
have powers of 
a Civil Court. 
11. The appropriate Government shall consult the Commission on all policies
related to the promotion of scientific temper in the country.
Appropriate 
Government 
 to consult the 
Commission. 
45 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Special Fund to be known as the Fund for the
Promotion of Scientific Temper, for  carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governmen ts shall, from
time to time, after due appropriation made in this behalf by the
Fund for the 
Promotion of 
Scientific 
Temper. 

6 
Parliament or the respective State Legislature by law, contribute such 
sums of money to the Fund, in such ratio as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Fund shall be administered and maintained by the Commission,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accounts and 
audit.
13. (1) The Commission shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
including the administration of the Fund and prepare an annual statement of 
accounts in such form and manner, at such time of each financial year, and 
such intervals, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the National Commission
under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of
the offices of the Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf,
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the
Central Government by the Commission.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Annual 
Report.
14. (1) The Commission shall prepare every year, in such form and within such
time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of
Parliament, along with a memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be
taken on the recommendations of the Commission relating to the Union and
the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of such recommendations, within a
period of one year from the date of receipt of such report.
(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any issues connected with
the State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the
Governor of that State who shall in turn cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State concerned, along with an explanatory memorandum
on the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations related
to the State, and reasons for non-acceptance if any, of such recommendations
within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such report.
30 
35 
40 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect.
15. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law.
16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 45 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
17. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear
to be necessary for removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
50 

7 
5 
10 
15 
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of
giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, w hile it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Power to make 
rules and 
regulations. 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Promoting scientific temper is  crucial for societal progress, personal 
development, and creating a more rational world.  It encourages evidence -based 
decision-making, challenges superstitions, and fosters a spirit of inquiry that 
ultimately leads to a more informed and open- minded society. It was Pandit 
Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of the country, who popularised the 
concept of scientific temper in India. According to Nehru, scientific temper points 
out the way along which man should travel. It is the temper of a free man. Scientific 
temper, in essence, ‘is the search for truth and new knowledge, the refusal to accept 
anything without testing and trial, the capacity to change previous conclusions in 
the face of new evidence, and above all, the reliance on observed fact and not on 
pre-conceived theory’. 
Scientific temper is not merely about scientific knowledge, but also about a 
way of approaching the world with curiosity, scepticism and a quest for deeper 
understanding. India is the first and only country that adopted the concept of 
‘Scientific Temper’ in the constitution. The 42nd amendment to the Constitution of 
Indiain 1976 added Article 51-A(h)Part IVA on Fundamental Duties, which states 
that: “It shall be the duty of every citizen of India to develop the scientific temper, 
humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform”. 
Although scientific temper enjoys constitutional sanctity for almost half  a 
century, the Indian society hasn’t recognised it as a way of life. In order to foster a 
culture of rational decision -making that questions religi ous dogmas and 
superstitions, we need serious effort from the Government to popularise the concept 
of scientific temper. By empowering individuals with the tools to understand and 
appreciate scientific concepts, we can pave the way for a more informed and rational 
society. In this era of religious dogmas, witchcraft, honour-killing and black-magic, 
there is an urgent need to foster a mindset that values evidence, reason, and critical 
thinking. The role of the G overnment in fostering scientific temper is critical. 
Therefore, creation of a specialised N ational Commission for the P romotion of 
Scientific Temper is required to empower the children and common man in order to 
make them active stakeholders in the scientific process.  
Hence, this Bill. 
SANDOSH KUMAR P. 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
   Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National 
Commission for the Promotion of Scientific Temper and for the appointment of the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Commission. Clause 4 inter alia provides for 
the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson 
and Members of the Commission. Clause 7 provides for the appointment of officers 
and staff including experts of the Commission, as may be considered necessary, and 
for the salaries and allowances payable to them as well as the terms and conditions 
of their service.  Clause 9 lays down the functions of the Commission, which inter 
alia, provides for the conduct of in- depth research to suggest to the appropriate 
Government better ways of ensuring the fostering of scientific temper and to support 
institutions, organisations and individuals engaged in the promotion and 
popularisation of science and scientific thinking in the country. Clause 12 of the Bill 
provides for the constitution of a Fund for the Promotion of Scientific Temper to be 
utilised for the effective implementation of the provisions of the Act, to which the 
Central and State Governments shall contribute in such ratio, as may be prescribed. 
    The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non- recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult at this stage, to estimate the exact quantum of expenditure likely to be 
involved. 

10 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION 
   Clause 1 7 e mpowers the Central Government to make such provisions 
through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Bill., whereas Clause 18 empowers the Central Government to 
frame rules and the National Commission for the Promotion of Scientific Temper to 
frame regulations for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
As the rules or orders will relate to matters of procedure and administrative 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______
____ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a National Commission 
for the promotion of scientific temper in the 
country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.) 
   RS-P&P-PMB(E)—335—08.12.2025.