THE MEDICARE SERVICE PERSONS AND MEDICARE SERVICE
INSTITUTIONS (PROTECTION FROM VIOLENCE AND
DAMAGE TO PROPERTY)
BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to protect the medicare service persons and medicare service institutions from violence
and damage to property and impose punishment on the offender and for matter
connected there with and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Medicare Service Persons and Medicare Service
Institutions (Protection from Violence and Damage to Property) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole country.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Medicare Service Institutions” mean all institutions providing medical care
to people which are under the control of  States or Central Government or Local Bodies
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill  No.  XXXVIII of  2008.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH FEBRUARY, 2009

2
etc., including any private hospital having facilities for treatment of the sick and used
for their reception or stay; any private maternity home where women are usually received
and accommodated for the purpose of confinement and anti-natal and post-natal care
in connection with child birth or anything connected therewith; and any private nursing
home used or intended to be used, for the reception and accommodation of persons
suffering from any sickness, injury or infirmity whether of body or mind and providing
of treatment for nursing or both of them and includes a maternity home or convalescent
home, etc.,
(b) “Medicare Service Person” include:—
(i) Registered Medical Practitioners, working in Medicare Institutions
(including those having provisional registration);
(ii) Registered Nurses;
(iii) Medical Students;
(iv) Nursing Students;
(v) Para Medical Workers employed and working in Medicare Service
Institutions;
(c) “Offender” means any person who either by himself or as a leader of a group
of persons or an organization, commits or attempts to commit or abets or incites the
commission of violence under this Act; and
(d) “Violence” means activities of causing any harm, injury or endangering the
life or intimidation, obstruction or hindrance to any medicare service person in discharge
of duty in the medicare service institution or damage to property in medicare service
institution.
3. Any act of violence against Medicare Service persons or damage to property in a
Medicare Service institution is hereby prohibited.
4. Any offender, who is found guilty of Committing an act in contravention of section
3, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term of three years and also with fine which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
5. Any offence committed under section 3, shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
6. (1) In addition to the punishment specified in section 4, the offender shall also be
liable to a penalty of twice the amount of purchase price of medical equipment damaged and
the loss caused to the property as determined by the Court trying the offender.
(2) If the offender fails to pay the penal amount under sub-section (1), the said amount
shall be recovered from him under the provisions of this Act as if it were an arrear of land
revenue.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith  contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject and save  as
aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
8. The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
Prohibition of
violence.
Penalty.
Offence to be
Cognizable
and non
bailable.
Recovery of
loss for the
damage caused
to property.
Overriding
effects.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Acts of violence causing injury or danger to the life of persons engaged in medicare
services as also damage to  property belonging to medicare institutions  are on the increase
in the century.  As a result of such incidents  against  medicare persons, patients visiting
hospitals have to suffer tremendously.
These acts are resorted to by the Relatives and alives acquaintances of patients who
are not satisfied with the treatment given to the patients and sametime also by unrully
elements of society.
As of now, there is no law in the country to safeguard the life of the doctors, para-
medical staff and others who as associated with medicare as also damage to property of
medicare service institutions.
It is, therefore, necessary that a suitable law be passed to prohibit violence against
medicare service persons and damage to property in medicare service institutions in the
country before the situtation becomes alarming.
Hence this Bill.
PRAKASH  JAVADEKAR
3

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only as such the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to protect the medicare  service persons and medicare service institutions from
violence and damage to property and impose punishment on the offender
and for matter connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prakash Javadekar, M.P . )
GMGIPMRND—663RS(S-5)—13-02-2009.