As INTRODUCED IN THE (२५४४ SABHA.

Bill No. XXXVI of 2001

THE INDIGENOUS DOMESTIC INDUSTRIES (PROTECTION FROM.
MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES) BILL, 2001

A
. BILL

to provide for the protection of indigenous domestic industries from the onslaught of
Multinational Companies adopting unfair trade practices in pricing etc. thereby
making the domestic industry sick and ultimately acquiring such sick industry and
to put a check on such practices of multinational companies by establishing a National
Fair Practices Commission and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Indigenous Domestic Industries (Protection from
Multinational Companies) Act, 2001.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(०) “Commission” means the National Fair Practices Commission established
under Section 3; हर

। 10 (0) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.

Definitions.


2

Establishment 3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months

of Commis- from the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a

ston. Commission to be known as the National Fair Practices Commission to exercise the powers
conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.

(2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and five 5
members who shall be appointed by the Central Government in the following manner:

(a) the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson shall be appointed from amongst
the sitting or former Judges of the Supreme Court or High Courts, as the case may
be;

(b) the members shall be appointed from amongst the persons having knowledge 10
and experience in the matters of industry, policy making and administration.

(3) The term of office of the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and members of the
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.

(4) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Jaipur in the State of Rajasthan.

Secretariat of. 4, The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Commission and such 15
the Commis- * gies staff on such terms and conditions as it deems fit for the efficient functioning of the
Sion. Commission.

Functions of 5. The functions of the Commission shall be to~
the Commis- oe, .
sion. (a) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made on a complaint made

by an enterpreneur of an indigenous domestic industry wherein it is alleged thata 20
Multinational Company (hereinafter referred to as MNC) is adopting an unfair prac-
tice of lowering the price of its products to such a lower level which may adversely
affect the viability of similar indigenous industry leading ultimately to its closure.

(b) ensure healthy competition amongst the domestic industries and MNCs.

(c) tender advice to the Central or State Governments on such matters relating 5
to industries or MNCs, as the case may be, as may be referred to it by the concerned

Government.
Powers of the 6. The Commission shall, while conducting any inquiry under this Act, have all the
Commission. powers of a Civil Court trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and in 5 of 1908.
particular in respect of the following matters, namely: wv

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;

(6) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(व) requisitioning any record of any indigenous industry of MNC as the case 5

may be; न . :
(e) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Proceedings 7. (a) The proceedings of the Commission shall be conducted at its headquarters in
of the such manner as may be prescribed.
Commission.

(9) The Commission shall be deemed to be a Civil Court and every proceedings 40
before the Commission shall be of the nature of a Judicial proceeding.

Reports. 8. (7) The Commission shall present its Report on every complaint or bunch of com-
हु plaints of similar nature to the President containing its recommendations.

(2) On receipt of each report, the President shall cause the same to be laid before
each House of Parliament with action taken on such report. 5


3

9. (7) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the
difficulty.

(2) Every order made under this Section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be
5 laid before each House of Parliament.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Power to
remove
difficulties.

Power to make
tules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Indian industries are poised to be wiped out by unfair trade practices being adopted
by the Multinational Companies. They are taking advantage of their deep pockets rendering
Indian Cos. to incurhuge losses to drive the out of business. In the aftermath of liberalisation
and globalisation of economy competition has increased leading to increase in the number of
foreign products available resulting reduction of prices. There are instances in India, where
MNCs have put their prices down to make others' business down. If it is analysed, it is
nothing but a predatory pricing policy being adopted by these companies to make the Indian
industry sick, so that MNCs can buy them. A similar trend in South East Asia was observed
last June. With foreign competition really hotting up and engulfing Indian Industry clearly
such a Governing Body is required urgently for protecting Indian Cos. from fierce competition
with MNCs.

Hence this Bill.

SANTOSH BAGRODIA


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 provides for the establishment of a National Fair Practices Commission.
Clause 4 provides for the Secretariat of the Commission. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of Rs. two crores
may be invovled as recurring expenditure per annum.

Asum of Rs. five crores may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of details only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

a

3.1.

to provide for the protection ot indigenous domestic industries from the onslaught of
Multinational Companies adopting unfair trade practices in pricing etc. thereby
making the domestic industry sick and ultimately acquiring such sick industry
and to put a check on such practices of Multinational Companies by
establishing a National Fair Practices Commission and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Shri Santosh Bagrodia, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—7562RS—30-03-2001.