2 1 _._______... ७ ५+++++3+++ननमनननननन-+-3+-..... व

AS INTRODUCED IW THe Rarra Saver

Bil] Ne. XXXV of 1993

‘
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1994
A

BILL,

further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
» the Forty-fifth Year of the Republic

BE it enacted by Parliamen
०६ India as follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure mann
386

¢ ४) ve, #09!

Amendment) Ac 4 pa
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, I! shall come into force मा

Central Government may. by notificavon in the pao

5 un such date as the
Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 20 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1978 (hereinafter 4
referred to ss the principal Act), after sub-section (4), the following sub- ment of
section shall be inserted, namely:— section

“(#4) The State Government may, by general or 20,
order and subject to such control and directions as it may deem fit
७ impose, delegate its powers under sub-section (4) ‘9 the District

2 of 1974

10 special

Magisirate.”.
3. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), after the Amend-
15 proviso, the following Explanetion shall be inserted and shall be deemed Soo of
section

to have been inserted with effect from the 18th day of December, 1978, Pa

namely: —


3

‘Explanation—Fay the purposes of this sub-section, —

(०) “regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers” means a Cadre
of Prosecuting Officers which includes therein the post of a
Public Prosecutor, by whatever name called, and which pro-
vides for promotion of sistant Public Prosecutors, by whatever

name celled, 10 that pes 3
(७) “Prosecuting Officer” means a Pe'son, by whatever
hame ealed, sppolnted 10 perform: the functions of a Public
Prosecutor, am Additional Puntie Prosecutor or an Assistant
Public Prosecutor Under this Cade.’,
Insertion 4 In Chapter [1 of the Principal Act, after section 25, the following 10
of new Section shal] pe inseried, pamely:—
fection
258, i
व “25A, (1) The State Government may establish & Directorate of
Direc. ४ . ti
torale of Prosecution conststing of a Director of Prosecution and as many
Prose- Deputy Directors Of Prospeution as jr thinks fic. 15
cufion.

(2). The Head of the Directorate of Prosecution shail be the
Director of Prosecution, who shall function under the administrative
control of the Head of the Home Department in the State,

(3) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution shall be Subordinate to
the Director af Prosecution, ९20

(4) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutay and
Special Public Prosecutor @ppointed by the State Government under
I sub-section (72), or as the case may be, sub-section (8), of section 24

10 conduct eases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the
Director of Prosecution, 33

(5) Every Pubtic Prosecutor, Additionat Public Prosecutor and
Special Public Prosecutor appointed by the State Government under
ri sub-section (3), or as the ease may be, sub-section (8), of section
24 to conduct cases in District Couris and every Assistant Publie
tor appointed under Sub-cection (1) of section 25 shall be 30
Subordinate to tha Deputy Director o¢ Prosecution,

|| (०) The Powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution and

| the Deputy Directors of Prosecution and the arens for which each
Of the Deputy Directors of Prosecution have been appointed shall be
Such as the State Government may by notification specify. 33

| (7) The Provisions of this Section shall not apply to the Advocate
General for the State while [== the functions of a Public

Prosecutor,”.
5. In section 29 of the principal Act—
Amend. principe;
ment 4, 2 -
ecti (@) in sub-section (2), for the words “five thousand Tupees™, the 40
। as words “twenty.five thousand Tupees shall be substituted.

| () in Sub-section (3), for the words “one thousand Tupees"
| words “five thousand Tupees' |,



3

6. In section 45 of the Principal Act, (n sub-section (2), after the Amend.
words “members cf the Force”, the words “or to such other public ser- ment of

vants” shall be inserted, wa ion
3,
7. In section 46 of the principal Act,— ७ Amend-
‘ ment of
(०) in sub-section (3}, the words “Or is not a proclaimed offender section

declared under sub-section (4) of section 82" shall be added at the end; 8.

|
| (७) after sub-section (3), the follwing sub-section shail be
| inserted, namely :—

“(4) Save im exceptional circumstances, no woman shall
10 be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and where such
exception circumstances exist, the Police officer shall, by making
@ written report, obtain the prior permission of his immediate
Superior officer for effecting such arrest or, if the case 19 one of
extreme urgency and stich prior permission cannot be obtained
before making such arrest, he shali, after making the arrest,

1 15
| forthwith report the matter in writing to his immediate superior
} officer explaining the urgency and the reesens for not teking

prior permission es aforesaid and shall also make 2 report to the
| Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the srrest had been
} made.",
||

* $. After section 50 of the principal Act, the following section shall हर रअ
be mserted, namely: — section
508.

“SOA. Every police officer or other person making any arrest Obligation

under this Code shall forthwith give the information regarding such wh maa
arrest and the plece where the arrested person is being held to such arrest to

a Person is may be nominated by the arrested person for the purpese inform
। of giving such information,”, ebout the
arrest elc.,
|| to & nomi-
j nated
} person.
9, In section §3 of the principal Act, for the Explanation, the follow- poser
ing Explanation shall be substituted, namely; — dation
58
‘Explanation—In this section and in sections 53A gnd 54.
x» (०) “examination” shall include the examination of blood,
swabs in case of sexual assault, sputum and sweat, hair samples
and finger nail elippings and such other tests which the registered
medical practitioner thinks necessary in a particular case;
(७) “registered medical fzactitioner” means 4 medical
35 practitioner who possesses any medictl qualification as defined
103 of 1956. in clause (1) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956

and whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register,’


4
Tasertion 10. Atier section 53 of the Principal Act, the following Section shall be
OF now inserted. namely:
section
832.
Pig “SGA, (1) When 9 Persen is arrested on & charge of committing
Porson an offence of rape or an attempt to commit rape sand there re
Accused of Zeasonable groundy for believing that an examination of his person 5
a will afford evidence as to the zZ Of such offence. i: shall be
Tracti. lawful tor a registered medical Practitioner employed in a hospital

acting at the request of 2 police officer not below the rank of a sub. 10
inspector, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and
under his direction, to make such ay examination of the arrecied
person and to use such force as ig reasonably necessary for that
DUrpose_

(2) The registered medi¢al practitioner conducting such exami. 15
mation shali, wichour delay, examine fuch person and Prepare a report
of his examination giving the following particulars, hamely

(7) the name and address of the accused and of the nerson
by whom he was brough:,

Gi) the age of the acensed, 20

(i) marks of injury, if any, on the Person of the secused,

(iv) other materia} Particulars in reasonable detail

(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each con-
clusion arrived at, cred 25

(४) The exact time of commencement and completion of the
examination shall also be noted in the report,

(5) The registered medicay practitioner shall, Withour delay,
forward the report to the investigating officer, who shall forward
to the Magistrate referred to in section 173 as part of the documents
referred to in cloyse (०) of sub-section (5) of that section.”_ 30

Amend. 11. Section 54 of the Principal Act shaq be renumbered as sub section
pita or (1) thereof. and after sub-section (7) as so renumbered, the following
Section
84.

|] (2) Where an examination is made under sub-section (I), a
‘| copy of the report of such examination shall, on 9 request being 35
| made by the arrested person or by any person Tominated by him in
| this behalf, be furnished by the registered medical practitioner to the

arrested person or the betsen so nominated.”,



5

12. After section 54 of the principal Aci, the following scetion stil)
be inserted, namely: —

“D4A, Where ७ person is arresied on @ charge of committing an

ificats ५. Ideniifi-
fence and his identification by any other person or pergonsy is cation

5 considered necessary for the purpose of investigation of such offence, ‘of persan
the Court, having jurisdiction, may, on the request of the officer in rested
| -charge of a. police station, direct the person so arresied to subject
himself to identification by any person or persons in such manner as
| the Court muy deem fit,”

10 43, In section 82 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the follow. “mend~

ing sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— ee

“(4) Where a proclamation published under sub-section (7) is in

respect of @ person actcused of an offence punishable under section

302, 304, 364, 367, 382, 392, 993, 304, 395, 396, 397, 398, 3४%,

15 400, 402; 436, 449; 459 or 460 of the Indian Penal Cede, and such per-
son falls to appear at the specified place and time required by the
proclamation, the Court may, after making such inquiry as it thinks

fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender and make a declaration to

that effect. > +

declaration made by the Court under sub-section (4) as they apply to
the proclamation published under sub-section ( 2)".

'
'
|
||
20 (5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shal apply io #
14. In section 102 of the principal Aet,— ne
ment of
(०) in sub-section (3), after the words “transported to the Court” —jo2,
25 the words “or where there is difficulty in securing proper accommo-
* dation for the custedy of such property, or where the continued re-
tention of the property in police custody may not be considered neces-
sary for the purpose of investigation” shall be inserted;
| (8) #fter sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be added
। 30 at the end, namely: —
;

“Provided that where the property seized under sub-section
(1) & subject to speedy and naturat decay and if the person en-
titled to the possession of such property is unknown or absett and
the value of such property is less than five hundred rupees, it may
35 forthwith be sold by auction under the orders of the Superinten-
dent of Police and the provisions of section 457 and 358 shall, as
nearly as ‘may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such
sale.”.

15. In section 116 cf the principal Act, in clause (f) in sub-clause (1), Amend
(8 in item (9) the word “or” shall- be omitted; meat of
stction
40 (0) after item (g), the following .item.shall be substituted, 119.
namely: —

“(h) the Foreigners Act, 1946; or". ‘



16. In section 122 of ihe principal Act. in sub-section (7), in clause
(०), for the words “bond without sureties" the words “bond, with or
witheut sureties,” shall be Substieed,

Vi. In section 125 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), ji sub-
clause (b), for the words “five hundred rupees", the words “ons thousand 5
five hundred rupees” shall be substituted,

18. Chapter X of the princip§]| Act, under sub-heading "C—Urgent
cases of nuisance or apprehended daviger”, after section 144, the follow
ing section shall be inseried, namely;—

‘I44A. (7) The District Magistrate may, whenever he considers it 10
necessary so to do for the Preservation of public peace or public
Safety or far the maintenance af public order. by public
Notice or hy order, prohibit in any area within the local limits of his
iurisdierion, the carrying of arms in any precession or the organising

or holding of, or taking part in, any mass drill or mass training with 15
arms in any nublic place.

(2) A public notice issued or an order made Under this section
Tay be directed to a pareular person or to Persons belonging to any
community, party or organisation.

(3) No public notice issued or an order made under this section 20
shall remain in force for more than thtee months from cre date on
which if is issued o1 made.

(4) The Stote Government may, if it considers necessary so to
do for the preservation of public peace or public safety or for the
maintenance of public order, by notification, direct that a public 25
hotice issued or order made by the District Magistrate under this
॥ Section shall remain in force for such further period not exceeding

six months from the date on which.such public notice or order war
issued or made by the District Magistrate would have, but for such
direction, expired, as it may specify in the said notification 30

| (5) The State Government may, subject to such control and
| directions 85 it may deem fit ‘o impose, by general or special order,
delegate ils powers under sub-section (4) to the Districe Magistrate
Explanation—The word “arms” shall have the Meaning assigned
to it im section 15333 of the Indian Penal Code 35
opined 18. After section 164 of the principal Act, the following section shall
| fection be inserted, namely: —
160.

Medicag ‘164A. (7) Where, during the stage when an offence of commit-
examing. ting rape or attempt to commit rape is under investigation, pee is pro-
toa Posed to get the person of the woman with whom rape is alleged or 49

attempted to have been committed or attempted, examined by a
ii| rape, medical expert, such examination shall be conducted by a registered
॥ medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government
| + or @ local authority and in the abseice of such a practitioner, by
| any other registered medical ptactitioner, with the content of such 45
| | woman cr cf a person competent to Give such consent on her behalf
| and such woman shall be forwarded 9 such registered medical
-- | Practitioner without delay.
|



? न

(2) The registered medical Practitioner, to whom suck woman
| is forwarded. shall. without delay, examine her person and prepare
a report 61 his examination giving the followins particulars,
namely: —
4 (7) the name and address of the woman and of the person
| by whom she was brought;
(6) the age of the woman;
(ti) whether the woman was previously used 19 sexual
intercourse;
10 (iv) marks of injury, if any, On the person of the woman,
17) generel mental condition of the woman; and
(एछ) other material Particulars in reasonable detail
(3) The report shalt state precisely the reasons for each con
clusion arrived a

15 (4) The report shall specifically petord that the consent of the
woman or of the person compeient to Sive such conseni on jer
behalf to suck: exaiination had been obisined.

(5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the
examination shall २399 be noted in the Teport

20 (6) The repisered medical practitioner shall, withour delay, for-
Ward the repare w the investigating officer who shall forward it to
the Magistrrwe referred to in section 173 as part of the dozumenrs
referred (o in ९३७७८ (a) of sub-section (5) of that section,

(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as reilering law-
ful any examination without the consent of the woman or of any
person competent tn give such consent on her behalf.

Eaplanation-—Por the purposes of this section, “examination” and
“registered medical practitioner” shall hays the same meaning; as in
section 53.7, |

30... 90, In section 173 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 4. ig
following sub-section shall be inseried namely: — tment of

“(3A) Where in respect of any offence compounduble wader

॥ section 820, the person by whom the offence may be ८ pounded
I tinder the said vection gives. in the course of investigation @ report
| 35 in writrng 10 the officer in cherge of the police station expressing his
desire 10 compound the offence as provided for in the said section.

Such officer shall mention this fact in the police report under sub-

section (2) and forward it 16 the Magistrate who shall thereupon deal

with the case under section 320 as though the prosecution for the

40 offence concerned thad been Igunched ‘before that Magistrate.",

21. In section 176 of the principal Act, y पर

@) in sub-section (1), the words “where any person dies while —e

|
| in the cistody of the police or” shall be omitted; Te.
i

(ii) after subsection (1), the following sub-section shall be
45 inserted, namely:— हैं



Amend-
ment of
section
197,

Amead-
meat of
section

=
ment of
section
204,

“UA) Where
(a) any person dies or disappears, or

(b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any wo-

addition to the inquiry or investigation held by the police, an
inquiry shall be held by the Judicial Magistrate or the Metropo-
Hitan Magistrate, 85 the case may be, within whose local juris-
detion the offence has been committed .";

(83) after sub-section (4), before the Explanation, the following 10
sub-section shall be inserted, namely;—

22. In section 190 of the principal Acr. to sub-section (1), the following 20
Proviso shall be added, namely:—

“Provided that where it ig not possible for a Magistrate 19 take
cognizance of an offence under clause (b), he shall, after recording
reasons therefor, suthorise the detention of the accused person
otherwise than in the custody of the police, for a period nat exceed- 35
ing seven days.",

23. In section 197 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), after the
words “members of the Forces", the words “or to such other public
Servants” shall be inserted.

24, In section 202 of the Pineipal Act, in sub-section (1), after the
words “may, if he thinks fit,”, the following shall be Inserted, namely; — 30

“and shall in a case where the accused ig residing at a place
beyond the area in Which he exercises his jurisdiction,”.

25, In section 206 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (70,--

(4) in the opening paragraph, after the words
section 260", the words and figures “or Settion 261"

and figures “under
shal] be inserted: 35

(०) in the Proviso, for the words “one hundreg Tupess”,
words “one thousand Tupees” shall be substituted, ae



et + न ननकनवकननकवशनीनीनीी

9
26. In section 223 of the principal Act, in the proviso,—

(@) for the worg “Magistrate”, the wordy “Magistrate or Court
of Session” shall be substituted; हु

(>) for the words “if he is satisfied”, the words “if he or [६ Ig
satisfied” shall be substituted,

27, In section 228 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause

(@), for the words “, and thereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate”, the
words “or any other Judicial Magistrate of the first class and direct the
accused to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or, as the case

10 may be, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, on such date as he

deems fir, ond thereupon such Magistrate” shall be subatituted,

28. In section 260 of the Principal Act, in subsection @M—

(०) for the words “two hundred rupees", wherever they oecur,
the words “two thousand rupees” shal] he substituted;

(b) in clause (vi), for the words “criminal intimidation", the
words “criminal intimation punishable with j{mprisonment for 4
term which may extend to two yeers, or with fine, or with both"
shall be substituted. -

29. After section 291 of the principal Act, the following section

20 shall be inserted, namely;—

25

35

“A51A. (1) Any document purporting to be a report of ident).
fication under the band of an Executive Magistrate in respect of
8 petson or property may be used as evidence in Sny inquiry, trial
or other proceeding under this Code, although such Magistrate is
not called as a witness:

Provided that where such report contains a statement of any
suspect or Witness to which the provisions of section 21, section 32,
section 33, section 155 or section 157, 88 the case may be, of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, apply, such statement shal) not be used
under this sub-section €xcept in accordance with the provisions of
those sectionts.

(2) The Court may, tt it thinks fit, and shall, on the application
of the prosecution or of the necused, summon and examine such
Magistrate as to the subject matter of the said report.”.

30, In section 292 of the principal Act—

(2) in subsection (1), after the words “the Mint” the words
“or of the Currency Note Press or of the Bank Note Press or of
the Security Printing Press” shall be inserted;

10) in sub-section (3), for the words “the Master of the Mint,
or the India Security Press", the words “the Genera] Manager of the
Mint or of the Currency Note Press or of the Bank Note Press or
of the Security Printing Press or of the India Security Press’ shall
be substituted.

Avaend-
nent of

oetiog
223,

Amend-
उदय of
section

238,

Amend-
ment of
section

ment of
292,



10

Atnend- 31. In section 293 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4),—

ment of

bein (a) for clause (b), the foliowing clause shall be substituted,
a: namely:—

“(b) the Chief Controller of Explosives";

(b) after clause (0, the following clause shall be added, 5
namely: —
“(g) any other Government scientific Expert specified by
notification by the Central Government for this purpose.”
rei 32, After section $11 of the principal Act, the following section shall
seins be inserted, name:;— to
SHEA
satay “SIA, If a Magistrate of the first class is satisfied that, for the
ne wife purposes of amy investigation or proceeding under this Code, it is
ander expedient 19 direct any person, including an accused person, (५
person give specimen signatures or handwriting, he may make an order 15
‘onve 2 to that effect and in that ease the person to whom the order relatas
a Shall be produced or ‘shall attend at the time and place specified
aes in stich order and shall give his specimen signatures or handwriting:
Fale Provided that no urder shall be made under {his section unless
writing the person haz at some time been arrested in connection with such
investigation or proceeding.”, »
a 33. In section 320 of the principal Act, in the Table under sub-
section section (2),--
328. (०) the words * Voluntarily causing burt by dangerous weapons
or means” in column 1 and the entries relating thereto in columns -
2 and ३ shall be omitted; 35
(5) in column 3, for the word “Ditto”, against the entry relating
to section 925, the words “The person to whom the hurt is caused”
shall be substituted;
(०) in cofumn 1, for the words “two hundred and fifty rupees”,
whe they occur, the words “two thousand rupees’ shall be 30
substituted.
Amend- 34, In section 356 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), —
racut of
उस कक (०) after the worda, figures and letter “or section 4891” the
356, words, figures and brackets, “or section $08 (in so far as it relates to
‘rirainal intimidation punishable with imprisonment for a term 35
whieh may extend to seven years or with fine or with both)" shall be
inserted;
(0) after the words and figures “Chapter XII", the words and
figures “or Chapter XVI" shsll be inserted.
one 35, In section 358 of the Principal Act, in subsections (1) and (2),
of

tection for the words “one hundred rupees”, the words “one thousand rupees”
shall be substituted.



8

35

| ऑन

I

36, In section 377 of the principal Aet—

(2) in subsections (1) ana (2), for the words “an appeal
the High Cour: against the Ssnlence On the ground of 105 inadequacy”
the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inacte-
quacy—

(a) to the Court of Session, if ihe sentence is passed by
the Magistrate; and

(०) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any
other Court’;

(९) in subsection (3), for the words “the High Court”, the
words “the Court of Session or, 25 the case may be, the High Court”
shall be substituted

37. In section 378 of the principal Act—

fi) for sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be substi-
tuted, namely: —

“(1) Save as otherwise provided in subsection (2), and
subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (5),—

(०) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct the
Public Prosecutor to Present an appeal to the Court of
Session from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate
in Fespect of a cognizable and non-bailsble offence:

(०) the State Government may, in any case, direct the
Public Prosecuter to Present an appeal to the High Court
from an original or appellate order of an acquittal passed
by any Court other than a High Court [not -being an order
under clause (०)] ar an order of acquittal passed by the
Court of Session in revision.”:

(४) in sub-seetion (2), for the porhien beginning with the words
“the Central Government may” and ending with the words “the
order of acquittal”, the following shall be ‘substituted, namely:—

“the Central Government may, subject to the provisions of
sub-section (3), also direct the Public Prosecutor to present
an #ppeal—

(@) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal
passed by a Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and non-
bailable offence;

(७) to the High Court, from an original or appellate
order of an acgnittal passed by any Court other than a
High Court [not being an order under clause (¢)] or an
order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revi-
sion;";

(४) in sub-section (3), for che words “No appeal”, the words
“No appeal to the High Court” ¢halj be substituted;

Auerad-
हज of
ction

378,



12

Amend- 38. In section 389 of the principal Act, to sub-section (1), the fol-
men, of lowing PrOvisos shal? be added, hamely;—

section

309. Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before releasing on

bail ar on hjs own bend 8 convicted berson who is convicied of an
offence Punishable with death or imprisonment for life for imprt-
senment for a term of Hot less than ten years, shall give Opportunity
10 the Public Prosesutor for showing cause in writing against such
release:

Provided further tha: it cases where g convicted person 15 release
On bail it shall be open to the Public Prosecutor to fila an application 10
for the cancellation of the bail.”,

Amend- 39. To Section 428 of the Principal Act, the following proviso shall
tment of be added, namely;— Si

section

428, ‘=| that in cases referred to in section 433A, such period

of detention shal be set off against the périod of fourteen years re. 15
ferred to in that Section,"

Amend- 40, In section 436 of the principal Act, in subsection (1) —

ment of

section (a) in the firgt Proviso, for the words “may, instead of taking
4396. bail”, the words “may. and shall, jg such person js indigent and js

uneble to furnish eur: 21 instead of taking bail” shal] be substiruted; 29

(b) after the first proviso the following Explanation shall be
- inserted, namely:— ६६

“Explanation --७/॥७०७ ब person is unable to give pail
। within a week of the date of his arrest, it el es
ent ground for the officer or the Court to presume that he is an
indigent person for the purposes of this proviso.”

Lsertion 41. After section 436 of the principal Act, the following section shalt

| of new be inserted, namely:—

/ Section
4364.
Maximum “436A. Where a Person has, during the Period of investigation, 34
Pttiod for inguiry or trial under this Code of an offence unde any law (not
Which ag being an offence for which the punishment of death has been -
ee et fled as one of the punishments under that law) undergone detention
oe for a period extending up to one-half of the maximum period of
detained, imprisonment specified for that offence under that lew, he shall be 35

released by the Court on his personal bond with or without sureties:

ed during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial for More than

॥ the Peroid of imprisonment Provided for the yaid offence

i under that law: _ 45
!

| Provided further that no such Person shall in any case be detain-



—

tea

13

Explanation,—In computing the period of detention under thig gec.
tion for granting bail the period of detention passed due to delay in
proceeding caused by the accused shall be excluded,”,

42, In section 437 of the principal Act—
3 (i) in sub-section (2)—

(a), in clause (i), for the words “a non-bailable and cogni-
zable offence”, the words “xs cognizable offence punishable with

imprisonment for three years or more but not less than seven
years” shall be rubstitared;

10 (0) after the third pravigo, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely

“Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged
to bave been committed by him is punishable with death,
imprixdament fer life or imprisonment for seven years or

15 more be released on bail by the Court under this sub-section
without giving en “opportunity of hearing to the Public Pro-

seculor,”.

(8) in sub-section (3), fer the pertion beginning with the words
“the Court may impose", and ending with the words “the interests of
30. justice", the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“the Court shall inapoge the conditions,—

(4) that such person shall attend in aceOrdance with the
conditions of the bond executed under this Chapter,

thy that stch persor shall not commit an offence similar
25 to the offence of which he is accused, or suspecied, of the com-
mission of which he $ suspected, and

(०) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make
any inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted
with the facts of the case so as to digsuade him from disclosing

30 such fatts to the Court or to any police officer 9r Lompar with
the evidence.

and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such other conii-
ons as it considers necessary.”

43. In section 438 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the  fol-
35 lowing sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) Where smy person has Teason to believe that he may be
arrested on accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence,
he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direo-
tion under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be

40. released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration,
inter alia, the following factors, namely;—

(0) the nature and gravity of the accusation;

(४) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to
whether he has previously undergone imprisonment on convic-
45 tion by a Court in respect of any cognizable offence;

(8) the possibility of {He applicant to flee trom justice; and

ment of
section
437.

Amondd~

meat of

438,



14

(iw) where the accusation has been made with the object
of injuring or humiliating the applicant by baving him so ar-
rested.

either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for
the grant of anticipatory bail: 5

Povided that, where the High Court or, ag the case may be, the
Court of Session, has not passed any interim order under this sub-
section or has rejected the application for grant of anticipstory bail,
it shall be open to an officer \in-charge of a police station to arrest,
without warrant the applicant on the basis of the accusation appre- 10
hended in such application

QA) Where the Court grnts an interim order under sub-section
(1), it shall forthwith cause 8 notice being not less than seven days
hotice, togetherwith a eopy of such order to be served on the Public
Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give 15
the Public Prosecutor a reasonable opportunity of being heard when
the application shall be finally heard by the Court.

(1B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail
shall be obligatory at the time of final hearing of the application
and passing of final order by the Court, if on an application made »
to it by the Public Prosecutor, the Court considers such presence
Necessary in the interest of justice.”.

44, After section 441 of the Principsl Act, the following section shall

Tpsertion

of new be inserted pamely:—

section

144A,

Dectura- “4414. Every person standing surety to an accused person for his 5

tion by rélease-on bail, shall make g declaration before the Court as to the

धणाां numbet of persons 10 whom he has stood surety including the accus-

ed, giving therein all the relevant particulars.”.

Ament 45. In ercticn 446 ¢f the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the

ment of words ‘at its diseretion”, the words “after recording its reasons for 0
| एक doing so” shall be substituted. न

के: 46. In section 459 of the principal Act, for the words “less than ten
rene 1 rupees" the words “less than five hundred rupees shall be substituted:
of 1
tion
459.
Amend- 47, In the First Schedule to the principal Act, under the heading

ment of 4. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, 38
pyran (a) afrer the entries relating 10 section 153A, the following
entries shall be inserted, namely— i

Pr 2 1 5 6

“1S3AA Knowing carryingly Imprisonment Dette, Ditto Any Magis. 49
arms in any proscwor for 6 months trate":
ongensing ot hokling of ard fine of
taking partin 805 ७85४. 2,000 rupecs

| drill or muss training

॥ with anus,

(b) in the fh ooluma, in the entries relating to ‘section 153B,

for the Word “Ditto”, "the words “Magistrate of the first class” shall 45
es substituted;



ee

18
> (०) after the entries relating to section 174, the following entries
shall be inserted, namoiy:
1 2 3 4 $ 6
“IMA Failure to appear at specia- lnprisonment | Cogniay Noo balk Magistrate of
5 ed place and ied = for 3 years of tb ble able the first class.
_ time" as” Tequired with fine or
ty a proclamation with both
ton) ot seta of
) of section 82 of
10 this Code.
Io 9 case where deo) Tmprisonment Ditto Ditto. Dit
ration has been made for 7 years
under Subsection and fine
15 (8) of section 12 of
हि this Code Pronowncing
& person 4s prociaimed
offender,
(7) in the entrics relating to section 175,—
(i) in the 4th <olumn, for the word "Ditto" the word “Non-
20 sognizable"; and

(8) in the Sth column, for the word “Ditto” the word
“Bailable”,

shall be substituted,

(९) after the eniries relating to 58:
25 shall be inserted, namely.—

tion 229, the following entries

1 2 3 4 5 6
“2294, Fuilgre by peeson released Troprisioment for Cogniz, Now-bajl- Any Magistrate, ;
on bail or bond to ap- 1 year, or fise able woh
bear ir Court. ov both

(f) in the 5th column, i) the enties relating to—

(i) section 274. for the word “Ditto” the word “Non-bajl-
able” shall be substinited;

(Gi) section 275, for the word “Ditto”, the word “Bailable”
shall be substituted;

35 (iit) “seetion 224, for the word “Ditto, the word “Non-hail-
able” shall be substituted:
(iv) section 325 ० the word “Ditto”, the word “Baijlable”
Shall be sotstituted;

(v)-eection 33%, for the word “Bailable", the ward “Dijtta"
40 shall be substieued;

(vi) section 338, for -the word “Non-bailable, the word
“Ditto” shall be substituted:

(vl) section , for the word “Ditto”, the word “Non-bail-
able” shall be substituted;

Gy. (vit) section 354, for the ward “Ditto”, the word “Bailable*
shall be substinnted, .



16

Amend. 45. In the Second Schedule to the principal Act, in Form No. 45, after
ment of the words and figures “See section 436”, the figures and letter, "436A"
Second shall be inserted,

Schedule,
Amend. 49. In the Indian Penal Code,—
ment of
Act 45 of (a). after section 153A, the following section shall be inserted,
1860. Namely: » 5
Shes ‘I68AA. Whoeve, knowingly carries arms in any procession or
aig organizes or holds or takes part in any mass drill or mass training
ingly with arms in any public place in contravention of any public
carrying hotice or order issued or made under section 144A of the Code of
arms in Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall be punished with imprisonment 10 2ot 1%
od asi for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which
or orga May ¢xtend to two thousand rupees,
nising, or
holding
or taking ४५
part in
any mass
bie cal Explanation, “Arms” moans articles of eny deseription
training designed or adapted ag weapons for offence or defence and
with includes fire arms, sharp edged weapons, Iathis, dondas and 15
arma sUcks,"; 4
(6) after section 174, the following section shall be inserted,
tamed: — 4
Non “1744, Whoever fails to appear at the specified place and
aged the specified (ime us required by a proclamation published under 2
response Sub-section (1) of section §2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
10 @ pro- 1973 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
cleme~ may extend to three yeurs or with fine or with both, and where
ton a declaration has been made under gyb-section (4). of that
sere sectlon protiouncing him as a proclaimed offender, he shall be 25
‘ 82 of punished yrith imprisonment for a term which may extend to
oat tt 3 Seven years and shall also be liable to fine.”;
=e (०0) after section 229, the following section shall be inserted,
| namely: -... . ‘
a ne “220A. Whoever, having been charged with an offence and 30
BE toa released on bail or on bond without sureties, Zails without suffi-
on bail cient cause (the burden of proving which shall lie upon him),
or bond + 10 appear in Court in accordance with the terms of the bail or
to appear bond, shall pe punished with imprisonment of either description
| in Court, for S ferm Which may extend ig one year, or with fine, or with 35
both
Explanation,—The punishment under this section is—
14) in addition to the punishment to which the offender
would be lisble on 5 conviction for the offence with which

he has been charged; and 40
i

(b) without prejndice to the power of the Court to
| order forfeiture of the bond,”,



1974,

STATEMENT OF OBIE

'8 AND REASONS

Having regard to the recommendations ma by the Law Commi
sion and the National Police Commission, the observal le by tb
courts and the suggestions received from the State Governments and
others, and with a view to Temoving certain difficulties or lacunae felt
in its working, it has been found necessary to amend variou
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

ions of

“2. The Notes on clauses explain, jn brief, the various provisions of
the Bill,

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects

New Deun;
The 13th April, 1904,

8. B. CHAVAN.

17


Notes on clauses

Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend sub-section (6) of section 24 to
clarify the expressions “regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers” and
“Prosccuting Offirer’® oe ७०

Clause 4.—This Clause seeks to insert a new section 254 empowering
the State Government fo establish the Directorate of Prosecution. The
Director of Prosecution eholl function under the administrative contro} of
the Head of the Home Departmen: in the State,

Clattse 5.—This clause sceks to amend sz. jon 29 of the Code to शान
hanee the sentencing power of the Magistrate of the First Class to impoge
fine from five thousand Tupees unto twenty-five thousand Tupees and Mag-
istrate of the Second Class from one thousand rupees upto five thousand
rupees. This is being proposed keeping in view the depreciation of the
value of the rupee since 1973 end to make the provision more deterrent.

Clouse 6.—Sub-section (2) of section 45 of the Code gives protection
from arrest to members of the Armed Forces charged with the mainte-
nance of public order This clause seeks to extend similar Protection 16
Such other public servanis as are ch, i
lic order a5 they

Clause 7.—Thig clause seeks shore section 46 to empower the

Police officer concerned to Use ‘al meang necessary to effect the arrest,
including causing death, in the pose of proclaimed offender under sub-
section (4) of section 82. A new sub-section (4) is being added to sald
section 46 to prohibit atrest of ¢ woman after sunset and before sunrise
except in unavoidable cireumstahees, t

Clause 8—This clause seeks tb insert a new section 50A to require the
Police to give information sWovtthe arrest of the person as well as the

place whore he is being held /if' any one who may be nominated by him
for sending eve information, .

’

Clause 9.—Thix Clause seeks 16 insert an Explanation to section 53
to explain the meaning of the expressions “examination” and “registered
medical practitioner” appearing tn sections 59 583, and 54,

Clause 10—This aed steks to insert a new section 584 to provide
for 2 detniled médical oxamination of a person eceused of an offence of
Tape OF जा attempt to commit tape by the registered medical practitioner
employed jn a hospital run by the Government or a local authority and
in the absence of such a Prastidoner by ary nther registered medical
Practitioner, (

18



iE

Clause Il-—The proposed amendment 40 gection 54 is intended to
Provide that 2 copy of the Teport of the medical examination of the
arrested person should also be furnished by the registered medical prac-

titioner to the arrested person or his nominee, after his medical examina-
tion has been conducted

Clause 12.—This clause seeks fo insert ॥ new section 54A to empower
the Court to dimct specifically tho holding of the ideniffieation of the
arrested person at the request of ihe prosecution.

Clause 14.—This clause seeks to insert new sub-section (4) and (5)
in section 82 empowering the Court ta make the declaration that the
Person is 8 proclajmed offender where be foils ‘9 appear at the speeified
Place ond time mentioned in the proclamation {ssued under sub.section
(1) of section 82 jp relation 10 offences under sections 302, 304, 364, eic.,
of the Indian Penal Code,

,
के

Clause 14—The proposed amendment io sub-section (3) of section
102 fg intended to give greater diccretion to the police for releasing
Seized property where there ig difficulty in securing proper accom-
modation for the custedy of property or where the continued retention
of the property in police custody is not considered necessary for the pur-
p0ses of investigation,

It is also propesed that if the seized property is of perishable nature
and value of such property is less than five hundred Tupeés and if the
person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or absent,
the police by empowered to sell such property by auction under the
orders 71 १७ Suttimtendent of Police For this pUrpMc a provise Is
being inseried |0 sub-section (3) of section 102 of the Code,

Clouse 15.—Tn order to effectively desl with offences under the
Foreigners Act, 1946 | need hes heen “olt to stvengthen the hands of State
authorities by empowering them fo take action under section 110 of the
Code against pursons atisting infiltration, ‘This will help to = check
the fiow of undersirable foreigners into the country, The Foreigners
Act, 1946 ia, accordingly, bein addeat ae item (h) of sub-clause (i) of
tiause (1, '

Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 122
to remove the discrepancy between section 107(1) and section 122(1) (h)
of the Code,

Clause 17.—On the recommendations made by the Chief Justices’
Conference and in view of (he depreciation in the value of money, it is
proposed 10 amen section 125 of the Code to enhance the maximum limit
for payment! of ynaintenanse from five hundred rupees 10, one thousand
five hundred rupees

Clause 18--In order to curb the mililant activities of certain  com-
munal organisations, a need has been feli ta strengthen the hands of
State authorities for effectively checking communal tensicn and foster
न sense of complete security in the minds of members of the public.
This clause, therefore, seeks to insert a new section 144A in the Code

to enable the District Magistrate to prohibit nee drill (or ae

arms in public places.



0

Clause 19.—Thig clauseseeks ig insert ney section 164A in ihe Code
to provide for a medics) examination of the viclim of a Tape by a reg-
istered medical Practitioner employed in a horpital run by the Govern.
ment or a local authority and in the absence of such a practitioner by
any other registered medical practitioner,

Clause 20.—A new sub-section (3A) $; ing added to section 173 to
enable the police to tnke note of the desire of the parties to compound
offences compoundable under section $20 even at the stage of invesiigzation.
This is intended to help quicker disposal of cases of compoundable cate.
gory and to reduce the work Inad of the police,

Clause 21.—Section 176 is being amended to provide that in the case
of death or @isappearance of a erson, or rape of a woman while in the
custody of the police, there shall be a mandatary indicial inquiry and in
case of death, examination of the dead body shall he conducted within
twenty-four hours of deark.

Clause 22.Thie Patna High Court in 1977 in Remdvo Mahio'y ease
(1977 Bihar L.3-R, 498) observed that (here 19 a Jacuna in the Code as
there is no provision therein which enables 9 Magistrate to poss an order
of remand after submission of the police renert imder section 173 (2) and
before taking cogrizance of the offence disclosed police report
under section 190. This clouse therefore seeks to insert a proviso to
sub-section (1) cf section 190 of the Code to empower a Magistrate to
authorise further detention in custody of an accused person. for @ period
not exteeding a week, after recording rearons therefor.

Clause 23—Section 197{3) gives protection to the members of the
Anmed Forces charged with the maintonanes of public order in the mat.
ter of prosecution in respect Of nffences alleged ip have been
committed while acting or perporting to act in the Gischarge of thofr
duties, This clause seeks to amend sub-section (3) {0 extend similar
protection to other public servants, charged with the mnintenance of
pubile order, as they haye also 10 face similnr difientries

Clause 24—Faise complaints are filed against Persons residing at far
off places simply to harass them. In order 10 see that innocent persons
are not harassed by unscrupulous this clause
setks fo amend sub-ection (1) of setion 20% ke it obligatory ७७०७
the Magistrate thag before summoning the acclsed residing beyond his
jurisdiction be shall enquire into the case himeolt or direct Inves-
tigation to be made by a police officer or hy ench other person as he
thinks fit, for finding out whether or n” there was suffictent eronmd
for proceeding against the accused

Clouse 26.—The provisions of section 206 ore meant to enable a
quick disposal of petty cases and to Tedure congestion in the Court of
Magistrates. Since the value of fe money his cone down considerably,
this clause seeks to amend sub-ceetion (1) of that section to raise the
limit of fine that can be specified in the summope from one hundred rupees
to one thousand rupees

Clause 26—The proviso to section 223 provides that the Mavistrate
om an spplication of the accused persons may direct thelr Joint trial even
if they do nof fall in the categories specified. if he ig satisfied thar such



2

Persons would nut by prejdicially affected thereby, In the interest of
prompt disposal » Scope of this proviso is being widened to
enable the Cowt of Sesion #190 (© hold such trials,

Clause 27—Unuer section 248, 2 Session Judge can transfer a case
Only to the Chief Jusdicfal Magistrate, The Proposed amendment seeks
lo give discretion to the Sessions Judge 10 transfer a case cither to the
Chief Judicial Magistrate or to any other Judicial Magistrate of the
First Class and to fix & date for ike appearance of the accused before the
Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Judicial Magistrate, as the case may

be, 50 that a lot of time, which is Wasted in summoning the accused hy
the Magistrate, may be saved.

Cruse 28.—Under sul cio (1) of section 260 a Magistrate has a
discretion to try offences tified therein either summarily or in a
tegular way, It 15 Proposed lo amend this sub-section to make summary
trial of offences specified therein mandatory. It is also proposed to pro-
vide that the offence of theft and other cognate offences, namely, offen-
ces Under sections 879, 3H), 381, 411 and 414 of the Indian Penal Code
may be tried Summariiy where’ the value of the property invelved does
not exceed १४४० thousund rupres instead of two hundred rupees at present,

Clause 29—Under the ७ “sling provisions of the Code an identifica-
tion memo 15 requized to be proved in the Court by examination of
the Magistrate, why conductes the proceedings. These facts are gene-
rally not disputed. in erder to save time of the Court, a new section
2914 is being inserted with lew to making memorandum of identifi-
cation prepared by the Ma ve admissible in evidence without for-
mal proof of facts staled therein with a provision that the Court may,
if it thinks fit, on the npplication of the prosecution or the accused,
summon or Cxamivie wisttate 85 to the subject matter contained
in the memorandum wf | entification ,

Clause 30,—~This clause seeks to amend section 292 of the Code to
cover ihe specified officers of the Curreney Note Press, the Bank Note
Press and the Security Printing Press, like other specified officers of the
Mint and the India Security Press and also makes certain other conse-
quential changes,

Clause 31.—Tie designation “the Chief Inspector of Explosives”
appearing in the Indian Explosives Aci, 1884 has been changed to “the
Chief Controller of Explosives” by the Indian Explosives (Amendment)
Act, 1978. The oppurtinity hes therefore been taken to make the conse-
quential amendment to section 293 where the expression “the Chief
Inspector of Explosives” occurs,

Clause 32.—The Supreme Court in State of UP. Vs. Ram Babu Mishra
‘AIR 1980 S.C 791) suggested that a suitable legislation be made on the
analogy of section ह of the Identification of Prisoners Act, 1980, to provide
for the investiture of Magistrates with Powers to issue directions to any
person including an accused person to give specimen signatures and hand-
writing, A new section 811A is accordingly being inserted in the Code.



22

Clouse 33.—Sub-clause (4) seeks to wmend the Table appended to
sub-section (2) of section 920 of the Code so as to mike the offence under
Section 324 of the indian Penal Code, y non-compoundable offence.

Sub-clause (c) sceks ‘o amend the said Tuble 30 85 lo enhance the

well as the aguvayaied fiom ihe offence under section 506 (criminal ine-
midation punishable With imprisonment for 8 tecm which may extend
10 seven years, or with fine. or with both),

Ciquse 35,—Thtis clause Seeks to amend section 358 of the Code to

89 83 fo make this provision more effective.

Clause 36.—Section 377 is being amended so as (० permit the filing
of an appeal in the Courr of Session instead og the High Court on the
ground of inadequacy of sentence passed by a Magistrate. This amend-
ment ls intended not only to make it easier for the aiiministration to
preier appeals against unduly lenient sentences by Magistrates but will
also deter the latter irom passing sentence that are grossly inadequate.

Clouse 37.—In order to guard against the arbitrary exercise of power
and to reduce reckléas Sequittals, section, 378 is being amended to pre-
vide that an appeal against an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate
in respect of ५ cognizable and non-bailable offence filed on @ police report

of nequitral passed by any court other than the High Court should lie
only to the High Cour, and the authority to direct the Public Prosecutor
to present an appeal shall continue to be with the State Government,
Clause 38—Whis 27086 adds two provisos ६० sub-section (1) of section
389 of the Code to the effect thar (i). the Appellate Court will give notice
10 the prosecution before releasing 8 convicted person on bail, if he
was convicted of an offerme punishable with death imprisonment fer life
or imprisonment for a term of not less than tex Yeats; and (ii) the prose.
cuticn should be permitted to move an application for cancellation of bail

Cicuse 39.—The provision of section 4334 adversely affects the re-
formation of lifer, whose case inspite of good ' ccm in jail cannot be

that the period for which the life convict remained in detention during
investigation, inquiry or trial shall be set off aguinst the period of 14
years of actual imprisonment reserfbed in section 433A,

के



gent and cannot furnish surety, the Court shall release him on his execu.
tion of & baad without sureties,

Clause 41—~There had peen instances, where under-trail prisoners
Were detained in jail for periods; beyond the maximum period of
imprisonment provided for the alleged offence. A ney stction 436A js

cribed ५8 one of the punishments, has been under detention for a period
exlending to one-half of the meximum period of imprisonment provided
for the alleged offence, he should be released on his personal bond, with
or without sureties,

tt iz also proposed to Provide that in no case will an undertrjal
Prisoner ke detained htyond the maximum peried of imprisenment for
Which he can be convicted for the alleged offence.

Clouse 42.—This clause seeks to amend section 437 to provide the
if @ verson commits a engnizeble and non-bafable offence and he haz
previously been convicted on two or more occasions of a cognizable
cence punishable with imprisonment for 2 years or mace but NOL less
than 7 years, he shall not be released except in the circumstances
specified in the provision.

It is further provided that if an accused appears before the Court
while in judicig) custody and prays for bail, or 2 prayer for pail 15
made on his behalf, the court shall srant bail only after giving an
°pportunity of hearirg 10 the prosecution, if the offem:e alleged to have
been committed by the accused is punishable with death, imprisonment

for life or imprisonment for not less than 7 years.

Under sub-section (3) of section 437 of the Code, the Court has got the
discretion to impose certain conditions for the grant of bail, Under
Section 441(2). where any condition is imposed for the relewse of a
person on bail, the hond shell contain thot ¢onditvon also. ‘nh order to
make the provision stringent and to See thst the person on bail does not
interfere or intimidate witess, sub-section (3) js being amended to specify
certain conditions, which are mandatory,

Clase 43.—Section 438 is being amended to the effect chat (i) the
pawer to grant anticipatory beil should be exercised by the courte of
Session or High Court after inking into consideration certain circumstances;
(ii) if 4 Court does not reject the application for the rant of anticipatory
bail, and makes an interim order of bail, jt should, forthwith Bive notice

the parties; and (ii) the Presence of the person seeking anticipatory hail
in the Court should be made mandatory at the time of hearing of the
application for the arant of anticipatory bail subject to certain exceptions.



i4

Clause 44,—This clause Seeks io insert a pew Séclion, section 44)A
which provides that a Person standing surety for an accused person shal)

Gisclose ag ०० in how 11:29 cases he hag already stoud surety for accused
persons

Clause 5—Under <ut Fettion (1) of section #46. where ७ bond for
“ppearance before a Court is forfeited the Court records ihe grounds
“tf such proof and calls Upon persons bound by such bond 15 buy a penalty
thereof or to show Cause why it should not be paid. The Court, hew.
ever, has a discretion tp remit any portion of the petiaity and enforce
payaient in part only. In order to see that such 2 penalty is yest
reduced liberally, Sub-section (3) of section 446 is being amended to pro-
Vide that the Court shal) record reasons before reducing the penalty.

Clause 46.—This clause seeks to make a consequential amendment jn
Section 459 of the Code. A new proviso which 15 being added in aub-
section (3) of section 102 Of the Code seeks to empower the police to sell
Perishable property up 10 g value of five hundred Tupets. As per the
existing provisions of Section 459 the Magisirste is empowered to sell
perishable property of the value of less than ten Tupees only. As a result
90:66 has been given concurrent jurisdiction in the matter with the

Clause 47.—Epiries relating to sections I538AA_ 1744 and 229A to he
inserted in the Indian Penay Code, as indicateg in Clause 34 have to be

incorporated in the First Schedule (० the Code. The amendinents are con-
Sequential,

The offence under section 324 of the Indian Penal Code, Le., volunia-

rily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means is at present bailable,
Since the offender is immediately released on bail, the chances of re.

The offences under Sections 274 (Adulieration of drugs), 332 (volun-
tarily causing burt to deter public servant from his duty) and 353 (as.
sult or criminal force to deter public servant from discharging his duty)
of the Indian Pena] Code are at present bailable, In order to deal with
these offences effectively, the First Schedule to the (९००७ is being amen-

Clevse 48—Form No. 45 in the Second Schedule to the Code is be
ing amended as # constquence of insertion of a new section 436A by
clause 47, Providing for release of the person; undergoing detention
during investigation, ete. on a personal bond with or without sureties,

Clause 49.—Thig clause | cel the Indian Penal Code as follows,
namely :—

(6) clause 19 is intended to enable the District Magistrate 16
prohibit mass drill (or training) with arms in public places. A new
section 153AA is therefore being added to the Indian Penal Code to



Prescribe punishment with imprisonment up to six months and fine
up to two thonsand rupees for the contravention of the probibitory

order.

(b) clause 16 seeks to insert new sub-sections (4) and (5) in
section 82 of the Code to provide the declaration of a Person a5
proclaimed offender, if he fails to appear inspite of the proclamation
published under sub-section (1) of thet section In order to curb
the tendency on the part of criminals not 10 attend the cout in
response to proclamation published under sub-section (1) or further
proclamation issued under sub-section (4) declaring the accused as
“Proclaimed Offender” 2 new section 1744 is being added to the Tndisn
Penal Code to Prescribe punishment for such offender;

(९) under clause 50 an oblivation ig Cast on the pers0n released
on bail or on bond to appear and surrender tg custody’. In order ३6
enforce this obligation, a new section 229A is being inserted in the
Indian Penal Code to prescribe punishment for those who fail to do
ww.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bil) Provides for the esiablishmen: of 4 Directoyate
Gf Prostcution consisting af a Director of Prosecution and Depuiy Direc-

lors of Prosecution below him. This provision would enable the State
ua

Sore Union territories to set up Directorates of Prosecuusn,
When it is considered necessary t establish such & Directorate. The addi-
Gonal expenditure ig such 9 Directorate is established, will be 16 regard
fo creation of the posts ० Director and Deputy Directors only a5 the
Public Prosecutors and Assisiam Public Prosecutors would already be in
position to conduct cases, The appoin’ment of a Director of Prosecution
and Veputy Directors of Prosecution will generally be made [rom amongst
the departmental officers, The State Governments themselves weuld
bear the expendiwire involved in the creation of Directorates of Prosecu-
den in the States. The Central Government would have to bear the
expenditure in respect of the Directoraing of Prosecution which may be
set up in those Union territories which do met have 2 consolidaind Fund
of their own; provision for such e made in the
appropriate budget fer the Sa territory concerned &nd when it is
proposed to set up 9 Directorate of Prosecution in that Union territory,
Tt is, therefore, nor possible to give an imate of the expenditure in-

volved (recurring or non-recurring) in this behalf at this stage, How-
ever, proposals for establishment of such Directorates in Union territo-
ries would be processed in consultation with the Ministry of Finance
{Department of Expenditure),



} ANNEXURE
| Extaacts From Tue Cane or Crimrnar, Proceoure, 1973
(2 ay 1974)
| * 2 e * *
| 24. (7) . 7 कि . ad

(6) Notwithstenaing anything contained in sub-section (5), where
in 8 State there exist 4 resular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers the State
Government shall appoim a Public Prosecutor or sn Additional Public
Prosecutor only from among the persons cons’ uting such Cadre;

Provided that where, in the Opinion of the State Government, no
suitable person ix avullable in such Cadre for such appointmen
Government m; appoint a person ag Public Prosecutor or Ad
Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, from the panel of names prepared
by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4)

= . * * *
Senten 29, (7) + . + न s
oes
which (2) The Court of ६ Magistrate of fhe first class may pass a sentence
Megis- of imprisonment for a term mot exceeding three years, oy of fine not z
og न exeveding five thousand rupees, or of both,
(3) The Cour: of a Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or of fine not excred-
ing one thousand Tupees, or of both,
. . . . .
Protec 45, (1) * « * . *
tion of

members (2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the pro-

at the visions of sub-section (1) shall apply to such class or category of the

re members of the Force charged with the maintenance of public order ag

fom may be specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon

arrest the provisions of that sub-section shal] apply as if for the expression
“Central Government" orcutring therein, the expression “State Govern-
ment” were substituted,

Arrest 40. (1) * * 2 * *
how
made (3) Nothing ia this section gives a right to cause the death of @ person
Who is not accused of an fence punishable with death or with imprison-
| ment for life.
. ’ . . *
Spe 53. (1) When a rersen is ‘rtested on a charge of committing an off.
| accused ence of such a nature and alleged to have been committed under such
by circumstances that there gaze Tessonable grounds for believing that an
medical examination of his person will afford evidence a3 to the commission of
practi- an विन it shall be lawful for ६ registered medical practitioner, acting
bras? at the request of a police officer not below the rank of sub. inspector, and
prcecnge for any person acting in Rood faith in his aid and कं direction, to
police
officer ig



Son wrested as is reasonably neces
in the facts which May afford such evidence, pnd
१० Use such force uy is reasonably necessary for that purpose,

©) Whenever the Petsca ul a female is to be examined under thas
seciion, the cXamination shall be made only by or under th 2 Skpervision
ef, a female registered medics} Practitioner,

Explanation. In this section and in section 54, “registered mediral
PractiGoner” meang 2 Medical practitioner who possesses any recopnized
2 of 1956, medical qualitis Hon as defined jn clause (R) of section 2 of the Indian
Medical Count, Act, 1956, and whose name has been entered in 9 State
Medical Register.

(3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (I) haji forthwith
report the seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction and where =
property seized is such that it cannot be conveniently fansported to the
Court, he may give custody thereof to any person on his executing a
bond undertaking to produce the Property hefore the Court ss and when
required and to give effect to the further orders of the Court as to the
disposal of the sume.

= + ° * .

116. When un Executive Magistrate Teceives information that there is
within his local jurisdiction a person who—

* रू + . *

(0) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the co-

mission of—

{1} any offence under one or mare of the following Acts.
namely: —

न , + * .

52 of 1962,
(9) the Customs Act, 1962,
= - * * .

122 (1) (a) os . * + *

(७) If any person after having executed a bond withou: suretics
for keeping the peace in pursuance of an order of a Magistrate under
section 117, is proved. to the satisfaction of Such Magistrate or hie
SUCCEssor-in-Office to have committed breach of the bond. such Magistrate
OF successor-in-ofice may, after recording the grounds of such proof,
order thst the person ६७ atrested and detained in prison until te expiry
of the period of the bond and such order जोश) be without prejudice
to any other punishment or forfeiture to which the Said person may
be able tn accordance with law.

Power of
Police
Officer te
Selze
certain
Property

Security
for good
behaviour
from
habitual
Offenders,

Tmptivon-
meat im
कर्नल
of
security,



Onder for
01३ 08:
wong
of wives,
ehiléren
aunt
Parents

29

CHAPTER 1X
ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE oF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS

125. (1) If any person having sufficient means neglecty or refuses to
Trainiain

(४) his wife, unable to miintain herself. or

(७) his legitimaie or illegitimate minor child, whether married
or not, unsble to meinisin itself, or

(०) his legitimsie ex iNegitimate child (no being « married
daughter} whe has attained majority, where such child is, by
reason of any physical or mental abnormality or mijury unable to
mainiain itself, or

(@) his father or mother, unable 10 maintain himself or herself,
a Magistrate of the first tise may, Upon proof of such negles: or
refusal, order such person 10 mnake a monthly allowance for the main-
tenance of his wife or such chij:i, father or mother, st such monthly rate
not 6: ing five hundred Tupees In the whole. ag such Maxistrare
thinks fit, and to Pay the same to such person a8 the Magistrate may from
time 10 time direct;

Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female
child referred to in clause (७) to make Such allowance, until she attains
her majority, if the Magistrate ig satisfied that the husband of such
minor female child. if married, is not possessed of sufficient means.

Explentiion.—For the purposes of this Chapter—

(७) “minor” means 9 person who, under the provisions of the
Indian Majority Act, 1875 ig deemed no} to have attained his majority;

(०) wife" inciudes a woman who has been divorced by- cr has
‘ined a divorce from, her husband and has not remarried.

न = * ® *

9 of 1875.



Inquiry by
Magistrate
into
canse

of death

Cogpzane
of offen.
ces by
Nigist-
tates,

Prosecu-
tion of
Judge and
public
Fervants,

4

776. (1) When any person dies while jn the custody of the ७०1०७ or
when the case 13 of the nature referred 10 in clause (i) or clause (ii) of
sub-section (3) of section 174, the nearest Magistrate empowered to hald
inquests shall, and in any cther case mentioned in sub-section (1) of
section 174, any Mazistrate so empowered may hold en inquiry into the
cause of death either in: of. or in addition to, the investigation held
by the police officer; and af he does so, he shall have all कल powers in
conducting it which he would have in holding an imquiry into an offence.

(2) The Magistrate hotding such an inquiry shall record the evidence

taken by him in connection therewith in any manner hereinafter pres.
tribed according to the ciieumstances of the case.

(3) Whenever such Mogistrate considers it expedient to make an
examination of the dead body of any person who has been already inter-
red, in order to discover the cause of his death, the Magistrare may
cause the body to be disinterred and examined.

(4) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section, the Magistrate
shall, wherever practicahie, inform the relatives of the deceased whose
names and addresses are known, and shall allow them to remalt Ptesent
at the inquiry

Explanasion—In this jon, the expression “relative” ‘vans parents,
children, brothers, sisters and spouse.

e * * . .

IM. (1) Subject to the Provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate
of the first class, and any Magistrate of the second class Specially em-
powered in this behalf under sub-section (2), may take cognizance of
any offenve-—

(०) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such
offence;

(०) upon a police report of such facis;

(० Upon information received from any person other than a
police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such cffence has
been committed,

. . . . .
7. (1) * + * . -

(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the
provisions of sub-section (2), shal] apply to such class or category of the
members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order
as may be specified therein, wherever they may be | and there-
Upon the provisions of that sub-section will apply as if for the expres-
sion “Central Government” occurring therein, the expression “State
Government” were substituted ,

. * . ©



31

202. (1) Any Magisiraie, on feveipt of a complaint of an offence of
which he is authorised to take cognizance or which has been made over
to hini wader section 192, may, if he thinlss fir, postpone the issue of
process against the accused, and either inquire into the ease himself
or diveet an in aston to be Made by a police officer or by such other
Person as he thinks fit, fer the purpose of deciding whether or not there
is sufficient ground for proceeding:

Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be made—

(०) Where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence com-
plained of is triable exclusively by the Court of Session; or

(6) where the complaint has not been made by 4 Court, unless
the complainant and the wiinesses present (if any) have been ex’-
mined on osth under section 200.

* = + = *

206. (1) 17, in the opinion af # Mugisteate taking cognizance of a

petty offenee, the case may he summarily disposed of under tection 260,
the Magistrate shall, except where he is, for reasons to be recorded in
writing of a counttal'y opinion, issue summons to the accused requiring
him efiiner to appear in person of by pleader before the Magistrate on
8 specified date, or If he desires to plead guilty to the charge -without
appearing before the Magistrate, tu transmit before the Specified date,
by post or by mastenger to the Magistraie, the said ples jn writing and
the amount of fine specified in the summons or if he desires to appear
by pleader and to plead guilty to the charge through such pleader, .to
authorise, In writing, the pleader to plead guilty to the charge on his
behelf and to pay the fine through such pleader:

Provided that the amount of the fins specified in such summons
shall not exceed one hundred rupees,

* = * * *

223, The following persons may be charged and tried, together,
namely:—

(@) persons accused of the same offenco committed in the
course of the same transaction;

(0) persons accused of un offence and persons accused of abet

ment of, or attempt to commit, such offence;

(०) persons accused of more than one offence of the same kind,
Within the meaning of section 239 committed by them jointly within,
fie period of twelve months; हे

(@) persons accused of different offences committed in the course
of the same transaction; .

(e) persons accused of an offence which includes theft, extor-
tien, cheating, or criminal misappropriation, and persony accused of
* reveiving or retaining, or assisting in the disposal or concealment

of, property possession of which is alleged to have been transferred
by any such offences committed by the first-named persons, or of
abetment of er attempting to commit any such last named offence; ,

Hostpone-
ment of
isgue of
Dracess,

Special
SUMING
in erase

af petty

offenes,

What

may be *
charged
Jointly.



Fram.
ing of
theres

Power
to try

Sarum

vily,

३

() person, Secused of offences under sections 411 and 414 of
the Indian Penai Code or either of those sections in regpect of sto.
jen property the possession of which has been transferred by one
offence;

(9) persony accused Of any offence under Chapter XII of the
Indian Penal Code relating to counterfeit coin afd persons gecused
of any other offence under the said Chapter relating to the same
Sain, or of sbetment of or attempting to commit aby such offence:
and the provisions contained in the former Part of this Chapter
shall, so far as may be, apply to all such char, 4

Provided thae where a number of Persons are charged with separate
offences and such persons do not fall within any Of the categories speci-
fied in this section, the Magistrate may, if such persons by an applica
on in writing, so desire, and if he is आंच that such persons would
not be Prejudicially mffected thereby, and it ig expediont so १0 do. try
al} such persons torether

. ® = . कर

228. (1) If. after such consideration and hearing ay afore: the Judge
is Of opinion that there 2 ground for presuming tha: the accused has com-
outed an offence whith—

(a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session. he may,
frame ॥ charge against the accused and. by order, transfer the eage
for ial to the Chiet Judicial Magistrate, and thereupon the Cnet
Judicial Magistrate cian try the offence in eccordance with the proce.
dute for the trial of wetrant-cases instimted on 4 police veport:

* e * =

CHAPTER XXT
Suamary ‘Tarars
200. (1) Notwithstanding anydung contsined in this Coda—
19) any Chief Judicial Magistrate

७) ony Mesropolitan Moaxistrate;

(c) any Magistrou of the first cings specially empowered jn this

behaif by the High Court
Tay, if he thinks fit, try jn a summary Way all or anys of the following
offences: —
G) uffenets not punishable with death, imprisonment Yor life or
imprisonment far 8 term exceeding two years;
eee theft, under section 379. sectian 380 or section 381 of the Indian
Penel Code. where the value of the property stolen doss not exceed
two hundred rupees;

(651). receiving 0० relaining stolen property, under settion 411 of
the India ‘Penal Code, where the Value of the property déeg not ex-
ceed two hundred rupees;

45 of 1860

45 of 1860.

#9 of 1209,

45 of 1800.



|

ot 1860.

49 of 1860

tet 1671.

1 of 1872,

45 of 1860.

33

Gr) assisting in the concealmen: or dispos
under section 414 of ihe indian Penal 0;
property does not exceed iwo hundred rupee

of stolen propery,
re the value of suet

(०) offences under sections 454 and 456 of the Indian Pens] Coie;

(ti) insult with inten: 16 Provoke a breach of the peace, undee
seclion 504, and criminal intimidation, undev section $06 of the Indian

(0) abetmear of any of ihe foregoing offencas:

(शत) an allempt to commit any of the foregoing offences when
sOch attempt is an offence;

(it) any offence constituted 9७ an act in respect of which 2
complaint may be made under section 20 of the Cattletrespass Act
1871.

. + ry .

202, (7) Any document purporting 10 be a report under the hand of
any such gazetted officer of the Mint or of the India Security Press (jn-
cluding the office of the Controller of Stamps and Stationery) as the Cen-
tral Government may, by notification Specify in this behalf, upon auy
matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination and report in the
course of any proceeding under this Code, may be डरते as evidence in
any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, alihough
such officer is not called as a witness

- « . *

(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 12% and 124 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, no such officer shall, except with ihe persission
of the Master of the Mint or the Indla Security Press or the Controller of
Stamps and Stationery. as the case may be, be permitted—

‘ial

1०) io give any evidence derived from any unpublished — afi
records on which the report is based; or

(b) to disclose the nature or particulars of any test apulied by hin
in the covrge of the examination of the roatier or thing,

293, (1) . - * 7 ”

(4) This section applies to the following Gavernment scientific experts
hamely:

(b) the Chie Inspector of Explosives;

a : « * *

320. (7) * © * . i

(2) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal
Code specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may,
with the permission of the Court before which eny prosecution for such

Evidencs
of office.
“ce of

Cont.

pound
iny of
offemces,



Order

for
notifying
address
ef previ.
ously
५
offemer.

34

offence is pending, be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third

column of that Table:—

Table
Offenee Section of Person by whom olftace m
the Indian be compounded
1 2 3
Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous 324 The person to whom hurt is caused.
Weapons oy obtans,
Ve lentery cexsirg grieveus hurt 32s Ditto.
* ‘ Po a *
Theft, where the valoe of Property sto- 9 Tae owner of the Preaperty stolep
fen does not exceed two Hundred and
Aifly rupees,

Theft by clevs or servant of property in 381
Possession of maser, where 11८ value

of 86 proparty stolen does not excced
two hundred and 11३ 799,

. * *
iminal breach of trust, where’ the ves 406

hee of the propery does not exceed
two bundred and tity rapecs,

Crimjoal breach ६
wh arlinger ९६८...
PEO perty dos:

aod 5

by 8 corvier, 407
fe the value of the

Bos exceed 1७४ hundred

rupees.

Criminal breach of rut by a clerk or 408
Servant, where the value of the Pro.
perty does not ckeoed two hundred ad
fifty rupees.

Dishowestly receiving stolen froperty, 411
knowing it to be stolen, when the valuc
of the stolen property — does not
eacced two hundres and fifty rupexs

Assisting in the conzealment or disposal ald
of stolen peoperty, knowing It ta be
stolen, where the value of the stolen

Feoperty does not cacced two hundred

und fifiy rupees
. * s
° क्र =

Ditto,

The owner of ihe operty in respect of

which the tye \ of trast has been
committed,

Ditto,

Ditto,

The owner of the Property stolen.

Ditto,

* *

356. (1) When any person, having been convicted by 3 Court in India

of an offence punishable under section 215, section €89A_ section

4893,

Section 489C, or section 499D of the Indien Penal Code, ar of any offence

punishable under Chapter XIy or Chapter XVII of that

prisonment for & term of three years or

Code, with im- 45 of 1807

upwards, is again convicted of any

offence punishable under sny of these sections or Chapters with imprison-
ment for a term of three years or upwards by any Court other फल that
of a Magistrate of the second class, such Court may, if it thinks fit. at the
time of passing a sentence of imprisonment on such person, also order that

his residence and any change of, or absence from, such residence

after

release be notified as hereinafter provided for @ term not exceeding five

x

ars from the date of the expiration of such sentence.



25 of 19५

Sutpen,
sion of

| Cac
pending
the mp_
peak re
lease of
*ppellany
on ball,

35

. * 7 .

259. (1) Whenever 8ny person causes a police officer to arrest another
person. if 1 appears ta the Magistrate by whom the Case is heard thar
there was no sufficient ground for causing such arrest, the Magistrate may
Sward such compensation, not exceeding one hundred Tupées, to he paid
by the person so causing the arrest to the Person 30 afrested, for his loss
of time and expenses in the matier, as the Magistrate thinks fit,

(2) In such cases, if more persons than one sare arrested, che Magist-
Fare may, in tke manner, award to each of them compensation net
exceeding one hundred Pees. as such Magistrate thinks flr,

४4 ° * रू .

377, (1) Save 85 otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the State Gov-
ernment anay, in any case of conviction on a trial held by any Court other
than ® High Court, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the
High Court against the sentence on the @tound of 15 inadequacy.

ich the offence hag heen investi-

ment, constituted under the
1946, or by ether agency emp-
10 make itvestivaiion ints 8५ cfenve Under eny Centr) Act
ian this Code, the Central Government may also direct the Public
tor ६७ present 8७ anneal to the High Court against the sentence og
the fround nf {es inedeanacy,

(3) When en appeat has been filed against the sentence on the grownd

7. the High Court shall not enhsnce the somence except
after giving to the accused 4 reasonable opportunity of showing eause
agsinst sich enhancement and while showing cause, the aecused mar
plead for his sequizts! op for ths reductinn of the « mience.

878. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-eettion (2) and subject to
the provisions of sub-gections (3) and (5), the Stete Government may, in
any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High
Court from 2n original *ppellate order of aequitta) passed by any
Court cther than s High Court or an order of Aequitie] passed by the
Court of Session in revision,

(2). Tf such an order of Sequittal 15 passed in any ease im which the
offence haa been investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment
constities under the Delhi Spesin} Police Establishment Act, 19486 or
by any other agency empowered io make invastigetion into an offence
under eny Central Act other than this Code, the Central Government may
also direct the Public Prosecutor to Present an appeal. subject i the pro-
visions of sub-section (3). to the High Coure from the order of acquittal

(5) No eppeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be
entertained except with the leave of the High Court,

* * * . .

889. (1) Pending ४59 appeal by a convicted person, the Appellate
Court may, for reasons 10 be recorded by it in writing, order thar the
execution of the senience or order Sppealed against be suspended and,
8190, if he ig in confinement, that he be released on bail, or on his own
bend

Compea-
sation to
persons
around:
lessiy
arrested,

Appeal
by the
State
Govern=
ment
Against
rentenice.

Appeal
in ease
of
acquittal.



Period o€
detention
tuner
छजाह

oY tie
acoused
10 be
set off
erEinst
the
sentence
of im_
prion
mene

Th wha
casey
bait

fe be
taken,

Whee
bail
LS be
taken

in cise

of noo,
bailaile
offence,

| 128. Where an accused person has. on Conviction, been sentenced tg
imprisonment for a term, the period of detention, ig any, undergone by
him during the Investigation, Inquiry or trial of the Same case and heforg

CHAPTER Xxxn 1

Provisions ५३ to BAIL AND BONDS

Prepared at any time while in the custody of such offiner Or at any stage
of the preceeding before such Court (७ @ive bail, such person shall be
released on bail: ००

Provided ihat such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit. aay, instead
or taking bail from such Person, discharge him on his executing 3 bond
without sureties for his appearance ag hereinafter Provided:

Provided further that nothing in this Section shall be deemed to affert
the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 116 or section 446A.

* . « © .

(8) such person aball not be 90 released jf Such offence ig 3
cognizable offence and he had beon Previously convicied of an
offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprigon-
ment for seven years or more, or he had boon Previously convicted
on two or more occasions of a non-bailable and cognizable offence:

Provided that the Court may direct thet 2 person referred to in,
clause (i) or clause (६) be released on bail if such Person is under the
age of sixteon years or 15 3 Woman or fs sick or infirm:

Provided further that the Court may also direct thar 4 person
referred to in clause (ii). be released on bail if it is satisfied that it is
just and proper 59 to do for any other special reason;

Provided glso that the mere fact that an Rccused person may be
entitled to be released on Sell and gives an underteking that he chall



=

—

+ न . = *

(3) When a person accused or suspected of the Commission of an
offence punishable With imprisonment which may extend to seven years
*r more or of an offence onder Chapter VI Chapter XVI or Chapter
XVII of the Indian Penal Code or abetment of, or conspiracy or attempt
‘8 commit, any such offence. is released on bail under sub-section (7).
the Court may Impose ONY condition which the Court considers
neresgary-

(४७) in order io ensure hat Such person shall atiend in accord-
nce with the conditions of the bond executed under this Chapter, or

(8) 18 order १0 ensure that such person shall not commit an
Offence similar to the offence of which he is accused or of the com-
mission of whieh he is suspected or,

(०) “therwise in the interesis of ipstice

. के . cy

338. (J) When any petson has reasan io believe that he may be srregt_
ed on an accusation of having commitied a non-bailable offence. he may
apply to the High Coust or the Court of Session for a direction under
this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that in
the event of such srresi, he shall be released on bail

448. (1) . न

15॥। The Court may, ae its discretion remit any portion of the penalty
mentioned and enforce payment in part only

रू « > = *

459, If the person entitled to the possession of such Property ts un-
known or absent and the Property is subject to Speedy and natural de-
cay, or if the Magistrate io whom iis seizure i reported is of opinion
that its sale would be for the benefit of the owner, ar that the value of
such property is 1698 than ten rupees, the Magistrate may at any time
direct it to be sod; ond the provitiors of wections 457 and 458 shall, os
nearly es may he practicable, apply to the net Proceeds of such sale

* . * © .

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES

FepeawsroaY Nore : (1) In repard in offences under the Indian Penal Code, the entrios in
the second and third cotemer aguinst 2 acction the Tember of

12) ॥7 0७५ sebelah (0) the en Magisirt= of the fre re,

Aaa vs AU te actatke Metropolitan पक |
एक Execetive Magistrates: (ii) the word“ nizable™ stands for
“a police officte may आता without warrant + and Gl the
word “non-copnuaite” vtandy for “a patice Officer shat nat

Direchian
for

of bait

8७ Peridy
pnre.
hending
urreat,

Proce,
dare whem
band

hus been
forte’,

tow,

Mower to
set peri-

sable

Property.



wa
&

i.—OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE

Punishmcwt
Inptason Ditto, Diti Ditio,
years, 06 fine, 0९
Ditto, Dae
+ +
Ditto. Ditto

Tupess, o¢ both,

provisions
Chapter XXVI
oom,

‘ .
Ditto Ditt Ditto,

275 Dito. Ditto. Ditto Ditto.
deug or medical
preperntion known ta
have been adulterated
* « * . न
324. Voluntarily cansing hurt Imprisonment for Cognizs- Ditto. Ditto.
by dangerous weapons 3 years or 196, of be
or means, both,
325 Voluntarily causing gri- Imprisonment for Ditto, Ditto.
evous bert, 7 years and fine,
. . . के रू
332... Voluntarily Causing hurt Imprisonment for Ditto, Bailable Magistrate of
to deter public servant 3 , OF tine, or the class.

from bis dury
335 Volumiatily causing grievous Imprisonment for Ditto Nob-bailable Court of Session

hurt te duter pablic 10 ३७०४5 and fine.
Servatit from his duty.
. + * * .
353... Assault or uso of ori- Imprisonment for 2 Copnisa- Ditto, Ditto,

minal forces to deter. a ce OF fine , or Bie
Dablic servant from h
discharge of his duty.

354 Assault or use of cri- Ditto, Ditto. Ditto, Ditto.
minal force to a Woman
with inteat to outrage
her modesty

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 476) 0
. . . *
"Meade No, 45
BOND AND BATL-EOND POR ATTENDANCE BEFORE Orvicen IN CHARGE OF
POLICE STATION On Counr
[See sections 436, 437, 436(3) and 441] Wad

के ts . + * ° %
rs ar 1



RAJYA SABHA

a
BILL

further to amend the Code of Crimnal Procedure 1979,

_——a S. B. Chaven,

Minister of Home Affatrs)