 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. XXXVI of 2024 
THE ENTREPRENEURSHIP LEAVE BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to make provisions in the service conditions of Central Government 
employees, employees of Public Sector Undertakings, employees  
of statutory, autonomous, and constitutional bodies, so as to  
enable them to avail upto two years of unpaid leave to  
pursue  their startup venture and for matters  
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Entrepreneurship Leave Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
10 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Entrepreneurship Leave" means a period of unpaid leave granted
to an employee to pursue a startup venture;
Definitions. 

2 
For the purpose of this clause, subject to the provisions of any law 
made in this behalf by Parliament, or any rules prescribed under 
this Act, a “startup venture” shall mean a newly established entity 
incorporated either as a private limited company or a partnership 
firm or a limited liability partner with limited resources and 
turnover working towards innovation, deployment, development 
or commercialization of new processes, products or services 
driven by technology or intellectual property or recognized as 
such  by the Government of India; 
(b) "employee" means any individual employed on a permanent basis
in the Central Government, or Public Sector Undertakings, or
statutory or autonomous bodies, or constitutional bodies;
(c) "Head of the Organization" means the highest-ranking official or
authority within the respective organization competent or
authorised to grant leave as prescribed by rules made under this
Act; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5 
10 
15 
CHAPTER II 
GRANT OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP LEAVE 
Eligibility and 
duration for 
grant of 
Entrepreneurship 
Leave. 
3. (1) Any employee who has completed a minimum of five years of
continuous service shall be eligible to apply for Entrepreneurship Leave.
(2) The Entrepreneurship Leave shall be granted only once during the
entire service for a period not exceeding two years.
20 
Procedure for 
application and 
sanction of 
Entrepreneurship 
Leave.
4. (1) An eligible employee desiring to avail Entrepreneurship Leave shall
submit an application in such form and manner as may be prescribed, to the
Head of the Organization, stating the purpose and duration of the leave.
(2) The Head of the Organization shall have the authority to sanction the
Entrepreneurship Leave after considering the application and subject to the
conditions of admissibility, as provided in this Act and such other
conditions for grant of such leave, as may be prescribed.
(3) The Entrepreneurship Leave shall be sanctioned at the discretion of the
Head of the Organization subject to the exigencies of service and his
decision thereon shall be treated as final.
25 
30 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS 35 
Preservation of 
service. 
5. (1) The period of Entrepreneurship Leave shall not be counted as a break in
service for the purposes of seniority, promotion, or other service benefits.
(2) No financial benefits shall be payable during the period of
Entrepreneurship Leave.
Accounting of 
Entrepreneurship 
Leave and 
combination 
with leave of 
other kinds. 
6. The manner and procedure of accounting of Entrepreneurship Leave and its
combination with leave of other kinds available to the employee concerned
as per the existing leave rules in his organization, shall be such as may be
prescribed.
40
 

3 
7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall be in
addition to the existing leave rules applicable to the concerned employee in
his organisation, and not in derogation of, any other law, rules, orders or
instructions for the time being in force.
Act to 
supplement 
other laws. 
5 8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary
or expedient for removing such difficulty.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
10 
15 
20 
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of  no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
rules. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India, being a young nation with a growing population of aspiring 
entrepreneurs, recognizes the need to encourage and support its citizens in 
their entrepreneurial endeavors. This Bill seeks to provide Central 
Government employees, employees of Public Sector Undertakings, 
statutory, autonomous, and constitutional bodies with the opportunity to 
take upto two years of unpaid leave, to be known as Entrepreneurship 
Leave to pursue their startup ventures. This initiative aims to foster 
innovation and entrepreneurship, thereby contributing to the nation's 
economic growth and development. Further, the provisions of this Bill will 
ensure that employees can return to their positions without any loss of 
seniority or service benefits, with duration of their entrepreneurial leave 
being counted for the purpose of next promotion, thus providing a secure 
environment for entrepreneurial pursuits. 
Hence this Bill. 
VIVEK K. TANKHA 

5 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
provisions through an order to remove any difficulties likely to arise in 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill, if enacted. Clause 9 of the Bill 
empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. As the orders and rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to make provisions in the service conditions of Central Government employees, 
employees of Public Sector Undertakings, employees of statutory, 
 autonomous, and constitutional bodies, so as to enable them  
to take upto two years of unpaid leave to pursue their  
startup venture and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Vivek K. Tankha, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—027–10.02.2025. 