AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON  26TH  JULY,  2024 
Bill No. XXXV of 2024 
THE NATIONAL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TECHNOLOGY 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL 2024 
A 
BILL 
to
 provide for the establishment of a National Artificial Intelligence Technology Regulatory 
Authority for the regulation and monitoring of the use of Artificial Intelligence 
 and related technologies in the country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows: - 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Artificial Intelligence Technology
Regulatory Authority Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “AI” means Artificial Intelligence, i.e., a constellation of
technologies that enable machines to act with higher levels of
intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense,
comprehension and actions;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, th e
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
(c) “Authority” means the National Artificial Intelligence Technology
Regulatory Authority constituted under section 3;
(d) “deep fake” means artificial media that has been digitally altered to
replace a person’s face or body or sound with that of another;
(e) “deep learning” means a method in AI that teaches computers to
process data in a way that is inspired by the human brain;
(f) “IT” means Information Technology;
(g) “machine learning” means a field of study in AI relate d to the
development and study of statistical algorithms that can learn from
data and generalise to unseen data and thus perform tasks without
explicit instructions
;
(h) "member" means a Member of the Authority constituted under
section 3; and
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5 
10 
1
5 
2
0 
Constitution of 
the National 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Technology 
Regulatory  
Authority. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, with effect from such date as it may
by notification in the Official Gazette appoint, constitute an 
Authority to be known as the National Artificial Intelligence 
Technology Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers conferred 
on and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 
(2) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(3) The Authority may establish its offices at such other places within
the country, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following: —
(i) a Chairperson having specialised knowledge and extensive
experience in the AI landscape, to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(ii) two Members, to be nominated by the Central Government,
from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing, who have
extensive professional experience –
(a) in understanding the various risks associated with AI,
Machine learning and deep learning;
2
5 
3
0 
3
5 
4
0 

3 
5 
10 
1
5 
(b) of working in organisations and institutions involved in the
ethical deployment of AI and related technologies;
(c) in conceptualising and developing innovative and ethically
responsible projects using AI;
(d) in understanding the IT policies of State and Central
Governments; and
(e) in understanding the future threats of AI in replacing human 
jobs
;
(5
) The Chairperson and every Member of the Authority shall hold office
for such period, not exceeding four years, as may be specified by the
Central Government in this behalf.
(6) The Central Government shall, from time to time, appoint such
number of officers and staff including experts to the  Authority, a
s
m
ay be required t o assist it in its efficient functioning, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(7) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Members, officers, staff
and experts of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(8) The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
20 
25 
30 
35 
4
0 
4. (1)  The Authority shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely,
to –
(a) function as an apex authority for regulating and monitoring the
deployment of AI and related technologies in the country;
(b) de sign a monitoring and regulatory landscape for the adaptation of
AI technology based on the principles of (i) 
safety, security and
robustness; (ii) transparency and ethics; (iii) accountability; and (iv)
equality and fairness;
(c) identify the key privacy challenges of AI technology including the
bias challenge, privacy challenge, misinterpretation challenge,
employment loss challenges and other related issues in order to control
and minimise the potential risks to human life;
(d) formulate a comprehensive national policy for regulating the
dissemination of AI technology in the country; design a strategic acti on
plan and guidelines, and monitoring and evaluation activities for
leveraging the benefits of AI technology as well as mitigating the ethical
risks arising out of it;
(e) perform such functions regarding the formulation and
implementation of schemes and projects for creating awareness
among the people about the prospects and risks of AI;
(f) c oordinate with various Government departments for cross -sector risk
assessment, supporting innovators and identifying the loss of human
labour;
Duties and 
functions of 
Authority. 

4 
(g) support the institutions, organisations and individuals who are
engaged in the development of ethical and responsible AI tools;
(h) identify a set of high -risk application of AI, and prohibit all the AI
and deep fake activities that are associated with unacceptable risks;
(i) enquire into any complaints concerning the deprivation of rights of
workers as a result of replacing human labour with AI and act as  a
na
tional-level grievance redressal mechanism in matters related to AI,
machine learning and deep fake;
(j) advise the appropriate Government in any other matter as may be
referred to it, from time to time; and
(k) perform such other functions, as it may consider necessary, for
implementation of the provisions of this Act and any other matters
incidental to the above functions.
5 
1
0 
 Authority to 
have powers of 
Civil Court. 
5. The Authority shall, while investigating any matter referred to it   under clause
(j) of section 4, have all the powers of a Civil Court in trying a suit and, i n
p
articular, in respect of the following matters, namely: -
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from an y
pa
rt of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or
office; 
( e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses a nd
documents; and
( f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
15 
2
0 
2
5 
Appropriate 
Government to 
consult the 
Authority.
 
6. The appropriate Government shall consult the Authority on all policies
affecting the application and deployment of AI and related technologies.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the
Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 3
0 
Accounts and 
Audit. 8. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may b e
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor- General of
India.
(2) T he accounts of the Authority, as audited and certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this
behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by
the Authority to the Central Government, which shall cause the same to be
laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
35 

5 
5 
10 
1
5 
9. (1) The Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within such time
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report giving a
true and full account of its activities during the previous year and copies
thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government  shall cause to be laid before each House of
Parliament, the annual report along with a memorandum of action  taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the  Authority and the
reasons for non -acceptance of the recommendations, if any, within a period
of
 one year from the date of receipt of such report.
(3
) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues connected
with the State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the
Governor of that State, who shall in turn, cause to be laid before the Stat
e
l
egislature concerned, such report  along with an explanatory memorandum
concerned with the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for not accepti ng
a
ny of the recommendations made therein, within a period of one year from
the date of receipt of such report.
Annual Report 
of the 
Authority. 
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
20 11. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law
for the time being in force.
Act to have an 
overriding 
effect. 
25 
12. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient
for removing such difficulty.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
30 
35 
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) E very rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while
it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
rules. 

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Artificial intelligence (AI) presents big opportunities and potential 
risks for the countries around the globe. The transformative effect of AI on 
commerce, government service delivery and human interactions can hardly 
be ignored in India as well. Realizing the future prospects and risks of AI, the 
NITI Aayog released two major documents in 2018 and 2021 – the National 
AI Strategy and the Principles of Responsible AI. Since India stands at a 
unique position to leverage such emerging technologies for dynamic  growth, 
the Government has taken a proactive approach toward developing 
frameworks for ethical and responsible deployment of AI systems.  
N
evertheless, AI continues to develop rapidly with new tools being 
released on a regular basis capable of increasing ly sophisticated tasks. The 
sophistication of these tools and their capabilities to generate highly realistic 
imagery has raised concerns over the long term social and political impact of 
AI. With the advent of deep learning and deep fake, world over Governments 
are seeking to address the issues of regulating AI. These digitally falsified 
media have the potential to harm reputations, fabricate evidence, and erode 
trust in institutions due to their hyper -realistic nature. Besides, the AI is 
replacing human l abor with machines at a faster rate. This has seriously 
affected the livelihood of large number of people.     
Against this context, the EU and Canada had already initiated 
regulations to control and monitor the use of AI. But India currently lacks 
specific regulatory mechanism that directly addresses generative AI, deep 
fakes, and AI-related crimes. While the existing guidelines list good practices 
and steer towards a vision for responsible AI, they are not legally binding. 
Therefore, there is a need for establishing a specific authority that is 
empowered to regulate, monitor and control the use of AI in an ethical manner 
without affecting its innovative potentials.   The rapid advancement and 
proliferation of AI technologies necessitate the establishment of a robust 
regulatory framework to ensure the ethical, transparent, and accountable use 
of AI in the Country. The Bill seeks to create a dedicated Authority, namely, 
the National Artificial Intelligence Technology Regulatory Authority 
(NAITRA), which shall have powers of a civil court, to oversee the regulation 
and monitoring of the use of AI and related technologies in the country. The 
Authority will be empowered to set standards, monitor compliance, promote 
research and it is envisaged that the creation of the Authority, would certainly 
address the issue of ethical regulation of AI in the country substantially.    
H
ence, this Bill. 
 S
ANDOSH KUMAR P. 

7 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 C lause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National 
Artificial Intelligence Technology Regulatory Authority to carry out the 
responsibilities assigned to it.  It also provides for the headquarters of and 
appointments of a Chairperson, Member s, officers, staff and experts to the 
Authority as well as the provision of salary and allowances to them.  Clause 4 
provides for the duties and functions of the Authority.  Clause 7 provides that 
the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority.  
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non- recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved.  

8 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
C lause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to 
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a norma l 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______
_ 
A 
BIL
L 
to
 provide for the establishment of a National Artificial Intelligence Technology Regulatory 
 Authority for the regulation and monitoring of the use of Artificial Intelligence 
 and related technologies in the country and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
_______
___ 
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–150―30.07.2024.