THE  DESTITUTE  AND  NEEDY  SENIOR  CITIZENS
(CARE,  PROTECTION  AND  WELFARE)  BILL,  2011
A
BILL
to provide for proper care of senior citizens who are destitute, by their kith and kins and
the Government and for protection of lonely or old couples by way of appropriate
security measures by local police and for other welfare measures and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute and Needy Senior Citizens (Care, Protection
and Welfare) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) it shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "destitute senior citizen" means an old person who has become infirm due to
old age or chronic ailment and who has no independent and adequate means of livelihood
for his subsistence;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH APRIL, 2012
Bill No. XXXVI of  2011
Definitions.
       5
     10

2
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "senior citizen" means any person who has completed sixty years of age.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
it shall be the duty of the kith and kins of senior citizen to take care and support such citizen.
(2) The kith and kins of a senior citizen who fail to comply with the provisions contained
in sub-section (1) shall forfeit their right to suceed the senior citizen in any manner after the
death of such a senior citizen.
Explanation—For the purposes of sub-sections ( 1) and (2) the kith and kins include
sons, daughters and other heirs and successors of the senior citizens.
4. (1) Every destitute senior citizens shall, on an application made in the prescribed
form to the appropriate Government be paid rupees one thousand per mensem as subsistence
allowance by such Government in whose jurisdiction such senior citizen permanently resides.
(2) The subsistence allowance referred to in sub-seciton (1) shall be subject to alteration
on the basis of the prevailing price index as may be determined by the Central Government.
(3) The procedure to be followed in granting and payment of subsistence allowance
under this Act shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Senior Citizen.
Homes at conspicuous places, as it may deem necessary for board and lodging of needy
senior citizens in such Homes.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide all necessary facilities of daily life in
each Senior Citizen Home for the benefit of senior citizens residing therein.
(3) The appropriate Government shall slao provide free medical aid and means of
entertainment to the inhabitants of the Homes established under sub-section (1).
(4) The senior citizens lodged in Senior Citizen Homes shall not be entitled to subsistence
allowance referred to in section 4 of this Act.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the local police of every district headquarter shall keep a record of senior citizens residing
within its jurisdiction in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of the area Station House Officer of the local police to,—
(a) verify the character and antecedents of the domestic servant or any domestic
help engaged by any senior citizen or lonely old couple residing within his jurisdiction
in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) provide adquate security to every lonely senior citizen or lonely old couple
residing within his jurisdiction.
7. The Appropriate Government shall also undertake the following welfare measures
for the senior citizens, namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance without interest or least minimal interst to
attain financial freedom;
(b) to provide free medical and healthcare facilities;
(c) concessional travel by road, rail and air; and
(d) such other measures as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this
behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Government for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
5
Duty of kith
and kins of
senior citizen.
10Subsistence
allowance to
destitute
senior
citizens.
Establishment
of Senior
Citizen
Homes.
15
Protection of
senior citizens
by local
police.
Other Welfare
measures to be
taken for
senior
citizens.
Central
Government
to provide
funds for the
purposes of
the Act.
20
25
30
35
40

9. The provisions for this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith, contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to senior citizens.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3
Power to
make rules.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With rising inflation and western influence in our country, senior citizens are being
neglected. This is against our Indian culture and philosophy. We, as responsible citizens
cannot be a mute spectator. With the increase in life expectancy, the number of senior citizens
is increasing continuously. However, in many cities in the country thousands of old citizens
living alone have been target of criminals and many have lost their lives due to peoples'
greed. It is our duty to provide them with security both personal and financial for their
welfare. These are the people who have contributed everything for the family, the society
and the country. It is inhuman and unethical to neglect our senior citizens. They must be
provided complete financial security including 'Roti, Kapra and Makaan'. Not only this,
they should also be provided with mental and psychological support.
Hence this Bill.
A VTAR  SINGH  KARIMPURI

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 (1) provides that appropriate Government shall give subsistence allowance to
every destitute senior citizen, Clause 5 provides for the establishment of senior citizen
homes and other facilities for the benefit of the destitute senior citizens residing in it. Clause
7 also provides for the other welfare measures to be taken for senior citizen by the appropriate
Government. Clause 8 is related with the appropriation made by Parliament in this behalf to
provide adequate funds for the purpose of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees one thousand five hundred crore is likely to be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand
crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the matters will relate to details only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—446RS(S3)—27-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for proper care of senior citizens who are destitute, by their kith and kins and
the Government and for protection of lonely or old couples by way of appropriate
security measures by local police and for other welfare measures and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri, M.P .)