Bill No. XXXV of 2006
THE COMMERCIALISED GIRL CHILD TRAFFICKING (PREVENTION,
REHABILITATION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of commercialized girl child trafficking wherein a girl
child is forced into prostitution after luring, procuring or kidnapping her or
dedicating her as devadasi for commercial gains by providing deterrent
punishment including capital punishment for such commercialization and for
rehabilitation of such girl child and for welfare measures to be undertaken by
Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commercialized Girl Child Trafficking (Prevention,
Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
5

SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/147RS\147RS.P65
2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘girl child’’ means a female who is below the age of eighteen years;
(c) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) ‘‘trafficking’’ includes forcing the girl child into prostitution or for any unlawful
and immoral purpose or procuring or supplying the girl child for such purpose or
dedicating the girl child as devadasi or Bhavin to ultimately end up as prostitute or
hiring or obtaining possession of the girl child for promiscuous sexual purposes;
(e) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The Commercialized girl child trafficking, in any manner, whatsoever, is hereby
prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever,—
(a) forces a girl child to prostitution for commercial gains, notwithstanding the
family relation of such girl child with the accused shall be punished with death;
(b) lures, procures or takes charge of a girl child for indulging in immoral traffic of
such girl child for the purposes of prostitution or for any unlawful and immoral purpose,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and also with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees;
(c) hires or otherwise obtains possession of a girl child for promiscuous sexual
abuse of her shall be punished with life imprisonment and also with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
(d) provides a girl child to his customers including any domestic or foreign
tourist for prostitution or for any unlawful and immoral prupose shall be punishable
with regorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but may
extend to life imprisonment and also with fine which shall not be less than two lakh
rupees but may extend to five lakh rupess.
(e) dedicates a girl child as devadasi or Bhavin notwith-standing that the person
is a natural guardian of the girl child, shall be punishable with imprisonment which
shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten years and also with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees.
5. (1) Any girl child forced into commercialized trafficking covered under this Act
shall be rescued by the Appropriate Government through the local police and produced
before a Magistrate or Judicial Officer so designated by such Government for being lodged
in a shelter home which shall be established by that appropriate Government.
(2) Every girl child rescued and lodged in a shelter home under sub-section (1) shall
be provided,—
(a) board and lodging with meals and other necessities of daily life free of cost;
(b) medical care free of cost;
(c) education including vocational, technical and medical education including
training wherever required free of cost;
Prohibition of
girl child
trafficking for
commercial
pruposes.
Penalty.
45 of 1860.
104 of 1956.
Girl child
forced into
commercialized
trafficking to
be rescued by
the
appropriate
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/147RS\147RS.P65
3
Welfare
measures.
45
(d) employment in public employment through reservation and other means;
(e) such other facilities as may be prescribed.
6. The appropriate Government shall formulate rehabilitation and such other welfare
measures for a girl child, forced into commercialized trafficking who may be rescued
under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the pruposes of
this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is a matter of grave concern that these days commercialized girl child trafficking is
going on in a very large scale and many a time in the name of adventure tourism in many parts
of the country particularly, in Goa, Mumbai, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and other
tourist destinations. Unfortunately, girl child trafficking or prostitution is rampant not only in
our country but throughout the world and more so, in Asian and African countries where
poverty persists in a big way. More and more adolescent girls are being forced into
commercialized prostitution by pimps, anti-social elements, organized criminal gangs, brothel
keepers, hoteliers, tour operators and in many cases even by their natural guardians and near
and dear ones. Mostly the girls are lured on one pretext or the other promising a decent and
comfortable lifestyle and forced into trafficking. In other cases the girls are kidnapped and
forced into prostitution. The girls are now even brought in from neighbouring countries like
Nepal, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Bhutan, etc. for commercialized trafficking by organized gangs.
In some parts of the country the young girls are dedicated to temples as devadasi or Bhavin
and then used for trafficking. For this shoddy affairs all the tourists cannot be blamed but a
few tourists do indulge in sex tourism.
The lives of the girl child prostitutes are in constant danger due to deadly AIDS,
many of them also suffer from other sexually transmitted diseases. But those who are
involved in commercialized girl child trafficking are least bothered about these hapless
girl children and deserve deterrent punishment. It is, therefore, proposed that whoever
forces a girl child into prostitution should be awarded death penatly. Those who procure the
girl child for sexual pleasure and those who provide the girl child to the clients should get life
imprisonment. Similar other proposals have also been made in this Bill so that the hapless
innocent girls are saved not only from the cruel and inhuman profession of prostitution
but also from the dreaded disease of AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.
Hence this Bill.
E.M.  SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Shelter Homes for the rescued girl
child from trafficking with provision of basic necessities of life, education medical care, etc.
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for rehabilitation and other welfare measures for rescued girl
child. Clause 7 provides for adequate funds to be provided by the Central Government for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure form the
Consolidated Fund of India. Though it is very difficult to estimate the expenditure at this
juncture it is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of commercialized girl child trafficking wherein a girl child is
forced into prostitution after luring, procuring or kidnapping her or dedicating her as
devadasi for commercial gains by providing deterrent punishment including capital
punishment for such commercialization and for rehabilitation of such girl child and for
welfare measures to be undertaken by Government and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—(S5)—496RS—12.05.2006.