Bill No. XXXVI of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
Short title,
extent and
Commencement.
THE NATIONALISATION OF INTER-STATE RIVERS BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for nationalisation of inter-State rivers for the purpose of equitable
distribution of river waters among the States and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Nationalisation of Inter-State Rivers Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means the State Government or Union Territory
Administration,  in case of a State or a Union Territory, as the case may be, and the
Central Government in all other cases;
.
5
Definitions.

2
(b) "committee" means the Water Distribution Committee established under
Section 7;
(c) "inter-State river" means any river which has its source in one State and
passes through two or more States including the States in which the river has its origin
before it submerges into the sea and also includes, a lake, tank, rivulet, which has its
source from a river which is an inter-State river; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
State shall have the exclusive right over an inter-State river or to its use.
4. From the date of commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall have the
exclusive right and control over all inter-State rivers.
5. ( 1) Every State Government/Union Territory Administration shall forward its
requirements of water for all purposes, including irrigation and drinking water to the Central
Government and also its requirements for electricity.
(2) While forwarding its requirements, every State Government and Union Territory
Administration shall indicate the rivers, which are not inter-State rivers, and their status and
any dam constructed within the State on any river,  including an inter-State river, and its
capacity for storage of water and electricity generated from those rivers.
(3) Every State Government and UT Administration shall also indicate the average
rainfall in the State during the last three years in different seasons and the amount of rainfall
during the current year.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to distribute river water of every
inter-State river to the States and UT within which such rivers pass through.
(2) While distributing river waters, the Central Government shall take into consideration
the following factors:—
(a) the population and area of each interested State and UT;
(b) the land available for farming in each State and UT;
(c) the requirements for drinking water and  for agricultural and other purposes
in each State and UT;
(d) the length of inter-State river passing through each State and UT; and
(e) the requirements and availability of electricity in each State and UT.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, establish a
committee to be known as the Water Distribution Committee to advise and make
recommendations to the Central Government about distribution and sharing of water of
inter-State rivers to each State and UT and matters connected therewith.
(2) The Committee shall consist of,—
(i)  a retired Judge of the Supreme Court—Chairperson;
(ii)  Secretary, Ministry of Jal Shakti—Member;
(iii)  Chairperson, Central Water Commission—Member;
(iv)  two eminent persons having experience in water resource management;
(v)  four Secretaries of Irrigation or PWD Department from the State Governments,
to be nominated on rotational basis—Members;
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
No State to
have exclusive
right over
inter-State
river.
Central
Government
to have right
and control.
State
Governments
to forward
requirements
of water/
electricity.
Central
Government
to distribute
inter-State
river water.
Establishment
of Water
Distribution
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and other members of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Ministry of Jal Shakti shall provide secretarial assistance to the Committee.
(5) The Committee while discharging its function shall follow such procedure and meet
in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) From the date of commencement of this Act, no appropriate Government shall
construct any hydro-electrical plant or project on any inter-State river or based on it.
(2) The Central Government shall have the exclusive right and control to construct
any power plant meant for power generation on any inter-State river and shall distribute
electricity in such ratio, among the States and UT through which the inter-State rivers
pass, as may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall pay to the Central Government in such ratio as
may be prescribed for the electricity it receives from any hydro-electrical plant or project
constructed on an inter-State river.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to construct
hydro-
electrical
plants on
inter-State
rivers.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are many rivers big or small flowing through many States before they submerge
into the nearest sea. Today half of the population of the country do not have accesss to
potable water. Water is also not available for irrigation and other purposes. As a result,
production of agricultural products has been considerably affected. It has been observed
that many States through which a river flows, fight for considerable share of river water and
try to deprive the just and due demand of other States. Consequently, many disputes are
pending in Tribunals for settlement. It is a common knowledge that Tribunals take a long time
before delivering judgement.
Water is a precious resource and calls for judicious management of the limited water
resources. It is high-time that the country needs to rise above political, ideological and
regional differences and also move away from a narrow project centric approach to a broader,
holistic approach to issues of water management.
Therefore, it is proposed that only the Cental Government shall have the exclusive
right and control over all inter-State rivers and it shall distribute river water according to pre-
determined formula for allocation of water, on the recommendations of Water Distribution
Committee. It is proposed that the Central Government shall also have the exclusive right
over electricity projects constructed on inter-State rivers. This measure will not only enable
distribution of river water among the different States without affecting the interests of the
concerned States but also enable proper utilisation of available resources.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides establishment of Water Distribution Committee to advise
and unable recommendations to Central Govt. regarding distribution and sharing of water.
Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall construct hydro electrical plants
or projects on inter-State rivers. Though there is a provision that the appropriate Government
shall pay to the Central Government in such ratio as may be prescribed for the electricity it
receives, yet expenditure will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will be involved. A non-
recurring expenditure of above rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the matters will relate to detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for nationalisation of inter-State rivers for the purpose of equitable
distribution of river water among the States and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, MP)
MGIPMRND—4315RS(S3)—11-12-2019.