THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govt. may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 66 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following shall be
substituted namely:—
‘‘66. (1) When the counting of votes has been completed, the Returning Officer
shall, in the absence of any direction by the Election Commission to the contrary,
forthwith declare the result of the election in the manner provided by this Act or the
rules made thereunder provided that the winning candidate has secured not less than
an absolute majority of the valid votes polled.
(2) In the event of no candidate having polled the requisite majority of votes,
there shall be a repoll within a week amongst two candidates who have polled highest
and the second highest number of votes at the original poll and at the completion of
the repoll in accordance with the provision of this Act and the rules made thereunder,
the Returning Officer shall declare the result forthwith in accordance with the provisions
of sub section (1) of section 66".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill NO. XXXVII of 2009
Amendment
of Section 66
of Act 43 of
1951.
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2009
10
15
Declaration of
results.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
     We have adopted Parliamentary system of democracy and the peoples'
representatives to the House of the People and State Legislative assemblies are elected
through direct election. There is, however, no stipulation regarding the minimum number of
votes required to be polled by the winning candidates. In view of the multiplicity of parties
in our system and unrestricted number of candidate's allowed to contest elections, the
winning candidates in a vast majority of cases poll very low percentage of valid votes polled
and can, therefore, hardly be treated as having a true representative character. There is,
therefore, a need that a provision be made that the winning candidates should poll absolute
majority of valid votes polled.
    In the event of no candidate securing the requisite majority of votes, there should be
a repoll amongst the two candidates having polled the highest and the next highest number
of valid votes. This will make the elected representatives truly having representative character.
Accordingly, section 66 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, is required to be
suitably amended.
Hence this Bill.
RAJEEV CHANDRASEKHAR
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTA TION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
*** *** *** *** ***
66. When the counting of the votes has been completed, the returning officer shall, in
the absence of any direction by the Election Commission to the contrary, forthwith declare
the result of the election in the manner provided by this Act or the rules made thereunder.
*** *** *** *** ***
Declaration of
results.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
—————
(Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5151RS(S5)—4-12-2009.