1
THE  POPULATION STABILIZATION  BILL,  2012
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of  family planning measures by the Central and State
Governments for population stabilization in the country through various incentives
and disincentives so as to ensure that the population is commensurate with its social,
economic and other developments and with the ecological balance and bridge the gap
between the haves and have nots and for achieving quality of life and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Stabilization  Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this act; and
(c) "small family” means family having one child.
Short title,
extent
and com-
mencement.
Bill No. XXXV of 2012
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON
THE 23RD NOVEMBER, 2012
Definitions.
5
10

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution of India or any other law
for the time being in force, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act are for the
purposes of giving effect to the policies of the State towards securing the principles laid
down in article 38 of the Constitution of India.
4. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, formulate a new comprehensive population policy particularly for the purposes of
having one child norm for the eligible couples and other issues including economic,
educational, legal medical, social and other incidental aspect to promote small family norms
so as to effectively control the booming population of the country in order to achieve rapid
economic progress and raise the standard of living of the masses.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the employee of the Central Government or of a Public Sector enterprise under the Control
of Central Government who adopts small family norm undergoing sterilization operation
himself or of the spouse after the birth of his first child shall be given:—
(a) one year additional salary with all allowances along with two additional increments
as incentives;
(b) plot or house site or built house from Housing Board or Development Authority of
the Government at subsidized rates;
(c) loan for construction or purchasing the house from banks or financial institutions
on nominal rate of interest;
(d) free healthcare facilities;
(e) free educational facilities to the child with vocational training and professional
courses wherever necessary; and
(f) such other benefits and incentives as may be prescribed.
6. The incentives and benefits referred to in section 5 shall be extended mutatis
mutandis to the general public in the manner provided therein.
7. Whoever in contravention of small family norm procreates more than one child, shall
lose the incentives and benefits provided in this Act and in addition thereto shall,—
(a) be denied the subsidies in matters of loans extended to him;
(b) not be eligible to get the benefits of Public Distribution System;
(c) not be given any loan by any bank or financial institution; and
(d) not be entitled for such other facilities as may be prescribed.
8. Any women having one living child shall not be provided with maternity facilities in
any Government Hospital, Dispensary, Health Centre or Medical Centre for the birth of her
second child:
Provided that if, such women agrees to undergo sterilization operation after the birth of her
second child then she shall be provided with the requisite maternity facilities forth with.
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the election laws for the time
being in force, a citizen shall be disqualified for being chosen as a member of either House of
Parliament or of the legislature of a State or of any body of the local self government, if that
citizen has more than two living children:
Provided that this provision shall not apply in case of a citizen having more than two
living children on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
marriage shall be solemnized between a male who is less than twenty-five years of age and a
female who is less than twenty-two years of age.
Giving effect
to the policies
of the States
as laid in
article 38 of
the Constitu-
tion of India.
Formulation of
Comprehensive
Population
Policy.
Facilities to
Government
employees
who adopts
small family
norm.
Extension of
benefits to
general public.
Loss of
benefits
whoever
contravenes
small family
norm.
No maternity
benefits to be
given for
those having
more than one
living children.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(3) Every serving government employee and those who will join any government
service shall give an undertaking that he shall not procreate more than one child:
Provided that this provision shall not apply to those government employees who have
more than the prescribed number of living children on or before the date of commencement
of this Act.
10. Whoever contravenes,—
(a) the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 9 shall commit cognizable offence and
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two
years but may extend to four years and also with a fine, which may extend to two lakh rupees.
(b) the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 9 shall forfeit his right to promotion and
shall not be eligible for any further increment till he is in government service.
11. The appropriate government shall,—
(a) implement the revised National Population Policy to achieve the goals enumerated
therein;
(b) set up maternity hospitals and centers in sufficient numbers at conspicuous places;
(c) distribute contraceptive pills, condoms through Healthcare Centres and Non-
Governmental Organisations;
(d) organize sterilization camps from time to time;
(e) distribute iron and vitamin capsules and tablets amongst the expecting mothers;
(f) give wide publicity to the benefits of having small families; and
(g) undertake such other measures as it may deem fit and expedient for the purposes of
this Act.
12. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act from time to
time.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act as may appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty.
14. The provisions of this Act and of any rules and orders made thereunder shall have
effect notwithstanding any thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not, save as otherwise
expressly provided in this Act, in derogation of any other law for the time being in force in
any part of this country.
16. The Central Government may be notification in Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty.
Duties of the
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is the second most populous country after China with largest birth rate in the
World. China's annual rate of population growth has been 0.6 per cent, against India’s 1.4 per
cent. Our population is around 1.3 billion, and is increasing every moment. Around 2030,
India will become the most populous country on the earth—with a population of
1.6 billion by 2050. Our global land area is 2.4 per cent, but we have more than sixteen per cent
of the global population making it the most densely populated nation of the world. This
scenario is compelling as half the population lives in slums and under squalid conditions.
This has caused over crowding due to which law and order situation also is deteriorating.
Unemployment is rising rapidly causing frustration amongst the unemployed, particularly
the youth who are being lured by anti-national and anti-social elements. There is  unparallel
transformation of human values, social institutions and economic structures. Agriculture
land holdings are becoming smaller and smaller and uneconomical and farmers are committing
suicides due to this fact. The housing needs are far beyond the available finances and the
shortage is appalling. Educational facilities are becoming hoplessly poor. Overcrowding is
also causing environmental degradation. Jungles are vanishing for fuel, construction, furniture
and for funeral purposes which has resulted water shortage and less rain and increased
carbon-dioxide in the environment resulting in harmful diseases. The healthcare facilities are
far from satisfactory and if, the population is not stabilised, we can hardly expect to achieve
quality life and the situation will become from bad to worse.
It is, therefore, imperative that effective steps must be taken to check the increasing
population. A clear message must go across the nations that since our resources are limited,
we have to opt for smaller families. It is very unfortunate that despite availability of various
birth control measures and several Family Planning Programmes, the population continues
to rise menacingly. This Bill is a step towards population stabilization in the country.
Hence this Bill.
SHADI  LAL  BATRA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides certain benefits to Government employees who adopt
small family norm. Clause 6 provides for extension of benefits to general public who adopt
small family norm. Clause 12 lays down that Central Government shall provide requisite
funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, will
involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also
likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 16 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—3506RS(S3)—26-11-2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of  family planning measures by the Central and State Governments
for population stabilization in the country through various incentives and disincentives
so as to ensure that the population is commensurate with its social, economic and other
developments and with the ecological balance and bridge the gap between  the
haves and have nots and for achieving quality of life and  for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shadi Lal Batra, M.P.)