1
Bill No. XXXVII of 2021
THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2021
A
BILL
 to provide for measures to control the population in the country and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Population Control Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent,
commencement
and
application.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021
5

2
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
this Act shall be applicable to all married couples including couples in a live in relationship,
even if the boy is less than twenty-one years of age and the girl is less than eighteen years
of age.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘Committee’’ means District Population Stabilizing Committee set up under
Section 5;
(c) ‘‘employee of the Union Government’’ means any person who is serving in
connection with the affairs of the Central Govrnment or in any undertaking or
organization under the control of the Central Government;
(d) ‘‘Fund’’ means the National Population Stabilization Fund constituted under
Section 10; and
(e) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall ensure that contraceptives are available at all
sub-health centres in the country and provided free of cost to EWS and BPL groups.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a National Population Control Council
of which the Union Health Minister shall be the Chairman and State Health Ministers and
Lt. Governor or Administrators in case of Union Territories shall be the Members.
(2) The Council shall meet quarterly in first week of January, April, July and October to
discuss the Population Control Program.
5. (1) The State Governments shall constitute State Population Control Council of
which the Health Minister or Lt. Governor/Administrators in case of Union Territories shall
be the Chairman and District Magistrates and Chief Medical Officers shall be the Members.
(2) The Council shall meet in the first week of every month to monitor the Population
Control Program.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up district level monitoring committee to
be known as District Population Stabilization Committee in all districts.
(2) The Committee shall consist of;
(a) the District Collector;
(b) the Chief Medical Officer; and
(c) One representative from each Panchayat Samiti in the district.
(3) The Committee shall take steps to encourage the use of contraceptives and control
the population growth rate in their concerned district in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The first Sunday of every month shall be celebrated as Population Control Day and
contraceptives etc. shall be provided free of cost to economically weaker sections and people
below poverty line.
(5) There shall be sterilization camps on first Sunday of every month in every hospital
including primary-health centres and recognized private hospitals.
7. If both the husband and the wife, who have only one child, undergo sterilization/
operation, the appropriate Government shall provide them with following benefits namely:—
(a) preference for admission in Kendriya Vidyalaya and Navodaya Vidyalayas;
Availability of
contraceptives.
National
Population
Control
Council.
State
Population
Control
Council.
Setting of
District
Population
Stabilisation
Committee.
Benefits to
married
couples for
undergoing
sterilization.
Definitions
20
25
30
35
40
15
10
5

3
(b) preference for admission in institutes of Higher Education;
(c) preference to the single child for selection in Government jobs;
(d) fifty thousand rupees each to wife and husband as one time grant;
(e) such other benefits as appropriate Government deems fit.
8. If both the husband and the wife are living below the poverty line and having only one
child, undergo sterilization/operation, in addition to the benefits granted under Section 8
by the appropriate Government, such married couple shall be eligible for payment from the
Central Government a one-time lump sum amount of fifty thousand rupees if the single
child is a boy or one lakh rupees if the single child is a girl.
9. Both the husband and the wife, who have more than two children after the
commencement of this Act, shall be debarred from:—
(a) contesting Lok Sabha, State Legislature and Panchayat elections;
(b) getting elected to the Rajya Sabha and State Legislative Council;
(c) forming political party and becoming political office bearer;
(d) applying for State Government jobs of any category;
(e) applying for Central Government jobs of any category;
(f) applying for Private jobs of any category;
(g) receiving any kind of subsidy including free food, free electricity, free water;
(h) receiving any kind of loan from banks and financial institutions;
(i) receiving any kind of incentive, stipend and monetary benefits;
(j) forming association or union or cooperative society;
(k) practicing any profession and carrying out any occuption;
(l) using right to vote, right to contest and right to form association.
10. The appropriate Government shall introduce a compulsory subject explaining the
adverse effects of population explosion and benefits of population control in all schools
including recognized, unrecognized, minority education schools and essay competition and
debates etc. will be organized every month.
11. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund called the National Population Stabilization
Fund by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government and the State Government shall contribute to the Fund in
such a ratio as may be determined by the Central Government:
Provided that the ratio shall be such that the State with higher fertility rate shall
contribute in higher proportion compared to the States with lower fertility rate.
(3) The money collected under the Fund shall be redistributed to the States and Union
Territories that have implemented reforms to control population and have been able to
significantly reduce their population growth rate, in such manner as may be prescribed.
12. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds after due appropriation by
the Parliament by law in this behalf, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
13. (1) After one year from the commencement of this Act, all employees of the Central
and State Government shall submit an undertaking in writing to the respective appointing
authority that they shall not procreate more than two children:
Additional
benefits for
married
couples living
below the
poverty line.
Disincentives
for the
married
couples with
more than two
children.
Compulsory
subject on
Population
Control.
Constitution
of National
Population
Stabilisation
Fund.
Provision for
Central
Government
Employees.
Undertaking
by the
Government
Employees.
20
25
30
35
40
15
10
5

4
Provided that the employees who already have more than two children at the
commencement of the Act shall submit an undertaking that they shall not procreate any more
children.
14. (1) The Central and State Government, when recruiting employees, shall give
preference to candidates having two or less than two living children.
(2) The employees of the Central and State Government already having two living
children may be allowed to procreate one more child in case of disability of living child or any
such circumstances as prescribed in the rules.
(3) An employee of the Central and State Government whose action is found to be in
violation of any provision of this Act shall be liable for dismissal from service.
15. The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying the purpose of this Act.
16. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
override laws.
10
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
At present, 125 crore Indians have AADHAAR, around 20 per cent viz. 25 crore are
without AADHAAR, and around 5 crore Bangladeshi-Rohingya infiltrators illegally reside in
India. From this, it is evident that the total population of our country is more than 150 crore
and we have marched ahead of China. If we calculate natural resources, then we have around
2 per cent of agriculture land and 4 per cent drinking water of the world. However, our
population is 20 per cent.
Russia is five times bigger than India but its population is 15 crores. China is three
times bigger than India and population is 144 crores. America is three times bigger than India
and its population is 33 crores. Canada is three times bigger than India and its Population is
just 4 crores. Brazil is 2.5 times bigger than India and its population is 22 crores. Australia is
2.5 bigger than India and its population is 2.5 crores and we are now 150 crores. Similarly,
5000 children are born per day in Russia, 1000 children are born per day in Canada, 44000
children are born per day in China, 11000 children are born per day in America, 8000 children
are born per day in Brazil, 900 children are born per day in Australia. But 70,000 children are
born per day in India.
Population explosion is root cause of most of our problems including shortage of
water, forests, land, bread, clothes and house, poverty and unemployment, hunger and
malnutrition and air, water, soil and sound pollution. It is root cause of the crowds in trains,
police stations, tehsils and jails, High Courts and Apex Court. Population explosion is the
root cause of theft, dacoity and snatching, domestic violence, physical and mental harassment
of women and separatism, fanaticism, stone pelting etc. From a survey, conducted  on
thieves, dacoits, snatchers, rapists and mercenaries, it is apparent that about 80 per cent
criminals and offenders are such that their parents have not followed policy of “Ham Do -
Hamare Do”. Therefore, it is evident from the above stated facts that population explosion is
the basic cause of more than 50 per cent problems of India.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to introduce incentives for population control and provides
for constitution of a National Population Stabilization Fund and National Population Control
Council. It is vital for us to realize that population control and enforcement of two child
norms are immediate measures, and steps such as providing contraceptives and encouraging
family planning will play a stronger role in decreasing the population growth rate in long run.
Hence this bill.
HARNATH SINGH YADA V
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment of District Population Stabilization
Committees that would work to provide assistance and information regarding population
control. Clauses 7 and 8 provide for cash amount to be given to couples as an incentive for
population control. Clause 10 provides for the introduction of a compulsory subject on
population control in schools of certain districts. Clause 11 provides for the establishment of
the National Population Stabilization Fund. Clause 12 provides that the Central Government
shall provide funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Central Government shall
have to incur some expenditure for implementing the provisions of this Bill in respect of
Union Territories. The State Governments will incur expenditure in respect of their States out
of their respective consolidated funds. The Bill, thereore, if enacted, would involve an annual
recurring expenditure of about five hundred crore rupees per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for measures to control the population in the country and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Harnath Singh Yadav, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1347RS(S3)—07-12-2021.