THE  INDIAN  EVIDENCE  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2006
A
BILL
further to amend the  Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Evidence  (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Evidence Act, 1872, after section 114A, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"114B. In a prosecution for culpable homicide or murder, as the case may be, of
a person by a police officer the court may presume that the death was caused when
that person was in the custody of the police, by the police officer having custody of
that person during that period after taking into account all the relevant circumstances
and facts unless otherwise proved by that police officer."
Bill No.  XXXVI  of  2006
Short title,
and com-
mencement.
Insertion of
new section
114B.
Presumption
as to death
while in Police
custody.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJY A SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
1 of 1872.
10
5

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Custodial violence leading to injuries, rape or deaths of suspects or accused has
become very common in our country. Of late, there is sudden spurt in the incidents of
custodial deaths. The courts while deciding cases of custodial deaths have been passing
strictures against the police and awarding compensation to the families of the deceased. The
Human Rights Commission in its Reports has also been referring to custodial deaths and
expressing concern over their increasing number. The Commission, in fact, has written to all
the States and Union Territories making it obligatory for them to report every incident of
custodial death to the Commission within 24 hours failing which the Commission will be free
to conclude adverse. But, even after all these observations and developments, the incidents
of custodial deaths are increasing unabated and a large number of them go unreported. It is
no secret that while in police custody all kinds of third degree methods are used by police
officers to extract information from the accused which, many a time, lead to custodial death.
The courts have issued several guidelines for police in order to prevent the custodial death,
but they are observed more in breach. In case of prosecution of police in custodial deaths, it
is very difficult to find any eye-witness. Besides, any other policeman never comes forward
to give evidence against his fellow policeman accused of custodial death. Therefore, it is
very difficult to implicate a policeman in the absence of evidence. Due to lack of action on
these police officers, they have become insensitive and have developed a sense of impunity.
Under the circumstances, it may be appropriate if the courts while trying a police officer
accused of custodial death should presume that it has been caused by the police officer and
the onus of proving innocent is fixed on the police officer.
The Law Commission in its 113th and 185th Reports has recommended changes in the
law with regard to causing bodily injury to a person while in police custody. But, nothing has
been done in this regard so far and the situation has been allowed to deteriorate. Therefore,
a beginning is necessary at least in cases of custodial deaths.
It is, therefore, necessary that changes in the Indian Evidence Act are made regarding
presumption by court if the death of a person takes place while he was in police custody.
Such an amendment will definitely serve as deterrent to the police officer and reduce the
incident of custodial deaths.
Hence this Bill.
KALRAJ  MISHRA

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the  Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—508RS(S5)—12.05.2006.