1
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 35A and section 35B in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the following
sections shall be substituted, namely—
"35A. (1) If in any suit or other proceedings, including an execution proceedings
but excluding an appeal or a revision, any party objects to the claim or defence on the
ground that the claim or defence or any part of it is, as against the objector, false or
vexatious to the knowledge of the party by whom it has been put forward, and if
Short, title and
commencement.
5 of 1908.
Bill No. XXXVI of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Amendment
of sections
35A and 35B.
Costs in
respect of false
or vexatious
claims or
defences.
5
10

2
thereafter, as against the objector, such claim or defence is disallowed, abandoned or
withdrawn in whole or in part, the Court, if it so thinks fit, may, after recording its
reasons for holding such claim or defence to be false or vexatious, make an order for
the payment to the object or by the party by whom such claim or defence has been put
forward, of such compensatory, punitive and prohibitive costs as appear to the Court
to be in the interest of justice.
(2) In determining the amount of costs under sub-section ( 1), the court shall
give due regard to the inconvenience faced by the objector against whom false or
vexatious claims were made, the costs of litigation, the loss of reputation of the objector
due to such claims and the loss of judicial time:
Provided that no Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount
exceeding the limits of its pecuniary jurisdiction.
(3) No peerson against whom an order has been made under this section shall,
by reason therof, be exempted from any criminal liability in respect of any claim or
defence made by him.
(4) The amount of any compensation awarded under this section in respect of a
false or vexatious claim or defence shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit
for damages or compensation in respect of such claim or defence."
"35.B (1) If, on any date fixed for the hearing of a suit or for taking any step
therein, a party to the suit—
(a) fails to take the step which he was required by or under this Code to
take on that date, or
(b) obtains an adjournment for taking such step or for producing evidence
or on any other ground,
the Court shall make an order imposing such compensatory, punitive and prohibitive
costs as appear to the Court to be in the interest of justice and payment of such costs,
on the date next hearing following the date of such order, shall be a condition precedent
to the further prosecution of—
(a) the suit by the plaintiff, where the plaintiff was ordered to pay such
costs,
(b) the defence by the defendant, where the defendant was ordered to pay
such costs.
Explanation.—Where separate defences have been raised by the defendant or
groups of defendants, payment of such costs shall be a condition precedent to the
further prosecution of the defence by such defendant or groups of defendants as have
been ordered by the Court to pay such costs.
(2) In determining the amount of costs under sub-section ( 1), the court shall
give due regard to the inconvenience faced by the other party due to delays caused by
the delinquent party, the costs of litigation and the loss of judicial time:
Provided that no Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount
exceeding the limits of its pecuniary jurisdiction.
(3) The Court may, for reasons to be recorded, exempt invocation of clause (1) if
it so deems, fit."
Costs for
causing delay.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The fact that our justice delivery sustem is in dire need of reform has been indisputable
for years. The number of cases pending in our courts vouch for it. While the pendency of
criminal cases has often been under focus, there has been little headway on the  civil front.
As per 2014 statistics, over 31 lakh civil cases were pending in High Courts. The corresponding
figure for District and Subordinate Courts was a whopping 82 lakh. An even alarming aspects
of this was that from amongst these cases, the cases that were pending for more than
10 years stood as 5,89,000 and 6,11,000 respectively for the High Courts and the subordinate
courts respectively.
A major cause of prolonged judicial proceedings is the tendency among parties to
litigation to seek adjournments on one excuse after the other. Moreover, many a time parties
make unsubstantiated claims in judicial prodeedings and employ it as a dilatory tactic to
delay timely conclusion of the proceedings.
The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 has had provisions to take care of such practices.
However, these provisions have largely proved to be inadeqate to address the malaise of
prolonged judicial proceedings due to various reasons. Firstly, it is discretionary for the
courts to impose costs for causing delays and courts have largely shown a disinclination to
impose penalties. As a result, litigants often try to delay judicial proceedings and get away
without any penalty.
Secondly, section 35A of the Code of Civil Procedure provides for only compensatory
costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences and disregards the need to impose
punitive costs on delinquent parties so as to prohibit them from making false or vexatious
claims or defences.
Thirdly, the said section lays down an upper limit of a mere three thousand rupees for
compensatory costs and that too is seldom invoked. Though the Supreme Court and the
High Courts have plenary powers under their writ jurisdiction to award higher costs, the
exercise of power to impose costs by the lower courts is largely fettered by the monetary
ceiling laid down under section 35A.
Sections 35A and 35B, therefore, need to be revisited to make them effective in
addressing delays in courts.
With the above objects in view, the Bill seeks to propose the following amendments in
the Code of Civil Procedure:—
(a) to make it mandatory for courts to impose costs for causing delays. However,
the courts may dispense with the requirement to impose such costs in certain exceptional
cases.
(b) to provide that punitive costs shall be imposed on delinquent parties which
try to make false or vexatious claims or defences in order to deter them from resorting
to such practices;
(c) to remove the maximum ceiling of three thousand rupees on costs which can
be imposed under section 35A of the Code;
(d) to provide that the factors such as inconvenience faced by the aggrieved
party, costs of litigation and loss of judicial time shall be taken into account by the
courts while imposing costs on delinquent parties so that the costs imposed are
prohibitive.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
Hence, this Bill.
NARAY AN LAL PANCHARIYA
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
(5 OF 1908)
* * * * *
35A. Compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defenses.—(1) If
any suit or other proceedings including an execution proceedings but [excluding an appeal
or a revision] any party objects to the claim or defence on the ground that the claim or
defence or any part of it is, as against the objector, false or vexatious to the knowledge of the
party by whom it has been put forward, and if thereafter, as against the objector, such claim
or defence is disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole or in part, the Court if it so thinks
fit, may, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or defence to be false or vexatious,
make an order for the payment to the object or by the party by whom such claim or defence
has been put forward, of cost by way of compensation.
(2) No Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount exceeding three
thousand rupees or exsceeding the limits of it pecuniary jurisdiction, whichever amount is
less:
Provided that where the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of any Court exercising the
jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 or
under a corresponding law in force in any part of India to which the said Act does not extend
and not being a Court constituted under such Act or law, are less than two hundred and fifty
rupees, the High Court may empower such Court to award as costs under this section any
amount not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees and not exceeding those limits by more
than one hundred rupees:
 Provided further that the High Court may limit the amount or class of Courts is
empowered to award as costs under this Section.
(3) No person against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by
reason thereof, by exempted from any criminal liability in respect of any claim or defence
made by him.
(4) The amount of any compensation awarded under this section in respect of a false
or vexatious claim or defence shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages
or compensation in respect of such claim or defence.
35B. Costs for causing delay.— (1) If, on any date fixed for the hearing of a suit or for
taking any step therein, a party to the suit—
(a) fails to take the step which he was required by or under this Code to take on
that date, or
(b) obtains an adjournment for taking such step or for producing evidence or on
any other ground,
the court may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order requiring such party to pay to the
other party such costs as would, in the opinion of the Court, be reasonably sufficient to
reimburse the other party in respect of the expenses incurred by him in attending the Court
on that date, and payment of such costs, on the date next following the date of such order,
shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution of—
(a) the suit by the plaintiff, where the plaintiff was ordered to pay such costs,
(b) the defence by the defendant, where the defendant was ordered to pay such
costs.
9 of 1887.
4

5
Explanation.—Where separate defences have been raised by the defendant or groups
of defendants, payment of such costs shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution
of the defence by such defendant or groups of defendants as have been ordered by the
Court to pay such costs.
(2) The costs, ordered to be paid under sub-section (1) shall not, if paid, be included in
the coasts awarded in the decree passed in the suit; but, if such costs are not paid, a separate
order shall be drawn up indicating the amount of such costs and the names and addresses of
the persons by whom such costs are payable and the order so drawn up shall be executable
against such persons.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
.
————
(Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—835RS(S3)—24-06-2019.