10

As INTRODUCED IN THE RAsya SABHA

Bill No. XXXV of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
2 After article 371 1 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely —

“371J. (7) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President shall,
within six months from the commencement of the Constitution (Amendment) Act,
2000, by an order, provide for the establishment of a Development Board with respect
to the North Eastern Region of the country consisting of the States of Assam,
Nagaland, Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh,

3. The Development Board established under clause (/) shall consist of the following
as members:-—

(i) the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission;
(ii) The Union Finance Minister,
(iit) the Union Minister of Railways,

Shorttitle.

Insertion of
new article
371d

Special provi-
sion with re-
Spect to States
of North-East-
emregion.


(iv) the Chief Ministers of the concerned States;
(0) the Finance Ministers of the concerned States; and
(vi) Members of Parliament representing the concerned States.

4. The Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission shall be the Chairman of the
Development Board.

5. It shall be the duty of the Development Board to draw up and execute plans, for:—

(1) providing adequa‘. infrastructure facilities like drinking water, roads,
sanitation and communication facilities;

(ii) development of tribal areas with special attention to basic facilities;

(iii) generating adequate employment opportunities;

(iv) special development of hilly and inaccessible areas;

(¥) providing adequate rail transport facilities,

(vi) providing for generating adequate electricity,

(vii) improvement and promotion of tourism; and

(viil) taking such steps as may be incidental or consequential to any of the
aforesaid objects.
6. The Union Government shall provide adequate funds for the implementation of
the various projects as recommended by the Development Board: ~

Provided that thirty percent of the cost of projects shall be met by the concerned
State Government from out of its funds.

7. The Development Board shall submit an annual report to the President who shall
cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament.

10

15

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The area commonly referred as the North Eastern Region comprising “seven sisters”
viz. the states of Assam, Nagaland, Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Amnachal
Pradesh, is a extremely backward and under-developed hilly region. The Region also consists
of many tribal areas and population who bave not yet seen the light of civilisation. There
are no adequate infrastructure facilities such as roads, power, rail, communication etc. in
the absence of which it is not possible to accelerate the growth and development of this
Region.

In order to step up the tempo of development of the Region at a faster pace, it is
deemed necessary to set up a special agency for the purpose to be known as Development
Board comprising of the representatives of the Union and the seven State Governments. A
special provision is therefore, proposed to be made in article 371 of the Constitution 10
achieve this object.

Hence this Bill.

KARNENDU BHATTACHARIJEE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 371J in the Constitution of India to
provide for the establishment of a Development Board with respect to the North Eastern
Region. Clause 5 of the proposed new article 371J of the Constitution further provides that
the Central Government would make available adequate funds for implementation of the
various projects of the Development Board. The Bill therefore, if enacted would involve an
estimated annval recurring expenditure of about Rupees Four Thousand Crores from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

The share of the States to the development projects will be met by the State
Governments from the respective Consolidated Funds of the States.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee, M.P)

UP(PLU)MRND—1671RS—15-07-2000.