1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (i) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(ii) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 214 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Parliament may by law establish such number of permanent
benches of a High Court at such places in a State or a Union Territory, as it may deem
necessary, on the basis of area and population of that State or Union Territory and the
number of cases pending in the principal seat of the concerned High Court”.
Bill No. XXXVIII of  2014
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 214.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our Constitution makes right to legal remedies a fundamental right. But the pendency
of cases in various courts especially High Courts is a matter of serious concern. Considering
the huge geographical expanse of our country and the prevailing poverty, seeking legal
remedy has become an expensive exercise. Time has come to deliver justice in an easy, quick
and cost effective manner to the people. Providing speedy justice at low cost is all the more
important for the people who live in remote areas, far away from State capitals where principal
seats of the most of the High Courts are located. Such a situation literally results in denial of
justice to the poor persons who cannot afford to travel frequently to far off places in search
of justice. The large volume of cases pending in the High Courts has resulted in delayed
delivery of justice which amounts to denial of justice. Moreover, since most of the
High Courts are located at State capitals, the advocates of a particular place create a monopoly
for themselves charging exorbitant fees which are not within the means of poor persons and
they are obliged to sell off their property in their quest of justice. If more benches of
High Courts are established, it will serve many purposes including convenience and savings
for the common man, less pendency of cases and speeds delivery of justice at low cost. This
will help to mitigate the sufferings of the masses.
Hence this Bill.
DR. SANJAY SINH
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for
establishment of permanent benches of High Court in a State and Union Territory. It is likely
that it will involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per year and
rupees one hundred crore as a non-recurring expenditure.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
******
CHAPTER  V
THE HIGH COURTS IN THE STATES
214. There shall be a High Court for each State.
******
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Sanjay Sinh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3796RS(S3)—18.12.2014.