AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XXXVI of 1999
THE INDIAN MAJORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL. 1999
A
BILL

further to amend the Indian Majority Act, 1875.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Indian Majority (Amendment) Act, 1999.

9 of 1875. 2. In the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
in the preamble, for the words “to prolong the period of nonage, and to attain more uniformity
5 and certainty respecting the age of majority that now exists;”, the words “to specify the age

of majority” shall be substituted.

Short title.

Amendment of
preamble.


2

Amendment of 3. In section 1 of the principal Act, the word “Indian” shall be omitted.

section 1.

Substitution of 4. For sections 3 and 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,

new section for namely:—

sections 3 and

4.

Age of “3. (1) Every person domiciled in India shall attain the age of majority on his

penons of completing the age of eighteen years and not before. s

domiciled in (2) In computing the age of any person, the day on which he was born is to be
a.

included as a whole day and he shall be deemed to have attained majority at the
beginning of the eighteenth anniversary of that day.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Indian Majority Act, 1875 which is a Central Act of general application and
importance has been on the statute book for more than a century and the same needed
Teview.

2. The Government of India has received representations against the prescription of
different ages for attaining the age of majority in respect of minors under guardians appointed
or declared by a Court of Justice, etc., at 21 years and others at 18 years. Section 3 of the
Indian Majority Act, 1875, inter alia, provides that the age of majority in respect of minors
whose person or property, or both, a guardian, other than a guardian for a suit, has been or
shall be appointed or declared by any Court of Justice before the minor has attained the age
of eighteen years or in respect of minors whose property the superintendence of which has
been or shall be assumed by any Court of Wards before the minor has attained the age of
eighteen years shall be twenty-one years. The representations have been examined by the
Government and it is found that there is no justification in discriminating the minors under
the guardians appointed or declared by a Court of Justice, etc., as stated above from the
other minors. It is, accordingly, proposed to amend section 3 of theAct prescribing a uniform
age of majority of eighteen years for all minors. The Act has also been reviewed and certain
archaic and redundant expressions and provisions are proposed to be omitted.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI, RAM JETHMALANI.
The 26th November, 1999.


Short title.

Age of
majority of

domiciled in
India.

Age of majority
how computed.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN Masoriry Act, 1875
(9 oF 1875)

* * * * *

Wuereas, in the case of persons domiciled in India it is expedient to prolong the
period of nonage, and to attain more uniformity and certainty respecting the age of
majority that now exists; It is hereby enacted as follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Indian Majority Act, 1875.

* * * * *

3. Subject as aforesaid, every minor of whose person or property, or both, a
guardian, other than a guardian for a suit within the meaning of Chapter XXXI of the
Code of Civil Procedure, has been or shall be appointed or declared by any Court of
Justice before the minor has attained the age of eighteen years, and every minor of
whose property the superintendence has been or shall be assumed by any Court of Wards
before the minor has attained that age shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian Succession Act or in any other enactment, be deemed to have attained his majority
when he shall have completed his age of twenty-one years and not before.

Subject as aforesaid, every other person domiciled in India shall be deemed to
have attained his majority when he shall have completed his age of eighteen years and
not before.

4. In computing the age of any person, the day on which he was born is to be
included as a whole day, and he shall be deemed to have attained majority, if he falls
within the first paragraph of section 3, at the beginning of the twenty-first anniversary of
that day, and if he falls within the second paragraph of section 3, at the-beginning of the
eighteenth anniversary of that day.

Illustrations

(a) Zis born in India on the first day of January, 1850, and has an Indian domicile.
A guardian of his person is appointed by a Court of Justice. Z attains majority at the
first moment of the first day of January, 1871.

(b) Z is born in India on the twenty-ninth day of February, 1852, and has an
Indian domicile. A guardian of his property is appointed by a Court of Justice. Z
attains majority at the first moment of the twenty-eighth day of February, 1873.

(c) Z is born on the first day of January, 1850. He acquires a domicile in India.
No guardian is appointed of his person or property of any Court of Justice, nor is he
under the jurisdiction of any Court of Wards. Z attains majority at the first moment of
the first day of January, 1868.

45 of 1860.


RAJYA SABHA

A
Ba
further to amend the Indian Majority Act, 1875

(Sint Ram Jethmalant, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2086RS—26.11.1999