AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON  THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XXXVII of 2025 
THE BHARATIYA NAGARIK SURAKSHA SANHITA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:― 
 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita
(Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Insertion of 
new section 
173A. 
 
 
Mandatory 
response to 
public reports 
of cognizable 
offences 
causing public 
safety incident 
widely 
disseminated 
through 
electronic 
means.
2. After section 173 of the Bharatiya Nagarik  Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, the
following new section shall be inserted, namely:―
“173A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita 
or any other law for the time being in force, where a report, 
complaint, or information relating to the commission of a 
cognizable offence, which causes or is likely to cause a public safety 
incident or public disorder, is ― 
(a) widely disseminated or reported through an y
electronic means, including digital social media 
intermediaries, instant messaging services, or publicly 
accessible online forums; and 
(b) brought to the notice of the officer in charge of a
police station within whose jurisdiction such offence is being 
or has been committed, 
such officer shall, subject to verification of the credibility of such 
report, complaint, or information, record the substance thereof in a 
book to be kept in the police station in such form as the State 
Government may by rules prescribe in this behalf and initiate 
appropriate proceedings under this Sanhita or any other law 
applicable, without undue delay: 
 Provided that the book shall be inspected and supervised by 
the Superintended of Police on a weekly basis. 
(2) Upon recording the information under sub -section (1), it
shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the police station to — 
(a) issue, within twenty-four hours of such recording,
a public statement, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, clarifying the status of preliminary verification, 
and the steps taken or proposed to be taken; and 
(b) disseminate the public statement throug h
appropriate public communication channels including, where 
feasible, official social media handles of the local police unit 
or other official means as may be directed by the State 
Government or the Director General of Police. 
(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the
State Governments, prescribe guidelines for the verification of 
credibility of such public reports, formats of public communication, 
and procedures to be followed for compliance with this section. 
(4) Where the officer in charge of the police station fails to
take action under sub-section (1) without sufficient cause, it shall be 
treated as dereliction of duty and such officer shall be liable to 
disciplinary action as per applicable service rules.   
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, expressions not defined 
in this Sanhita but defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000 shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.” 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
46 of 2023. 
 
21 of 2000. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In this age of digital communication, citizens often use social media to report 
crimes, raise safety concerns, or share real-time updates from the ground. However, 
the lack of timely police response to such public reports often leads to distress, 
misinformation, and public mistrust. Therefore, a Bill to amend the relevant 
provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and to provide for 
mandatory public response within twenty four hours by the police authorities to any 
crime, incident, or public grievance reported via social media platforms within their 
jurisdiction is a necessity in the changing times . This will enhance transparency, 
accountability, and responsiveness in law enforcement. 
Hence, this Bill. 
 MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI. 

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
___________ 
(Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni, M.P.) 
   RS-P&PS―PMB(E)―339―08.12.2025. 