Short title,
extent and
commencement.
 THE CITIZENS’ SMART CARD BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for issue of multi-purpose smart cards to every citizen in the country and matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizens Smart Card Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) ''citizen'' means a citizen of India as defined under the Citizenship Act, 1955
who is above eighteen years of age;
Bill No. XXXVII of  2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA ON THE 12TH MAY, 2006
Definitions.
SERVER4\BILL_ 2004/RS/504RS
5
57 of 1955.

2
SERVER4\BILL_ 2004/RS/1583RS
(b) ''competent authorities'' means authorities declared by the Central Government
competent to issue and change particulars of a smart card under this Act;
(c) "prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) ''smart card'' means a plastic or fibre glass card containing such details on a
microchip or magnetic strip as may be prescribed under this Act for the purpose of
multi usage;
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, issue a smart card to every citizen living in a city having a total
population of thirty lakhs and above as per the 2001 census:
Provided that by 2008, the Central Government shall issue smart card to each and
every citizen in the coutnry;
(2) The smart card issued under sub-section ( 1) shall contain the following
information, namely:—
(a) Full name in capital letters with photograph of the citizen;
(b) Date of birth;
(c) Permanent address;
(d) Temporary address, if any;
(e) Occupation;
(f) Educational qualification;
(g) Blood group;
(h) PAN Number, if any;
(i) Driving licence details, if any;
(j) Bank accounts details, if any; and
(k) Passport details, if any.
(3) The smart card shall be prepared displaying only a few particulars and encoding
the rest mentioned in sub-section (2) in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette declare the
authorities competent to issue and change the particulars in a smart card.
4.  It shall be the duty of every citizen to bring to the notice of competent authorities set
up for the purpose every detail required for the purposes of the smart card.
5. (1) In case of any change in the particulars of the smart card, every citizen shall, in
writing, bring it to the notice of the competent authority within a period of sixty days.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1), the competent authority shall
enter the new particulars in the smart card in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government shall ensure that the changes in the smart card
are made online by the year 2007.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
smart card issued under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 shall be the conclusive proof for the
purposes of determining the age, residence and other details of the citizen and shall be used
for such other purposes as may be prescribed.
Issuance of
smart cards.
Duty of
citizen to
inform the
details to
competent
authorities.
Recording of
change in
particulars on
smart card.
Smart card to
be proof for
determine
details of
citizens.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
SERVER4\BILL_ 2004/RS/1583RS
SERVER4\BILL_ 2004/RS/127RS
7. If a citizen is leaving the country for a period exceeding one year or intends to settle
abroad permanently, he shall surrender the smart card with the competent authorities failing
which he shall not be allowed to leave the country.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a
citizen who does not hold a smart card shall not be entitled to the benefits of any of the
schemes of the Central Government, the State Governments or their undertakings.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the
rules may provide for all or any of the following matter, namely:—
(a) the size and shape of  the smart card, the photograph to be affixed to the same
and the letter to be used therein;
(b) the competent authorities empowered to issue the smart card and make changes
in it;
(c) the manner and purposes in which smart cards can be used;
(d) the manner in which publicity shall be given to the provisions of the Act so as
to enable the people to get their smart cards prepared;
Surrender of
smart card.
Denial of
benefits of
Government
schemes to
citizen not
having smart
card.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Issue of smart card to each and every citizen in the country is one of the most essential
requirements of the day keeping inview the security threat to the nation. Our nation is prone
to infiltration from all sides, and a lot of infiltrations do take place from neighbouring countries.
Therefore, the citizens do need some sort of document to prove their indentity whenever
confronted during security checks.
With the commitment of the nation towards e-governance, issuing of smart card to a
citizen would be a step in that direction. Many countries have adopted this method of
providing identity to their citizens. The smart card will be containing all the necessary details
about a person. It can be used in banks, smart card readers, etc. for financial and other
transactions in an efficient manner. In the long run, it will save a lot of time and energy.
Hence this Bill
KALRAJ MISHRA
SERVER4\BILL_ 2004/RS/3776RS

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for issuing of smart card to every citizen of the country and
for setting up of authorities for issue of smart cards for issuing and changing its particular.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involved expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore per annum on
account of appointment of staff who will issue the indentity cards.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
SERVER4\BILL_ 2004/RS/3776RS
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill and the rules relate to matters of details only. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
SERVER4\BILL_ 2004/RS/3776RS
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for issue of multi-purpose smart cards to every citizen in the country and
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—504RS(S5)—12-05-2006.