1
THE  YOUTH (ERADICATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL,  2016
A
BILL
to provide for the eradication of unemployment amongst the youth by granting right to
work to every eligible youth and for payment of unemployment allowance during
the period of unemployment and for making all the sanctioned posts in
Government employment non-lapsable and free from abolition
and  establishment  of  right  to  work  fund  for  funding
unemployment allowance and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted  by Parliament in the Sixty- seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called theYouth (Eradication of Unemployment and Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
Bill No. XXXV of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 10TH MARCH, 2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "employment exchange" means an employment exchange set up by the
appropriate Government;
(c) "fund" means the Right to work Fund establishment under section 6;
(d) "government employment" include all the services in the Ministries,
Departments, subordinate offices, bodies, public enterprises, constitutional bodies,
educational institutions including universities, colleges, schools etc., health services
providers, Banks and financial institutions and all such organisation which are under
the appropriate Government with sanctioned strength of officers and staff;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "youth" include any human being a male, female or transgender who has
attained the age of eighteen years but not crossed the age of forty five years and who
is a citizen of India.
3. Every unemployed youth shall have the right to work to be provided by the
appropriate Government as a measure of eradication of unemployment subject to the age,
educational qualification and ability of the youth as may be prescribed:
Provided that the youth seeking employment under this section shall register his name
in an Employment Exchange under the oppropriate Government.
4. Till such time an employment is provided to the unemployed youth under section 3,
the appropriate Government shall pay to the youth unemployment allowance not being less
than one thousand rupees per week in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the unemployment allowance under this section shall be stopped with
immediate effect if, the youth secures any work or job either through the Employment
Exchange or of his own or otherwise and his name shall also be removed from the register
of the Employment Exchange.
5. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any youth,—
(a) who has income, from one or more sources, not less than the amount of
unemployment allowances fixed under section 4;
(b) who is covered under any scheme of unemployment allowance prevalent in
a State or Union Territory, as the case may be.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the official
Gazette, establish a Right to work Fund with initial corpus of one lakh crores rupees to be
provided by the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf for the purposes of this Act and thereafter make such grants to the fund, from
time to time as may be required for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall also be credited with,—
(a) all grants made by the Central Government and Contributions made by
Governments of the States and administrations of the Union Territories;
(b) all voluntary donations made to the fund by individuals, bodies, corporates
and financial institutions etc;
(3) the Fund shall be administered for the purposes of this Act in such manner as may
be prescribed.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to fill up all the sanctioned posts of
Government employment within one months of the vacancies arising and no sanctioned
post of Government employment shall be subject to abolition and lapsing as a matter of
policy or for any reason whatsoever of the appropriate Government.
Eradication of
unemployment
through right
to work.
Grant of
unemployment
allowance.
Act not to
apply in
certain cases.
Establishment
of Right to
work Fund.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law,
from time to time, provide requisite funds to the States for the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Unemployment amongst the youth is the biggest problem of our vast nation today and
it is assuming menacing proportions with each passing day. Millions of educated and qualified
youth are unemployed. Recently media highlighted that a State Government invited
applications for few posts of Peons. In response it received nearly five lakh applications and
among the aspirants were Engineers, Technocrats and Ph.D degree holders. Though the
concerned State Government ultimately cancelled the process, but this shows the gravity of
situation so far as the unemployment in the country is concerned. Quite a large number of
unemployed youth have become desperate due to poverty. This situation is being exploited
by anti-social and anti-national elements by luring the youth into their net and the youth is
choosing the path of violence and crime. Lack of employment opportunities in the country is
also leading to brain drain and exodus of large number of skilled and unskilled youth abroad.
Agriculture sector and Government provide majority of jobs but agriculture sector is
under stress due to vagary of nature and consistent drought conditions. In Government the
number of vacancies are shrinking year after year. In Central Government there are peculiar
rules. For instance if a post is not filled for a year it automatically lapses. Similarly, ten percent
of the total vacancies arising in Government employment every year stand lapsed. Then
there are Voluntary Reitrement Schemes. So the sanctioned strength is decreasing year after
year. This trend needs to be checked by making it mandatory to fill up all the sanctioned
posts.
It is high time to make concerted efforts for the eradication of unemployment amongst
the youth by declaring right to work as fundamental and making it mandatory for the
Government to provide employment to all the youth. In case the Government fails to provide
employment, it must pay the youth unemployment allowance because Constitution of India
guarantees to every citizen the fundamental right to life. The apex court too has observed
that for the right to life, decent livelihood is necessary and if a person is unemployed, he and
his family can not enjoy a decent life. The Bill gives every youth the legal right to work and
grants unemployment allowance. The Bill also provides for the establishment of a Right to
Work Fund by the Government for the purposes of the Bill.
Hence this Bill.
RAJ KUMAR DHOOT

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the eradication of unemployment through right to
work. Clause 4 provides for the grant of unemployment allowance. Clause 6 provides for the
establishment of Right to Work Fund with initial corpus of One Lakh crore rupees to be
provided by the Central Government. Clause 8 makes it mandatory for the Central Government
to provide requisite funds to the States for the implementation of the provisions of the Bill.
The Bill if, enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Apart from
the initial corpus of one lakh crore rupees, it is estimated that a sum of two lakh crore rupees
may involve as recurring expenditure per annum. No non recurring expenditure is likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—4919RS(S3)—10.03.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the eradication of unemployment amongst the youth by granting right to
work to every eligible youth and for payment of unemployment allowance during
the period of unemployment and for making all the sanctioned posts in
Government employment non-lapsable and free from abolition
and  establishment  of  right  to  work  fund  for  funding
unemployment allowance and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P .)