THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 75 of the Constitution, for clause ( 5), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not elected as a
member of either House of Parliament shall, at the expiration of that period, cease to be
a Minister; and shall not be reappointed as a Minister for one year.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXXVI of 2010
Amendment
of article 75.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 13TH AUGUST, 2010

2
3. In article 80 of the Constitution after clause ( 3), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that no person belonging to any political party shall be nominated
under sub-clause (a) of clause (1)."
4. In article 164 of the Constitution for clause ( 4), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not elected as a
member of the legislature of the State shall at the expiration of that period cease to be
a Minister and shall not be reappointed as a Minister for one year."
5. In article 171 of the Constitution after clause (5), the following proviso be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that no person belonging to any political party shall be nominated
under sub-clause (e) of clause (3)."
6. In article 331 of the Constitution, the following proviso be added, namely:—
"Provided that no person belonging to any political party shall be nominated
under this article."
7. In article 333 of the Constitution, the following proviso be added, namely:—
"Provided that no person belonging to any political party shall be nominated
under this article."
Amendment
of article 80.
Amendment
of article 164.
Amendment
of article 171.
Amendment
of article 331.
Amendment
of article 333.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution, does not bar the appointment of a person from outside the legislature
as Minister. But he cannot continue to be a Minister for more than six months unless he
secures a seat in either House of Parliament. Quite understandably, the founding fathers of
our Constitution enshrined this provision in the Constitution so as to utilize the services and
ability of some eminent persons who can be great help to the nation but at the same time are
not members of legislature due to one reason or the other. Their services may possibly be
indispensable for the benefit of the country.
On the other hand, article 80 of the Constitution empowers the President to nominate
twelve members from amongst the persons having special knowledge or practical experience
in literature, science, art and social service. Thus the Constitution adopts the principle of
nomination for giving distinguished person a place in the upper House. A similar provision
is there in article 171 of the Constitution for States Assemblies. Similarly, articles 331 and 333
empower the President to nominate members of the Anglo-Indian community to the
Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly of a State, if they are not adequately represented.
These provisions, i.e., appointment of a Minister who is not a member of the legislature
and nomination of members to the legislatures are two distinct provisions. Therefore, to
nominate a person who has been appointed a Minister without being a member of the
legislature would go against the spirit of the Constitution. This would have never been the
intention of the framers of our Constitution to nominate a Minister who has failed to be
elected to the legislature within the time limit of six months.
Further in certain cases particularly in some States a person continues to be a Minister
for years without being a member of the State legislature. In such cases, the person is
reappointed as Minister after every six months. Therefore, it is proposed that if, a Minister
fails to be a member of the legislature with in the period of six months, he shall not be
appointed a Minister at least for one year. This provision will prevent the misuse of the
existing provision.
Similarly, to keep the provisions of nomination of members to the legislature away from
any controversies it is proposed that persons belonging to any political party should not be
nominated to the legislature. Let the experts from different sections of the society come and
benefit the legislature with their experience.
Hence this Bill.
KALRAJ  MISHRA
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
* * *
75. (5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of
either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
* * *
80. (3) The member to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) of clause (1)
shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such
matters as the following, namely:—
Literature, science, art and social service.
* * *
164. (4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of
the Legislature of the State shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
* * *
171. (5) The members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause (e) of clause (3)
shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such
matters as the following, namely:—
Literature, science, art, co-operative movement and social service.
* * *
331. Notwithstanding anything in Article 81, the President may, if he is of opinion that
the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People,
nominate not more than two members of that conmmunity to the House of the People.
* * *
333. Notwithstanding anything in Article 170, the Governor 
3[***] of a State may, if he
is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community needs representation in the Legislative
Assembly of the State and is not adequately represented therein, 
4[nominate one member of
that community to the Assembly].
4

GMGIPMRND—3874RS(S3)—13-08-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra, M.P.)