Bill No. XXXVIII of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Short title,
and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL  ANTHEM (MODIFICATION) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to modify the National Anthem ‘‘Jana Gana Mana’’.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Anthem (Modification) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by Notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. The National  Anthem "Jana Gana Mana" shall be modified as mentioned in the
Schedule of this Act.
Modification
of the
National
Anthem.
.
5

THE  SCHEDULE
[See Section 2]
Jana gana mana adhinayaka jaya hey
Bharata bhagya vidhata
Punjab Sindh Uttarpurv Gujarat Maratha
Dravida Utkala Banga
Vindhya Himachala Yamuna Ganga
Uchchala jaladhi taranga
Tava shubha name jage
Tava shubha ashisha mage
Gahe tava jaya gatha
Jana gana mangala dayaka jaya hey
Bharata Bhagya vidhata
Jaya hey, jaya hey, jaya hey
Jaya jaya jaya, jaya hey.
2

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The National Anthem of India "Jana Gana Mana" was composed by
Dr. Rabindranath Tagore and was first sung on December 27, 1911. The Anthem naturally
reflects the composition of India at that time.
The then President of India, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, had made a statement in the
Constituent Assembly on 24th January, 1950 that the composition consisting of the
words and music known as Jana Gana Mana is the National Anthem of India, subject to
such alterations in the words as the Government may authorise as occasion arises.
The anthem does not mention very important component of India like the Northeast,
now comprising of the states like Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Nagaland, Tripura,
Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Mizoram. The North-Eastern(NE) states are situated at
such strategic and sensitive points, that they are at the border of Burma, China, Bhutan
and Bangladesh. In most of the cases the people of North-Eastern states feel alienated
from rest of India, as most of the states are still not easily accessible by virtue of being
hill states with inhabitants of hill tribes inspite of the mass participation and
commendable contribution of the people of these states in the freedom struggle of
India. Therefore, the anthem needs to be modified so that it reflects the true composition
of present day India including the northeastern states.
Hence, this Bill.
RIPUN BORA
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to modify the National Anthem ‘‘Jana Gana Mana’’
————
(Shri Ripun Bora, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—823RS(S3)—25 -06-2019.