1
THE SALT WORKERS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for the protection from exploitation and welfare measures to be undertaken by
the State for the salt workers of Gujarat and other parts of the Country by setting up
a welfare fund, for payment of minimum wages, old age pension, healthcare, maternity
facility for women workers, educational facilities for their children and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salt Workers (Protection and Welfare) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) “employer” means any person who employs, whether directly or through
any other person, or contractor, whether on hehalf of himself or on behalf of any other
person, one or more labourer or workers for work connected with salt making from sea
or salt lake, as the case may be, including handling of salt;
Bill No. XXXVI  of  2014
Short title,
extent and
Commencement.
Definitions.5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

2
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) “salt worker” means any person engaged in making salt from sea or lake
water on land by digging shallow wells and pumping out brine or in a chemical factory
or any related occupation as a wage earner, whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood
and includes a person engaged through a contractor or engaged as a self employed
person;
(e) “wages” means the remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of
money which shall, if the terms of the contract of employment, whether express or
implied, are fulfilled, be payable to the salt worker in respect of the work done under
this Act;
(f) “welfare fund” means the Salt Workers Welfare Fund Constituted under
section 3.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notifications in the Official Gazette constitute
a fund to be known as the Salt Wokers Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act with an
initial corpus of rupee two thousand crore to be provided by Central Government by due
appropriation made by law by Parliament in this behalf and thereafter, the
Central Government, Governments of the concerned States and employers shall contribute
to the welfare fund to such extent and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The grants or donations made by corporate houses, financial institutions both
domestic and international, individuals and bodies through donations or otherwise shall be
credited to the welfare fund.
(3) All money received in the welfare fund shall be utilized for the welfare of salt
workers in such manner as the Central Government may prescribe from time to time.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to undertake such appropriate
measures as it thinks fit for the welfare of Salt workers.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the measures
referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) maintaining a register of salt workers with such particulars and in such
manner, as may be prescribed;
(b) maintaining a register of employers employing salt workers with such
particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) ensure that the wages of salt workers is not less than the minimum wages
prescribed by it for such workers, from time to time;
(d) ensure protection from exploitation and availability of work round the year
for the salt workers;
(e) payment of old age pension;
(f) provident fund facility;
(g) medical care, in particular for the skin related diseases caused by salt and
salty water which the salt workers have to handle while making salt, free of cost with
both the indore and outdoor patient facilities for the salt workers and their family
members;
(h) maternity and creche facilities for the female salt workers;
(i) educational facilities to the children of salt workers, free of cost;
(j) water supply for drinking and other purposes;
(k) improving standard of living and nutrition;
(l) amelioration of the social conditions;
Establishment
of Salt
Workers
Welfare Fund.
Appropriate
Government
to undertake
welfare
measures.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(m) providing financial assistance in case of infirmity or disability due to accident
or any other reason;
(n) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
(3) In order to defray the cost of measures cited under sub-section ( 2), the Central
Government may direct it to be defrayed from the Welfare Fund in such manner as may be
prescribed.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide adequate clean drinking
water at the sites where salt is produced for the salt workers and also to make available
subsidised diesel at the salt producing sites in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. The appropriate Government shall construct pucca roads in salt producing areas for
transportation of salt and repair these roads from time to time.
7. (1) The appropriate Government may appoint as many Inspectors control, officers
and staff as it deems necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public servant
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(3) Any Inspector appointed under this Act, may,—
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he may deem fit, inspect at any reasonable
time any place which he considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act;
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his
duties;
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.
8.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation by Parliament, provide
funds to Governments of concerned States for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
10. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, shall be guilty of an
offence and punishable with simple imprisonment which shall not be less than six months
but may extend upto two years and also with fine which may extend upto one lakh rupee.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, may make such order to give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty and
any such order shall be final.
12. The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Appropriate
Government
to construct
pucca roads.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
clean drinking
water.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Appropriate
Government
to make
appointment.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Salt is a part and parcel of our eating habits and is consumed by one and all. Salt is
produced in the coastal states of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Andhra, Odisha,
West Bengal and Tamil Nadu. Gujarat accounts for 76.7 of total salt produced in the country
followed by Tamil Nadu 16%, Rajasthan 9%.  But the living conditions of salt workers who
make salt from the land by digging shallow wells and pumping out the brine and then making
salt from the sea water or salt lakes, be it in Gujarat and other parts of our vast nation is very
appalling, ridden with poverty, diseases particularly skin diseases, exploitation and in many
cases they are bonded labourers. Most of them are illiterates and they are making salt for
generations. In Rann of Kutch in Gujarat, salt workers are migrants having no work during
monsoon who go back to their villages. They are meagerly paid and remain debt ridden. Salt
making process makes them prone to various diseases of skin including cancer and other
dangerous diseases. There is no protective umbrella for them in the society. They remain
uncared for in their old age and most of them are left to fend for themselves. The salt workers
face acute problem of drinking water, power and education for their wards as they stay
engaged for nine months in salt making process.
Our nation being a welfare State has to take care of the unfortunate salt workers and
their families and children and ensure that they too lead a good life. This Bill tries to ensure
that welfare measures are implemented for the salt workers by the Central and State
Governments in letter and spirit so as to ameliorate their living conditions.
Hence this Bill.
AHMED PATEL
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Salt Worker Welfare Fund
with an intial corpus of rupee two thousand crore. Clause 8 states that the Central Government
after due appropriation by Parliament will provide funds to Governments of concerned States
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The recurring and non-recurring expenditure
on this count cannot be estimated at this stage, but has to be worked out by
Central Government while implementing the provisions of the Act.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection from exploitation and welfare measures to be undertaken by the
State for the salt workers of Gujarat and other parts of the country by setting up a
welfare fund, for payment of minimum wages, old age pension, healthcare, maternity
facility for women workers, educational facilities for the children of the salt workers
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Ahmed Patel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3804RS(S3)—18.12.2014.