AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. XXXVIII of 2025 
THE DIGITAL PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:― 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Digital Personal Data Protection
(Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
2. In the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), in section 2, —
( i) after clause (o), the following new clause shall be inserted,
namely,— 
“(oa): ‘harm’ includes, but is not limited to: 
(i) bodily or mental injury;
(
ii) loss, distortion or theft of identity;
(iii) loss of reputation or humiliation;
(iv) loss of employment;
(v) discriminatory treatment;
(vi) financial loss, or damage or loss of property;
(
vii) subjection to blackmail or extortion;
(viii) denial or withdrawal of a service, benefit or goods
resulting from an evaluative decision about the Data 
Principal;  
(ix) observation or surveillance not reasonably
expected by the Data Principal; 
(x) movement or any other action arising out of fear of
being observed or surveilled; (xi) psychological manipulation 
which impairs the autonomy of the individual; 
(xii) any restr iction placed or suffered directly or
indirectly on speech; and 
(xiii) unauthorized profiling.”
(ii) after clause (x), the following new clauses shall be inserted,
namely,— 
“(xa) “profiling” means any form of processing of 
personal data that analyses or predicts aspects concerning 
the behaviour, attributes or interests of a Data Principal; 
(xb) “reasonable security safeguards” includes, but is 
not limited to, —    
(i) implementation of such security
practices and standards and having a comprehensive, 
docum
ented information security programme and 
policies containing managerial, technical, operational 
and physical security control measures that are 
commensurate with the information assets being 
protected with the nature of business:  
       Provided that in the event of an information 
security breach, the Data Fiduciary or the Data 
Processor, as the case may be, shall be required to 
demonstrate that they have implemented security 
control measures as per their documented information 
security programme and information security policies; 
( ii) adherence to the international Standard
IS/ISO/IEC 27001 on ‘Information Technology - 
Security Techniques ― Information Security 
Management Systems – Requirements’: 
         Provided that any industry association or an 
entity formed by such an association, whose members 
are self-regulating by following other than IS/ISO/IEC 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
50 
22 of 2023. 

3 
 
5 
10 
 
15 
codes of best practices for data protection, as per sub -
clause ( i), shall get its codes of best practice s duly 
approved and notified by the Board for effective 
implementation: 
        Provided further that the body corporate or 
a person on its behalf, who have implemented either 
IS/ISO/IEC 27001 standard or the codes of best 
practices for data protection, as approved and notified 
by the Board, shall be deemed to have complied with 
reasonable security practices and procedures provided 
that such standard or the codes of best practices have 
been certified or audited on a regular basis by entities 
through an independent auditor, duly approved by the 
Board, at least once a year or as and when the body 
corporate or a person on its behalf undertake 
significant upgradation of its process and computer 
resource, whichever is earlier; and 
( iii) such other additional safeguards as may be
prescribed under sub-section (5A) of section 8.” 
20 3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in clause (b), after the words "connection
with”, the words "or profiling of," shall be inserted. 
Amendment of 
section 3. 
 
25 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
4. In section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (10), the following new
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
     “(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, no Data Fiduciary shall share the personal data of a Data 
Principal with any 
other Data Fiduciary or Data Processor 
unless - 
(a ) specific, prior, informed and explicit
consent is obtained for such data sharing, and 
(b ) the purpose of such sharing is disclosed
at the time of   seeking such consent. 
      Provided that where personal data is 
proposed to be transferred to a foreign country, the 
Data Principal shall be informed of such eventuality 
in advance. 
(12 ) T he consent under sub -section (11) shall be
obtained independently of any general consent for processing 
any other personal data obtained previously. 
(13) An y sharing of data in contravention of sub -
sections (11) and (12) shall be deem ed to be personal data 
breach and shall attract the same penalty, as provided for non -
compliance of the obligation under sub-section (5) of section 8 
and also the liability to compensate the Data Principal, as 
provided under section 6A. 
        E xplan ation.― For the purposes of this section, “sharing” 
includes any transfer, transmission, dissemination, disclosure, or making 
available of personal data by one Data Fiduciary to another or to a Data 
Processor, whether electronically or otherwise.” 
 
Amendment of 
section 6. 
 
50 
5. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“6A. (1) A Data Principal shall have the right to seek 
compensation for any harm suffered due to contravention of the 
provisions of this Act by a Data Fiduciary or a Data Processor. 
Insertion of 
new section 
6A. 
 
Right to 
Compensation. 

4 
(2) The Board shall have the power to adjudicate and
award compensation, commensurate with the harm caused.” 
Amendment of 
section 7. 
6. In section 7 of the principal Act, —
(i) a fter clause (e), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely;—
      “Provided that the compliance of foreign judgment or 
order shall be subject to compliance, through courts of 
competent jurisdiction in India, with sections 13,14 and 44A 
read with sub -sections (5) and (6) of section 2 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908.”; 
( ii) af ter clause ( i), the following new clauses shall be inserted,
namely: 
  “(j) any exemption granted under this se ction shall be 
reasonable, not excessive or arbitrary, and shall be subject to 
judicial review; and 
(k) notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no
data shall be processed for profiling, behavioural monitoring or 
targeted advertising without the explicit and informed consent of the 
Data Principal.” 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
5 of 1908. 
Amendment of 
section 8.
7. In section 8 of the principal Act, ―
(i) i n sub -section (4), after the words "A Data Fiduciary”,
the words “or a Data Pro cessor engaged, appointed , used or 
otherwise involved by a Data Fiduciary on its behalf", shall be 
inserted;  
(ii) after s ub-section (5), t he f ollowing new sub- section 
shall be inserted, namely,— 
        "(5A) Save as provided in clause ( xb) of section 2, 
the Central Government shall, within  three months from 
the date on which the provisions of this Act come into 
force, prescribe by rules, additional reasonable secu rity 
safeguards to be followed by a Data Fiduciary and Data 
Processor: 
        Provided that the rules so framed shall be 
congruent with clause ( xb) of section 2 and the rules 
framed by the Central Government under clause ( ob) of 
sub-section (2) of section 87 read with section 43A of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000."; 
( iii) in sub -section (6), after the words "the Dat a
Fiduciary”, the words "or the Data Processor, as the case may be," 
shall be inserted.  
 
20 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
21 of 2000. 
Insertion of 
new section 
8A. 
R
ight to be 
Forgotten.
8. After section 8 of the principal act, the following new section shall be
inserted, namely:—
       “8A.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a 
Data Principal shall have the right to request the erasure, deletion, 
or restriction on continued retention or disclosure of her personal 
data held by the Central Government, State Government, or any of 
their instrumentalities, where – 
(a) the data is no longer necessary for the purpose
for which it was collected or processed by the authority; 
(b) the Data Principal has withdrawn consent, an
d
t
here is no legal ground for retention; or 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 

5 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
( c) retention of such data is not necessary for
compliance with a legal obligation or for a task carried out in 
public interest. 
(2
) Every such request made under sub-section (1) shall be duly
c
onsidered by the concerned public authority, and if found valid, the 
authority shall ― 
(a) erase or anonymize the relevant data; and
(b) confirm such erasure or anonymization i n
w
riting to the Data Principal within thirty days of receipt 
of the request. 
(3
) Any refusal to act on a request received under sub-section (1)
s
hall be intimated to the Data Principal within thirty days of the receipt 
of such request and shall  be accompanied by written reasons, and the 
Data Principal shall have the right to appeal against such refusal before 
the Board.” 
9. In section 9 of the Principal Act, sub-sections (4) and (5) shall be omitted. Amendment of 
section 9. 
 
20 
10. In section 11 of the Principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following new
sub-section shall be inserted, namely;—
        “(1A)  The Data Principal shall have the right to make a 
demand to the Data Fiduciary, to whom she has previously 
given consent and where the processing has been carried out 
through automated means, to transfer her personal data to 
another Data Fiduciary of her choice". 
Amendment of 
section 11. 
25 
30 
 
35 
11. In section 17 of the Principal Act, -
(i) s
ub-section (3), including the Explanation thereto,
shall be omitted; 
( ii) for sub-section (5), the following  shall be
substituted, namely:― 
        “(5) Any exemption or relaxation under this 
section shall be reasonable, not excessive or arbitrary, 
and shall be subject to judicial review.”; 
(
iii) after sub -section (5), the following new sub -
section shall be inserted, namely:— 
        “(6) The provisions contained in 
section 6 of the Act pertaining to the conferring of 
consent by a Data Principal for  
the processing of 
personal data shall apply mutatis mutandis  to the 
processing of personal data under this section unless 
expressly excluded by law or rules.” 
Amendment of 
section 17. 
 
40 
 
45 
12. In section 19 of the principal Act,—
( i) for sub -section (2), the following  shall be substituted,
namely:― 
        “(2) The Chairperson and Members of the Board shall be 
appointed by a Selection Committee comprising: 
(a) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge
of the  Supreme Court nominated by him – 
Chairperson ex-officio; 
Amendment of 
section 19. 

6 
(b ) the Leader of the O pposition in the
House of the People – Member ex-officio; 
(c) t he Minister in -charge of the Union
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology – 
Member ex-officio; 
(d ) the Attorney General of India – Member
ex-officio; and 
( e) an independent expert with vast
experience in the field of Data Protection, Information 
Technology, Data Management, Data Science, Data 
Security or Cyber and internet Laws, to be nominated 
by the Chairman of the Council of the States in such 
manner as may be prescribed- Member: 
        Provided that the Selection Committee may co-opt one 
Director each from any of the Indian Institutes of Technology and 
Indian Institutes of Management as subject experts without 
having the right to vote in the proceedings thereof. 
        E xplanation.— For the purpose of removal of doubts, it is 
hereby declared that where the Leader of the Opposition in the House of 
the People has not been recognised as such, the leader of the single largest 
party in opposition  to the Government in the House of the People shall 
deemed to be the Leader of the Opposition.” 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following new sub-section shall
be inserted, namely,― 
        “(2A) The Board shall be an independent statutory 
authority and shall not be subject to the directions of the 
Central Government in the discharge of its functions.” 
 
5 
 
10 
15 
20 
 
25 
Amendment of 
section 22.
13. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub -section (3), the words "except
with the previous approval of the Central Government", shall be deleted.
Amendment of 
section 23.
14. In section 23 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following shall
be substituted, namely:—
        “( 1)  The Board sh all regulate and observe its own 
procedure in regard to the holding or and transaction of business 
at its meetings, including by digital means, and authenticate its 
orders, directions and instruments, in accordance with the 
regulations, that may be issued by the Board in this regard, from 
time to time.” 
 
30 
 
35 
Amendment of 
section 24. 
15. In section 24 of the principal Act, the words, "with previous approval of
the Central Government,", shall be deleted.
Amendment of 
section 32.
16. In section 32 of the principal Act, ;—
( i ) fo r sub-section (4), the following  shall be substituted ,
namely: 
“(4) A voluntary undertaking shall not absolve a 
Data Fiduciary or a Data Processor, as the case may be, from 
liability to pay compensation under section 6A, nor bar 
adjudication under section 33.” 
(ii) sub-section (5) shall be omitted.
 
40 
 
45 
Amendment of 
section 33.
17. In section 33 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following new
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:

7 
        “(1A) In the eventuality of imposing penalty under sub -
section (1), the Board shall also determine and award compensation 
to the affected Data Principal having regard to the gravity of the 
harm, nature of the breach, and extent of infringement of rights.” 
Amendment of 
section 40.
 
5 18. In section 40 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), clause (t) shall be
omitted.
Amendment of 
section 44.
19. In section 44 of the principal Act,—
( i ) in sub-section (2), clauses (a) and (c), shall be omitted.
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.

8 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 In the digital age, personal data has emerged as a critical asset with 
wide-ranging implications for individual rights and privacy. The Digital 
Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 was enacted with the stated objective of 
safeguarding personal data and regulating its processing. However, a closer 
scrutiny of the Act reveals significant shortcomings that may undermine the 
very rights it purports to protect. 
 Grave concerns have been raised regarding the structure and 
independence of the Data Protection Board, the principal adjudicatory 
authority under the Act. The current provision empowers the Central 
Government to appoint the Chairperson and Members of the Board without 
laying down any criteria or requiring a transparent selection process.  Earlier, 
the Joint Parliamentary Committee had recommended an independent 
regulatory framework. 
 In addition to the issues of independence and transparency in the 
constitution of the Data Protection Board, section 22(3) of the Act permits the 
Central Government to waive the mandatory one -year cooling-off period for 
the Chairperson or any Member of the Board before they accept any re -
employment. This discretionary power, if left unchecked, risks compromising 
the integrity and impartiality of the Board. It creates a fertile ground for 
conflicts of interest and post -retirement inducements that could distort 
regulatory outcomes and weaken public trust in the adjudicatory body. The 
cooling-off period must be treated as an absolute bar, without exceptions, to 
ensure that Members and the Chairperson of the Board remain free from undue 
influence during and after their term of office. 
 The introduction of the concept of ‘voluntary undertaking’ under 
section 32 allows entities in violation of the law to submit undertakings and 
thereby avoid formal inquiry and penalties. This provision creates a potential 
escape route for powerful Data Fiduciaries and erodes the deterrent effect of 
the law. Compounding this, the Act is silent on compensatory relief to Data 
Principals who have suffered harm.  There is a need to incorporate the global 
best practices, such as the European Union's General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR), in the Act to recognize the right to claim compensation 
by the Data Principal -  thus offering redressal for privacy violations or data 
breaches. 
 Further, the Act introduces the notion of “reasonable security 
safeguards” as a compliance obligation for data fiduciaries but does not define 
or prescribe minimum standards for such safeguards. This ambiguity fosters 
compliance in form rather than in substance.  The Act simultaneously repeals 
Section 43A and clause (ob) of sub-section (2) of Section 87 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 - provisions that had enabled affected individuals to 
seek compensation for negligence in data protection. 
 Likewise, the extensive exemption powers under Section 17 vest the 
Central Government with authority to exempt public and private entities, 
including start-ups, from complying with the provisions of the Act.  The Act 
also does not guarantee rights such as the "right to be forgotten" in relation to 
data held by the State. 
 The legislation also affects the Right to Information Act, 2005 by 
effectively overriding Section 8(1)(j) of the RTI Act through section 44(3), and 
there is a likelihood of the provision being misused to withhold information 
merely on the ground that it constitutes personal data, even in cases where its 
disclosure will serve larger public interest or where such information could not 
ordinarily be denied to Parliament or a State Legislature.  
 Other deficiencies in the Act include the exclusion of provisions 
requiring Data Fiduciaries to obtain specific consent before sharing data  with 

9 
 
third parties or foreign entities; exclusion of Data Processors from the ambit of 
responsibility under the Act; and the lack of provisions for the right to data 
portability, despite these being recommended by earlier drafts or Parliamentary 
Committees.  
 Crucially, children’s data, despite being nominally protected under 
Section 9, is subject to broad governmental exemptions. Such exemptions 
allow for behavioural monitoring, profiling, and targeted advertising directed 
at children without robust paren tal consent mechanisms, which might 
undermine child safety and contradicts the protective intent of the law. 
 Moreover, there are apprehensions that the Act fails to rein in state 
surveillance effectively. Clauses such as Sections 7(b) and 7(c) allow the 
processing of personal data for vaguely defined state functions and national 
security, without explicit consent. Section 7(e) permits the enforcement of 
foreign civil and contractual judgments without the oversight of Indian 
courts—sidestepping safeguards under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
 The concept of “harm” to Data Principals, a foundational element in 
previous iterations of the Data Protection Bill, has been conspicuously omitted 
in the Act. As a result, there is no established basis for individu als to claim 
compensation or for regulators to evaluate the impact of privacy violations. 
 In light of these substantial gaps, this Amendment Bill seeks to:― 
1.  Define "harm" and "profiling" and recognize the right to   
claim compensation for damages resulting from breaches; 
2. Establish minimum standards for reasonable security 
safeguards and reinstate repealed protective provisions from the 
Information Technology Act, 2000; 
3.   Mandate specific, informed, and unbundled consent for data 
sharing, including cross-border transfers; 
                             4.   Ensure the independence of the Data Protection Board; 
5. Introduce the right to data portability, and require 
accountability from data processors as well as fiduciaries; 
6.   Eliminate arbitrary exemptions, particularly those allowing  
the State to operate outside the framework of the Act; 
7.   Ensure judicial review and transparency in all exemptions 
and governmental decisions under the Act; 
8.  Protect children's data more rigorously by disallowing 
exemptions for profiling, monitoring, or advertising without consent; 
9.     Reinstate the original provisions of the Right to Information 
Act, 2005, ensuring India’s transparency framework and the 
foundational principles of democratic accountability; and  
10. Provide for such other matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
 The objective of this proposed legislation is not only to fill legislative 
gaps but also to reorient the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 toward 
its stated goal of protecting the fundamental right to privacy as enshrined under 
Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court, in Justice K.S 
Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India and Ors., has recognized that “the right 
to privacy is protected as an intrinsic part of the right to life and personal liberty 
under Article 21 and as a part of the freedoms guaranteed by Part III of the 
Constitution”. It is the solemn duty of the legislature to give effect to this 
principle in both letter and spirit. 

10 
 
 This Bill, therefore, seeks to reclaim the balance between innovation 
and individual rights, governance and accountability, regulation and freedom– 
while laying the foundation for a data protection regime that truly honours 
constitutional values and public trust. 
 The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 
                                                                                          JOHN BRITTAS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
                ANNEXURE 
                 EXTRACTS FROM THE DIGITAL PERSONAL DATA  
                   PROTECTION ACT, 2023  
                   (22 OF 2023) 
 
     *                           *                             *                              *                              *                                                                   
 3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall— 
          (a) apply to the processing of digital personal data within the territory 
of India where the personal data is collected–– 
             (i) in digital form; or 
             (ii) in non-digital form and digitised subsequently; 
           (b) also apply to processing of digital personal data outside the territory 
of India, if such processing is in connection with any activity related to 
offering of goods or services to Data Principals within the territory of India; 
   *                           *                            *                                *                             *                                                                  
Application 
of Act. 
 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (1) The consent given by the Data Principal shall be free, specific, informed, 
unconditional and unambiguous with a clear affirmative action, and shall 
signify an agreement to the processing of her personal data for the specified 
purpose and be limited to such personal data as is necessary for such specified 
purpose. 
Illustration. 
          X, an individual, downloads Y, a telemedicine app. Y requests the 
consent of X for ( i) the processing of her personal data for making available 
telemedicine services, and (ii) accessing her mobile phone contact list, and X 
signifies her consent to both. Since phone contact list is not necessary for 
making available telemedicine services, her consent shall be limited to the 
processing of her personal data for making available telemedicine services.  
(2) Any part of consent referred in sub- section ( 1) which constitutes an 
infringement of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any 
other law for the time being  in force shall be invalid to the extent of such 
infringement. 
Illustration. 
         X, an individual, buys an insurance policy using the mobile app or 
website of Y, an insurer. She gives to Y her consent for ( i) the processing of 
her personal data by Y for the purpose of issuing the policy, and ( ii) waiving 
her right to file a complaint to the Data Protection Board of India. Part (ii) of 
the consent, relating to waiver of her right to file a complaint, shall be invalid. 
 (3) Every request for consent under the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder shall be presented to the Data Principal in a clear and plain 
language, giving her the option to access such request in English or any 
language specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution and providing 
the contact details of a Data P rotection Officer, where applicable, or of any 
other person authorised by the Data Fiduciary to respond to  any 
communication from the Data Principal for the purpose of exercise of her 
rights under the provisions of this Act. 
 (4) Where consent given by the  Data Principal is the basis of processing of 
personal data, such Data Principal shall have the right to withdraw her consent 
at any time, with the ease of doing so being comparable to the ease with which 
such consent was given. 
 (5) The consequences of the withdrawal referred to in sub -section (4) shall 
be borne by the Data Principal, and such withdrawal shall not affect the 
Consent. 

12 
7. 
legality of processing of the  personal data based on consent before its 
withdrawal. 
Illustration. 
        X, an individual, is the user of an online shopping app or website 
operated by Y, an e-commerce service provider. X consents to the processing 
of her personal data by Y for the  purpose of fulfilling her supply order and 
places an order for supply of a good while making payment for the same. If X 
withdraws her consent, Y may stop enabling X to use the app or  website for 
placing orders, but may not stop the processing for supply of the goods already 
ordered and paid for by X. 
(6) If a Data Principal withdraws her c onsent to the processing of personal
data under sub-section (5), the Data Fiduciary shall, within a reasonable time,
cease and cause its Data Processors to cease processing the personal data of
such Data Principal unless such processing without her consent is required or
authorised under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or
any other law for the time being in force in India.
Illustration. 
 X, a telecom service provider, enters into a contract with Y, a Data 
Processor, for emailing telephone bills to the customers of X. Z, a customer 
of X, who had earlier given her consent to X for the processing of her personal 
data for emailing of bills, downloads the mobile app of X and opts to receive 
bills only on the app . X shall itself cease, and shall cause Y to cease, the 
processing of the personal data of Z for emailing bills. 
(7) The Data Principal may give, manage, review or withdraw her consent to
the Data Fiduciary through a Consent Manager.
(8) The Consent Manager shall be accountable to the Data Principal and shall
act on her behalf in such manner and subject to such obligations as may be
prescribed.
(9) Every Consent Manager shall be registered with the Board in such manner
and subject to such technical, operational, financial and other conditions as
may be prescribed.
(10) Where a consent given by the Data Principal is the basis of processing of
personal data and a question arises in this regard in a proceeding, the Dat
a
F
iduciary shall be obliged to prove that a notice was given by her to the Data
P
rincipal and consent was given by such Data Principal to the Data Fiduciary
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
 * *   * *    * 
A Data Fiduciary may process personal data of a Data principal for any of the 
following uses, namely:—  
 * *   *  *   * 
(e
) f
or compliance with any judgement or decree or order issued under any
law for the time being in force in India, or any judgement or order realating to
claims of a contractual or civil nature under any law for the time being in force 
outside India;
General 
obligations of 
Data 
Fiduciary. 
8. * *    * *    * 
(4) A Data Fiduciary shall implement appropriate technical and organisational
measures to ensure effective observance of the provisions of this Act and the
rules made thereunder.
* *   * *   * 
(6) I n the event of a personal data breach, the Data Fiduciary shall give the
Board and each affected Data Principal, intimation of such breach in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
Certain 
legitimate
uses. 

13 
 * *   * *    * 
9. (1) The Data Fiduciary shall, before processing any personal data of a child
or a person with disability who has a lawful guardian obtain verifiable consent
of the parent of such child or the lawful guardian, as the case may be, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
        E xplanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, the 
expression “consent of the parent” includ es the consent of lawful 
guardian, wherever applicable.  
(2) A Data Fiduciary shall not undertake such processing of personal data that
is likely to cause any detrimental effect on the well-being of a child.
(3) A Data Fiduciary shall not undertake tracki ng or behavioural monitoring
of children or targeted advertising directed at children.
(4) T
he provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) shall not be applicable to
processing of personal data of a child by such classes of Data Fiduciaries or
for such purposes, and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government may, if satisfied that a Data Fiduciary has
ensured that its processing of personal data of children is done in a manner
that is verifiably safe, notify for  such processing by such Data Fiduciary the
age above which that Data Fiduciary shall be exempt from the applicability of
all or any of the obligations under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) in respect o f
p
rocessing by that Data Fiduciary as the notification may specify.
 * *    * *   * 
Processing of 
personal data 
of children.
11. (1) The Data Principal shall have the right to obtain from the Data Fiduciary
to whom she has previously given consent, including consent as referred to in
clause (a) of section 7 (hereinafter referred to as the said Data Fiduciary), for
processing of persona l data, upon making to it a request in such manner as
may be prescribed,—
(a) a summary of personal data which is being processed by
such Data Fiduciary and the processing activities undertaken by that 
Data Fiduciary with respect to such personal data; 
(b)
t
he identities of all other Data Fiduciaries and Data
Processors with whom the personal data has been shared by such 
Data Fiduciary, along with a description of the personal data so 
shared; and 
(c) any other information related to the personal data of
such Data    Principal and its processing, as may be prescribed. 
(2) Nothing contained in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall apply
in respect of the sharing of any personal data by the said Data Fiduciary with
a
ny other Data Fiduciary authorised by law to obtain such personal data,
where such sharing is pursuant to a request made in writing by such other Data 
Fiduciary fo r the purpose of prevention or detection or investigation of
offences or cyber incidents, or for prosecution or punishment of offences.
 * *    * *    * 
Right to 
access 
information 
about personal 
data. 
17. (1) The provisions of Chapter II, except sub-sections (1) and (5) of section 8,
and those of Chapter III and section 16 shall not apply where—
*                                 *                            *                            *                             *
(3) The Central Government may, having regard to the volume and nature of
personal data processed, notify certain Data Fiduciaries or class of Data
Fiduciaries, including startups as Data Fiduciaries to whom the provisions of
section 5, sub-sections (3) and (7) of section 8 and sections 10 and 11 sha ll
not
 apply.
Exemptions. 

14 
        Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the term “startup” 
means a private limited company or a partnership firm or a limited liability 
partnership incorporated in India, which is eligible to be and is recognised as 
such in accordance with the criteria and process notified by the department to 
which matters relating to startups are allocated in the Central Government. 
*                             *                         *                                 *                             * 
(5) T he Central Government may, before expiry of five years from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification, declare that any provision of this
Act shall not apply to such Data Fiduci ary or classes of Data Fiduciaries for
such period as may be specified in the notification.
 * *    *  *   * 
Composition 
and 
qualifications 
for 
appointment 
of 
Chairperson 
and Members.
19. (1) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of other
Members as the Central Government may notify.
(
2) The Chairperson and other Members shall be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
* * 
  * *    * 
Resignation 
by Members 
and filling of 
vacancy. 
22. * *   * *    * 
(3) The Chairperson and any other Member shall not, for a period of one year
from the date on which they cease to hold such office, except with the previous
approval of the Central Government, accept any employment, and shall also
disclose to the Central Gove
rnment any subsequent acceptance of
employment with any Data Fiduciary against whom proceedings were
initiated by or before such Chairperson or other Member.
Proceedings of 
the Board. 
23. (1) The Board shall observe such procedure in regard to the holding of and
transaction of business at its meetings, including by digital means, and
authenticate its orders, directions and instruments in such manner as may be
prescribed.
 * *    * *   * 
Officers and 
employees of 
the Board. 
24. The Board may, with previous approval of the Central Government, appoi nt
such officers and employees as it may deem necessary for the efficient
discharge of its functions under the provisions of this Act, on such terms and
conditions of appointment and service as may be prescribed.
 * *    * *     * 
Voluntary 
undertaking. 
32. * *    * *    * 
(4) The acceptance of the voluntary undertaking by the Board shall constitute
a bar on proceedings under the provisions of this Act as regards the contents
of the voluntary undertaking, except in cases covered by sub-section (5).
(5) Where a person fails to adhere to any term of the voluntary undertaking
accepted by the Board, such breach shall be deemed to be breach of the
provisions of this Act and the Board may, after giving such person an
opportunity of being heard, proceed in accordance with the provisions of
section 33.
 * *   * *    * 
Power to make 
rules. 
40. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
*                             *                                *                               *                              *
( t) the manner of authentication of orders, directions and
instruments under sub-section  (1) of section 23; 
 * *   * *  *

39 of 197
0. 
22 of 200
5. 
44. * *   * *   * 
(2) The Information Technology Act, 2000 shall be amended in the following
manner, namely:—
(a) section 43A shall be omitted;
(b) i n section 81, in the proviso, after the words and figures “the
Patents Act, 1970”, the words and figures “or the Digital Personal Data 
Pr
otection Act, 2023” shall be inserted; and 
(c) i n section 87, in sub-section (2), clause (ob) shall be omitted.
(3) In section 8 of the Right to Information Act, 2005, in sub -section (1), for
clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
 “(j) information which relates to personal information;”. 
 * *    * *    * 
Amendment to 
certain Acts. 

RAJYA SABHA 
__________ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. 
__________ 
 (Dr. John Brittas, M.P.) 
   RS-P&PS—PMB(E)—319— 08.12.2025 