1
Short title, and
commencement.
THE WATER CONSERV ATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Water Conservation Authority for the conservation of
water of the rivers, ground and rainwater through traditional means of ponds,
wells, canals, trenches, etc. and by building reservoirs, bunds and check dams,
reviving dried rivers, making trenches in riverbeds, building recharge shafts,
deepending and widening canals and ponds, building permanent water conservation
structures by means of rainwater harvesting to recharge the groundwater,
encouraging people to participate in water conservation movement and plantation
of trees in a big way and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the water Conservation Authority of India Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise, requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
Bill No. XXXVII of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 10TH MARCH, 2017
Definitions.5

2
(b) “Authority” means the Water Conservation Authority of India established
under section 3;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government, shall as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Water
Conservation Authority of India for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose off property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued;
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Aurangabad in the State of
Maharashtra and the Authority may with the prior approval of the Central Government,
establish offices at such other places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this Act;
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Union Minister of Water Resources, who shall be the Chairperson
ex-officio;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having
the background or specialisation in water conservation and such other qualification
as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the Presiding Officer of the respective
House;
(d) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the
Union Ministries of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Finance, Drinking Water
and Sanitation and Rural Development, respectively;
(e) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government, in
consultation with the Governments of the States representing Governments of the
States, in the alphabetical order, and it shall be ensured that all the States get
represented in the Authority, by rotation;
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Deputy Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall be such, as may be
prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and staff
headed by a Secretary who shall be the member Secretary of the Authority, with such
terms and conditions of service, as may be prescribed from time to time.
(7) The Authority shall observe such procedure in the transaction of its business as
may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall formulate and execute a comprehensive action plan for the
conservation of water of rivers, ground and rainwater throughout the country and perform
such other functions relating to water conservation as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the action
plan for the conservation of water may also include,—
(a) building adequate number of reservoirs at conspicuous places in different
parts of the country, particularly in desert and drought prone areas;
(b) reviving all the dried rivers and make trenches in all the river basins;
(c) constructing bunds and check dams on river beds;
Establishment
of the Water
Conservation
Authority of
India.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
25
30
35
40
45

3
(d) works relating to deepening and widening canals and ponds;
(e) building recharge shafts and construction of sufficient number of trenches
at appropriate places;
(f) building permanent water conservation structures and provision for recyling
of wastewater;
(g) desiltation of existing reservoirs, ponds, canals and such other water bodies;
(h) recharging shafts for dried up borewells, village ponds and hollows;
(i) reviving all the lost ponds and lakes;
(j) encouraging people to participate in water conservation in particular school
children and villagers to build water conservation structures;
(k) advising the appropriate Government to make rain water harvesting
compulsory in all Government buildings, public parks and places, households and
establishments and educate the masses about rainwater harvesting;
(l) advising the appropriate Government to diversify water guzzling crops;
(m) giving wide publicity through radio, videos, pamphlets, booklets, hoardings,
and through print and electronic media the importance of water conservation;
(n) encouraging tree plantation as a movement;
(o) such other functions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority every year for the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed and the
accounts shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India at such intervals
as may be specified by him.
6. The Authority shall for each financial year prepare in such form as may be prescribed,
its annual report giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and
submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
 7. The Central Government shall cause the annual Report and the audit report, together
with a memorandum of action taken thereon, of the Authority to be laid before each House
of Parliament.
8. The provision of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual report.
Annual
Report and
audit report
to be laid
before
Parliament.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
25
30
35
20

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Marathwada and Madhya Maharashtra in the State of Maharashtra, various parts of
Karnataka, Bundelkhand and some other parts of the country recently faced worst crisis of
water shortage and some parts had even to rush drinking water through trains from other
parts of the country to quench the thirst of the people and livestock. This grim situation has
taught the people the importance of water and consequences of wasting it and importance
of saving it. In coming years, water shortage will be major challenge. But today most of the
rainwater and water of the river goes waste in the Oceans. Groundwater resources have
been used for all kinds of purposes from agriculture through tubewells in farming areas to
cities where ground water is increasingly being used as the primary water source through
borewells, handpumps, well etc. In farm sector water guzzling crops such as sugarcane,
paddy, etc. are being cited for receding levels of ground water. In fact the unregulated usage
of ground water has led to massive exploitation of this precious resource.
So there is urgent need for water conservation in the country. The rain water has to be
conserved through rainwater harvesting and other means. Similar action has to be taken for
the conservation of river water. For this purpose, it is felt that National Authority for the
conservation of water be established to concentrate on this vital requirement of life and
through conservation, problem of water scarcity and shortage can certainly be brought
down if not eliminated.
Hence this Bill.
RAJ KUMAR DHOOT

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Water Conservation Authority
of India. Clause 5 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide adequate funds
to the Authority every year. The Bill if, enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. Though it is not possible to quantify the exact amount that will involve but
it is estimated that a sum of one lakh crore rupees may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
Non recurring expenditure to the tune of five lakh crores rupees for creating the
assets may also involve.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Water Conservation Authority for the conservation of
water of the rivers, ground and rainwater through traditional means of ponds, wells,
canals, trenches, etc. and by building reservoirs, bunds and check dams, reviving
dried rivers, making trenches in riverbeds, building recharge shafts, deepending and
widening canals and ponds, building permanent water conservation structures by
means of rainwater harvesting to recharge the groundwater, encouraging people to
participate in water conservation movement and plantation of trees in a big way and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4921RS(S3)—10-03-2017.