 
 
29 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
                            (2007-08) 
 
 
        FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
                   MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
            DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
                 (2008-2009) 
 
 
 
                 TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
            
  
 
 
          LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
    NEW DELHI 
 
     April 2008/Chaitra 1930 (Saka) 
  

  
 
            TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
                            (2007-08) 
 
 
       (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
                  MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
            DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
        (2008-2009) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 April  2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 April  2008 
 
 
            
  
 
 
          LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
    NEW DELHI 
 
April 2008/Chaitra 1930 (Saka) 

 
CONTENTS 
   PAGE (S) 
    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (iii)
        
I N T R O D U C T I O N            ( v )  
     
CHAPTER – I        Review  of  status  of  implementation     1   
                        of  the recommendations contained in 
                        the Twenty-First Report of the Standing  
                        Committee on Labour on Demands for  
                        Grants(2007-2008) relating to the Ministry 
          of Textiles 
  
CHAPTER-II    Introductory               8-10 
                
CHAPTER-III  Report – Demands for Grants (2008-09)   
    
A.     GENERAL PERFORMANCE                 11-26  
 
B. SCHEME FOR INTEGRATED TEXTILE PARKS (SITP)        27-37 
  
C. TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION FUND SCHEME (TUFS)        38-48 
 
D      HANDLOOMS WEAVERS COMPREHENSIVE                    49-59 
 WELFARE SCHEME 
 (I) HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME 
 
 (II) MAHATMA GANDHI BUNKAR BIMA YOJANA 
 
E. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FASHION TECHNOLOGY (NIFT)   60-68 
 
F. FASHION HUB               69-72 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 (i)        Minutes of the  sittings of the Standing Committee on Labour held       73-78 
       on  31.03.2008. 
 (ii)   Minutes of the  sittings of the Standing Committee on Labour                
 held on  16.04.2008. 
   
                                   APPENDIX 
 
 
 Statement of Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report    79-88 

  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-2008) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy - Chairman 
 
      MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
2. Shri Furkan Ansari  
3. Shri Subrata Bose  
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
6. Shri Munawar Hasan  
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta  
8. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan  
9. Shri Virendra Kumar  
10. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
11. Shri Basangouda R. Patil  
12. Shri Devidas Pingle  
13. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar  
14. Shri Mohan Rawale  
15. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat  
16. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat  
17. Smt. C. S. Sujatha  
18. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
*19. Shri Ramdas Athawale  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
   
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam  
23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany  
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari  
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
26. Shri Gandhi Azad  
**27. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
***28. Vacant  
***29. Vacant  
30. Vacant  
31. Vacant  
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Additional Secretary 
         2.    Shri  N.K. Sapra               -        Additional Secretary      
3.    Shri Brahm Dutt   -  Joint Secretary 
4.    Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director  
5.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
   6.    Shri Suresh Kumar  - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
* Changed the nomination from Committee on Railways to 
Committee on Labour w.e.f. 21 August 2007. 
** Nominated w.e.f. 14.09.2007. 
*** Vacancy caused due to retirement of Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
and Shri Dilip Ray w.e.f. 02.04.2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
                               
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour 2007-08 having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty-Ninth Report of the Ministry of Textiles on Demands for 
Grants for the year 2008-2009. 
 
2. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants pertaining to the 
Ministry of Textiles for the year 2008-2009 which were laid on the Table of the 
House on 17 March 2008.    Thereafter, the Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Textiles on 31 March 2008.   The Committee 
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 16 April 2008. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the 
Ministry of Textiles for placing before them the detailed written notes on the 
subject and furnishing the information as desired by the Committee in 
connection with the examination of the Demands for Grants and tendering 
evidence before the Committee. 
 
4. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation of the commitment, dedication and valuable assistance rendered 
to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body 
of the Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in 
Appendix of the Report.                   
    
  
 
       
 
 
    
                 SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY, 
NEW DELHI;                                        CHAIRMAN, 
 16   April,  2008         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
27 Chaitra, 1930  (Saka)  
 
 
 
(v) 

 
CHAPTER-I 
 
 
REVIEW OF STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) OF MINISTRY OF TEXTILES. 
 
  
1.1 The Standing Committee on Labour presented their Twenty-First Report on Demands for 
Grants (2007-08) pertaining to the Ministry of  Textiles  to Parliament on 26.4.2006.  An Action 
Taken Report (Twenty Fourth Report, Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-First Report was presented to Parliament on 05.09.2007.   
 
1.2 The Twenty-First Report contained 16 recommendations. Five recommendations  
(Sl.No.1,2,3,4 and 7) were accepted by the Governme nt. The Committee did not desire to pursue 
six recommendations (Sl.No. 5,8,9, 14, 15 and 16) in view of the replies given by the 
Government. In respect of three recommendati ons (Sl.No 6,12 and 13), the replies of the 
Government were not accepted and hence were reiterated by the Committee in their Twenty 
Fourth Report.   Replies of the Government were in terim in nature in respect of 2 
recommendations (Sl.No 10 and 11).   
 
1.3 The Minister of Textiles made a statemen t in Lok Sabha on the implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -First Report of the Committee on 6.12.2007 under 
Direction 73 A of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
1.4 The gist of operational portion of r ecommendations and the final status of 
implementation of recommendations is brought out in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
I.     Recommendations which were accepted by the Government 
 
Rec. No. 1.  Plan Expenditure :-The Committee recommended that the Ministry 
should adopt an innovative approac h to improve utilization of the 
plan fund and be more careful in formulation and selection of 
schemes rather than loading the sector with a plethora of half baked 
schemes. 
 
 
The Ministry of Textiles has stated th at concerted efforts are being made 
to fully utilize the plan fund th rough regular monitoring of the 
performance, holding weekly review m eetings at highest level and setting 
up of computerized monitoring mech anism alongwith evaluation of the 
major plans schemes. 
   
Rec. No. 2.  Non Plan Expenditure:-The Committee desired the Ministry to adopt 
a scientific approach of forecasting the Budget Estimates for non-plan 
expenditure so as to avoid surrend er of huge unutilized amounts and 
consequential locking of precious financial resources. 
 

 2
 
The Ministry has stated that Non-Plan Budget proposals are prepared after 
a detailed review with the concerned divisions and, thereafter, the 
estimates are discussed with the offici als of the Ministry of Finance and 
are also monitored regularly in the senior officers meetings.  From the 
year 2007-08, Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) has been made 
applicable in the Ministry.  This management system will improve the 
utilization situation in the year 2007-08 and prevent the surrender of 
funds.  
   
Rec. No. 3.  Handloom Schemes :-The Committee recommended that the existing 
system of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) in the handloom sector 
may continue for one year more in or der that the Ministry gets fully 
acquainted with the new system of converting all CSS to Central 
Schemes (CS). 
 
 
The Ministry of  Textiles has noted the recommendation for compliance. 
Rec. No. 4.  Earmarking 10% allocation to NER :-The Committee recommended 
that the Government should take steps to strengthen the 
monitoring/evaluation of different schemes so that the allocation in 
respect of North-Eastern States is better utilized. 
 
 
The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance and stated 
that adequate care will also be taken to ensure that the flow of funds to the 
states falling under NER is fully utilized. 
 
Rec. No. 7.  Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks (SITP):- The Committee 
recommended the Government to frame suitable guidelines to ensure 
that the execution of the Scheme is transparent, role assigned to each 
of the individual/agency is well defi ned, funding of the Scheme by 
private entrepreneurs/association of Industry is regulated in proper 
proportion and all functionaries involved are accountable towards the 
success of the Scheme.  Besides, th ere should also be an effective 
monitoring mechanism to oversee th e progress of these parks with a 
view to ensure that they are bein g developed within the stipulated 
time frame and are in a position to achieve the set target. 
 
 
The Ministry has stated that the guide lines for SITP have been issued by 
the Government in 2005 which lay down the role and responsibility of the 
project specific Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), the Project Management 
Consultant (PMC) and the Governme nt.  The PMC is helping the SPVs 
for the speedy implementation of the projects and a project approval 
committee regularly reviews the progress of the projects. 
 
 

 3
 
II.  Recommendations which were not pursued by the Committee in view of Government’s 
reply. 
 
Rec. No. 5.  Textile Workers’ Rehabilitation Fund Scheme (TWRFS):- The 
Committee recommended that the co mpensation/relief due to a 
huge number of 17,518 eligible workers of the closed mills be 
disbursed to them without any delay in a time bound manner 
and the role and responsibilities of the office of Textile 
Commissioner may be suitably redefined vis-à-vis this scheme 
so as to cut short the delays in process. 
 
 
The Ministry has stated that as on 11.6.2007, out of 19,947 workers 
who are to be paid relief, about 15,000 workers have been found 
ineligible under the scheme by the concerned State Governments 
and only 5000 workers are remaining.  The Ministry has further 
stated that the disbursement is expeditious once applications are 
received from the competent authority (State Governments), the 
office of the Textile Commissioner is  always in contact with the 
State Governments for speedy scrutiny of applications of workers. 
   
Rec. No. 8.  Scheme for Integrated Textile parks (SITP):- The Committee 
recommended that there should be close liaison and 
coordination among various Government agencies for 
expeditious clearance of the projects so as to avoid time and 
cost overruns and the procedural formalities required for 
clearance of such projects should also be simplified. 
 
 
The Ministry has stated that involvement of the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance is initially limited to the 
allocation of funds and approval of the scheme.  Approval of 
projects during the 10
th Five Year Plan was done expeditiously, and 
30 projects were sanctioned as per target.  
   
Rec. No. 9.  Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks (SITP) :-The Committee 
recommended that the Ministry  should make a realistic 
assessment as to the number of Parks to be opened keeping in 
view the demands from entrepreneurs in the overall perspective 
and the establishment of these Te xtiles Parks should be decided 
in such a manner that as far as possible a balance is maintained 
among various regions/States of th e country so that the benefits 
accruing with the setting up of  Textile Parks are equally 
divided throughout the nation.  Simultaneously, it should also 
be kept in view that the areas with high density of weavers and 
other handloom workers are given priority while taking a 
decision regarding establishment of such Parks in a State/UT. 
 

 4
 
The Ministry has stated that only those projects which are 
considered to be viable are approved by the Project Approval 
Committee (PAC).  In the Ist phase, proposals from traditional 
textiles producing areas were received.  Entrepreneurs of 
States/UTs, from where no propos al was approved during the 10 th 
Plan, will be sensitized to develop Textiles Parks as soon as a 
decision is taken to sanction more projects during the 11
th Plan.  
During the 10 th Plan one Handlooms Park was approved.  Efforts 
will be made to set up more such parks during the 11th Plan. 
   
Rec. No. 14.  Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojna (MGBBY):- The 
Committee recommended that the Government should take 
immediate steps to settle all th e pending cases of claims under 
the MGBBY and devise a proper mechanism to make the 
process of claim settlement quick and hassle free in future. 
 
 
The Ministry of Textiles stated th at the LIC has informed that 1345 
natural death claims and 14 accidental death claims (Totalling 1359 
claims) have been received by the LIC and all the 1359 claims 
amounting to Rs. 6.84 crores have been settled by the LIC up-to 
March 2007.  Thus it may be stated that the claims have been 
settled by the LIC promptly. 
   
Rec. No. 15.  Technology Mission on Cotton (TMC):- The Committee 
recommended that an appropriate mechanism be devised to 
make sure that all the Mini Missions meant for the development 
of cotton sector are brought under a single and unified 
command for their better, integrated, result oriented and 
cohesive performance. 
 
 
The Ministry of Textiles has stat ed that there is an empowered 
Committee under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary to 
oversee the implementation of the Technology Mission on Cotton 
(TMC).  Issues pertaining to Mini  Missions I and II of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Mini Missions III and IV of the Ministry of 
Textiles are taken up in the Empow ered Committee.  There is no 
problem of coordination between th e Ministries of Agriculture and 
Textiles in the implementation of the TMC project. 
   
Rec. No. 16.  Technology Mission on Cotton (TMC):- The Committee 
recommended that the Ministry should take steps to maintain 
co-relation between the budgetary allocations and physical 
targets while ensuring that the B.E. is projected on a realistic 
basis. 
 
 

 5
The Ministry has stated that the variation between the budget 
estimates and the expenditure incurred in the past years was due to 
the fact that the estimates were  based on the assumption that the 
Market Yards and the G&P factories approved under the project 
would be completed within a period of 1 year but due to problems 
such as financial limitations, weather conditions, non-availability of 
machinery etc., the development of Market Yards actually takes 
two to three years once the approva l is accorded.  The utilization of 
funds during 2004-05 and 2005-06 was slow because projects 
approved earlier i.e., during 2002-03 and 2003-04 were at the 
completion stage.  New and add itional targets were fixed during 
June 2005 and approvals were accorded thereafter. 
 
III. Recommendations which were reiterated by  the Committee in their Nineteenth 
Report 
 
 
Rec. No. 6.  Textile Workers Rehabilitation Fund Scheme (TWRFS):- The 
Committee recommended the Government to take all necessary 
steps including amendments, if  necessary, in the relevant 
provisions of Act, Rules and Stat utes to make the Scheme more 
flexible by waiving the existing ceiling to cover the workers and 
also to include the mills of Public and Cooperative Sectors closed 
between 6 June 1985 and 1 April 1993 and thereafter, to protect 
the interests of workers of th e closed mills to the maximum 
possible extent. 
 
 
In the Final Action Taken reply, it ha s been stated that the present 
budget provision is just adequate to  provide relief to the textiles 
workers covered within the existing wage ceiling.  The removal of 
wage ceiling without adequate budgetary support will prove counter-
productive.  As regards the covera ge of the workers of public and 
cooperative sector textile mills, which are not covered under social 
security provisions, these are the responsibility of the concerned 
State Governments. Their inclusion in the Scheme will put a strain 
on the funds available under the scheme. Not Implemented. 
 
Rec. No. 12.   Health Insurance Scheme  (HIS):-The Committee recommended 
that in view of the rising cost of consultation, tests, medicines, 
etc. the ceiling under the Scheme shou ld be raised to at least Rs. 
1,50,000 per annum per family and th e areas of critical care like 
cancer, bye-pass surgery, brain surgery, etc. should also be 
brought in the ambit of the Scheme but not within the proposed 
sum of Rs. 1,50,000 per annum. 
 
 
 

 6
In the Final Action Taken reply, it has been mentioned that the 
Handloom Weavers’ Comprehensive Welfare Scheme with the 
components of Health Insurance Scheme and the Mahatma Gandhi 
Bunkar Bima Yojana has been approved by the Cabinet Committee.  
The proposal for covering  critical illnesses  under the Health 
Insurance Scheme was placed before the Expenditure Finance 
Committee in its meeting held on 05.07.2007 to consider the 
Handlooms Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme of which the 
Health Insurance Scheme is a com ponent.  The EFC opined that this 
could be covered under the new scheme to be launched by the LIC. 
When the critical illness benefits are included in the scheme with 
existing benefits, then the amount of premium will be enhanced by 
Rs. 4/- per thousand (i.e. about  Rs. 400/- for Rs. One lakh).  
Consequently the premium will have to be substantially raised from 
the current rates.  This will be an  additional burden on the weavers.  
We have written to LIC and the Department of Financial Services to 
reduce the premium.  Regarding raising of the amount to cover 
general medical facilities to atleast Rs. 1,50,000/-, it has been stated 
that the Health Insurance Scheme component of the Handloom 
Weavers’ Comprehensive Welfare Scheme has been approved by the 
Cabinet committee with the benef its of Rs. 15,000/- per annum per 
family.  Not implemented.  This issue has again been examined 
by the Committee in this Report.   
   
Rec. No. 13.  Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojna (MGBBY ):-The 
Committee recommended that the age limit to cover the weavers 
under MGBBY should be extended from 58 to 70 years. 
 
 
In the Final Action Taken reply, it has been stated that the 
Government of India has been taking up the matter with the LIC and 
the Finance Ministry for extending the upper age limit from 58-70 
years from Handlooms Weavers under the MGBBY.  LIC has 
informed that raising the upper age limit from 58 to 70 years will 
involve a substantial increase of premium (Rs. 1400/-) out of which 
only Rs. 100/- is to be drawn from the Social Security Fund and the 
remaining fund is to be borne/shared by Ministry.  It may be 
mentioned that this premium appears too high and consequently the 
number of beneficiaries shall have to be reduced substantially and 
the benefit of the scheme will have  to be curtailed by huge numbers.  
Moreover, LIC has clarified that in case the claim outgo exceeds the 
premium for this group the exce ss of claim over premium is 
proposed to be made good by the Ministry.  We have written to LIC 
and the Department of Financial Services to reduce the premium .  
Not implemented.  This issue has again been examined by the 
Committee in this Report. 
 
 
 

 7
 
 
 
IV.  Recommendations on which replies of the Government were interim in nature. 
 
   
Rec. No. 10.  Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme :-The Committee 
recommended that in order to make the scheme highly effective 
and successful, the Ministry may urge upon the Planning 
Commission to allocate the additional amount of Rs. 500/- 
crore, or even more, if needed. 
 
 
In the Final Action Taken reply, it has been mentioned that for the 
financial year 2007-2008, there is a budget allocation of Rs. 911 
crore, and Rs. 840 crore stands utilized upto the month of October, 
2007.  The Ministry of Textiles have made a request for an 
additional fund of Rs. 889 crore from the Ministry of Finance.  
Accordingly, the final decision on the additional fund may become 
available only in the month of December, 2007. 
   
Rec. No. 11. 
 
 Census of Handloom Weavers :-The Committee recommended 
that the Government should take immediate and urgent steps to 
conduct a fresh census of handloom  weavers and allied workers 
engaged therein as of now, so that  realistic allocation for this 
section could be made. 
 
 
In the Final Action Reply, it has been stated that the Third 
Handloom Census has been made a component of “Diversified 
Handloom Development Scheme ( DHDS)” which has already been 
approved for implementation dur ing the XI plan period. The 
process for conducting a fresh Handl oom Census has already been 
initiated.  In order to identify the agency for conducting the Census.  
“Expression of Interest” has been  invited from various reputed 
national level agencies having experience of conducting national 
level census/survey of similar nature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 

 8
     CHAPTER-II 
 
Introductory 
 
2.1 The main functions and activities of the Ministry of Textiles can be broadly 
classified into five categories, viz. Policy formulation, planning, development, export 
promotion and trade regulation of the textile industry.  It is the responsibility of the 
Ministry to formulate the policies regarding production, distribution (for domestic 
consumption and exports) and development of  all textiles including cotton, woollen, 
jute, silk, synthetics, etc. produced on hand looms, powerlooms and in mills.  It is also 
responsible for readymade garments, handicraf ts and industries related to production 
of silk and cellulosic fibres.    
 
2.2 The developmental activities of the Ministry are oriented towards making 
adequate quantities of raw material available to all sectors of textile Industry and 
augment the production of fibres at reas onable prices from the organized and de-
centralised sectors of the industry.  To achi eve this objective, the Ministry lays down 
guidelines for a planned and harmonious growth of various sectors of the industry. 
 
2.3 It has been further stated that the Mini stry monitors the techno-economic status 
of the industry and provides the requis ite policy framework for modernization and 
rehabilitation.  It also coordinates the acti vities of Textile Research Associations and 
lends financial support to them for unde rtaking research and development.  The 
Ministry exercises administrative control over  various organizations and public sector 
undertakings under its charge. 
 
2.4 The principal functional areas of the Ministry cover the following:- 
 
• Textile Policy & Coordination. 
• Man-made Fibre/Filament Yarn Industry. 
• The Cotton Textile Industry. 
• The Jute  Industry. 
• The Sericulture and Silk Textiles Industry. 
• The Wool & Woollen Textiles Industry. 
• The Decentralised Powerlooms Sector. 
• The Export Promotion.  
• Planning & Economic Analysis. 
• Integrated Finance Matters. 
• Information Technology 
• Handicrafts 
• Handlooms 
            
 
 

 9
2.5 The Demands for Grants of the Minist ry of Textiles for 2008-2009 are given under 
Demand No. 92.  The detailed Demands for G rants of the Ministry were laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on 17 March, 2008.The fo llowing are the major heads under which 
the Demands for Grants of the Ministry have been given:- 
 
 3451  - Secretarial Economic Services 
            
            2552                -          North-Eastern Areas 
  
            2851  -          Village and Small Industries  
 
 2852  - Industries 
 
            3453                -           Foreign Trade and Export Promotion 
 
 3601  - Grants-in-aid to State Governments 
              
            3602                -           Grants-in-aid to Union Territory Governments 
 
 4552  - Capital Outlay on North-Eastern Areas 
 
            4851                -          Capital outlay on Village and Small Industries 
 
 4860  - Capital Outlay on Consumer Industries 
 
 6860  - Loans for Consumer Industries 
 
  
2.6 In order to efficiently carry out the ta sk of implementing various schemes, the 
Ministry has the following two attached offices, two subordinate offices, seven advisory 
boards, four autonomous bodies and four statutory bodies under it. 
 
Attached offices:- 
 
(a) Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms 
 
(b) Office of the Development Commissioner for Handicrafts 
 
Subordinate offices:- 
 
(a) Office of the Textiles Commissioner 
 
(b) Office of the Jute Commissioner 
 
 

 10
Advisory Boards:- 
 
(a) Development Council for the Textiles Industry 
 
(b) All India Handicrafts Board 
 
(c) All India Powerlooms Board 
 
(d) All India Handlooms Board 
 
(e) Cotton Advisory Board 
 
(f) Jute Advisory Board 
 
(g) Coordination Council of TRAs 
 
Autonomous Bodies:- 
 
(a) Central Wool Development Board (CWDB) 
 
(b) National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) 
 
(c) National Centre for Jute Diversification (NCJD) 
 
(d) Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Institute of Textiles Management 
(SVPITM) 
 
 
Statutory Bodies:- 
 
(a) Jute Manufactures Development Council (JMDC) 
 
(b) Central Silk Board (CSB) 
 
(c) Textiles Committee 
 
(d) Commissioner of Payments 
 
 
 
2.7 The Committee have attempted to scrutin ize the Demands for Grants for the year 
2008-09 of the Ministry to the extent possi ble and the conclusions drawn have been 
illustrated in the ensuing Chapters. 

 11
CHAPTER-III 
 
REPORT 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
 
A.    General  Performance: 
 
 
3.1 The Budget Estimates made in resp ect of the Ministry of Textiles for 
the year 2008-09 are as under: 
 
        ( R s .  I n  t h o u s a n d s  o f  R u p e e s )   
     REVENUE  CAPITAL  TOTAL  
CHARGED & VOTED                30645300                   2589800                  33235100  
 
Plan Schemes/Programmes of the Ministry are grouped under two categories, viz.  The 
village & Small Industries (VSI) segment an d Industry & Minerals (I&M) segment.  The 
Ministry has been allocated an amount of Rs. 2500 crore as the plan outlay for the year 
2008-09.  The details of the plan outlay  for the year 2007-08 and the expenditure 
incurred, schem-wise (upto 17 March 2008) have been given below:-.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 12
 
 
 
 

 13
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 14
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 15
 
 
3.2 The above Table shows that  the Budget Estimate for the plan schemes of the 
Ministry of Textiles was Rs. 2,243 crore whic h was increased to Rs. 2,323 crore at RE 
stage.  The actual expenditure has howev er been Rs. 1905.29 crore upto 17 March 2008.  
However, during the course of evidence, the Committee were informed that as per 
provisional figures, the expenditure as  on 31.3.2008 was Rs. 2228.00 crore.  Thus, the 
unspent balance for the annual plan 2007-08 has been Rs. 95 crore.   
 
3.3 On being asked the reasons for underu tilization of funds, despite quarterly 
monitoring of the expenditure and other co rrective measures adopted such as weekly 
review meetings of the senior officers of the Ministry chaired by the Secretary, the 
Ministry of Textiles stated in a written reply as under:- 
   
“During the first year of the new five ye ar plan period, the utilization of plan 
fund is generally low, as many schemes wer e required to be firmed up.  At the 
same time, all the major schemes in VSE sector have been restructured and 
accordingly required fresh approval from  Competent Authority.  This process 
was accomplished only by November-December, 2007.  In the subsequent years, 
utilization of plan funds generally impr oves. Due to this reason, (upto 18.2.2008) 
unutilised balance was Rs. 646.90 crore (based  on RE), which has declined in the 
subsequent days. For example, unutilized balance was Rs. 646.90  crore till 
18.2.08, it  declined to Rs 417.71 crore (as on 17.3.08). Introduction of new 
schemes which require the approval of the Cabinet and amalgamation of the 
existing schemes are mainly responsibl e for un-utilized balance. Some of the 
schemes were approved by the EFC/CCE A only at the end of November 2007 
and some other Schemes were approved only in December 2007.  Launching of 
the new schemes take a reasonable ti me, users take substantial time to 
understand benefits of the programmes,  acceptance of the programmes by the 
targeted beneficiaries also requires time.  The total expenditure as on 17.3.08 
stood at Rs. 1905.29 crore.  The 10% mandatory earmarking of  funds for the 
North-East Region is another reason fo r lower expenditure.  Even though the 
expenditure under the VSE sector in the North East is much more than the 10% 
of the total allocation under various schemes, there is no demand from the 
North-East Region for funds under the ma jor schemes of the Ministry such as 
Technology Upgradation Funds Scheme (TUFS) and Scheme for Integrated 
Textile Parks (SITP),  and therefore ther e is no expenditure under these schemes 
in the North-East.  The un spent fund earmarked for North-East will go to the 
Non Lapsable fund for the North-East.  The Ministry is making concerted  efforts 
to improve the plan expenditure so as to utilize maximum budget allocation.”   
 
 3.4 when enquired about the names of the sc hemes which were required to be firmed up 
despite the beginning of the Eleventh Plan peri od, the Ministry of Textiles replied in its post 
evidence written note as under:- 

 16
“All the Plan Schemes of the Tenth Plan in Handlooms Sector have been grouped 
into five schemes in the Eleventh Plan period namely (i) Integrated Handlooms 
Development Scheme (IHDS) (ii) Marketing & Export Promotion Scheme (MEPS) 
(iii) Mill Gate Price Scheme (MGPS) (iv) Handloom Weavers Comprehensive 
Welfare Scheme (HWCWS) and (v) Di versified Handlooms Development 
Scheme (DHDS). ….As far as Handicrafts Sector is concerned, all the eleven 
schemes in the Tenth Plan were continued in the Eleventh Plan with certain 
modifications.  These were merged into different schemes leading to six generic 
schemes for handicrafts, namely (i) Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hastshilp Vikas 
Yojana, (ii) Design and Technical Upg radation, (iii) Marketing Support and 
Services , (iv) Research and Developm ent, (v) Human Resource Development 
and (vi) Welfare Scheme.” 
 
3.5 On being asked the reasons for not taking appropriate steps so as to complete the 
entire process including timely approval of  the scheme well on time, the Ministry of 
Textiles replied in a written note as under:- 
 
“All out efforts were made to formulate the schemes and get the EFC conducted 
as per procedure.  All the schemes have  been approved by the Cabinet between 
the months of June-November, 2007.  The final approval from CCEA for three 
schemes i.e. Integrated Handlooms De velopment Scheme, Marketing & Export 
Promotion Scheme and Handloom Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme 
were received in the late months of 2007 leaving only four to five months for 
implementation of these schemes.  This is the main reason for not achieving 
hundred per cent plan expenditure.  ….In the Handicrafts sector, all the schemes 
are Central Sector Schemes.  Due st eps were taken from  May onwards for 
preparation of EFC note and to complete the entire process for CCEA approval.  
However, most of the approval took cons iderable time and was finally approved 
by the CCEA by the end of the year 2007.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 17
Plan Expenditure during the four quarters of 2007-08. 
 
3.6 The details of percentage expenditure, under the plan schemes, over RE in the 
four quarters of the year 2007-08 are as under:- 
 
 
Quarter Quarter-wise expenditure % of Exp over RE 
Quarter I 6.58 0.28 
Quarter II 807 34.74 
Quarter III 1551.87 66.81 
Quarter IV 
(Provisional) 
1905.29 (upto 17.3.2008) 82.02 
 
Against the total RE of Rs. 2323 crore, expenditure is Rs 1905.29 crore as on 
17.3.2008 
 
 
 
3.7 The Committee observed from the above ta ble, that the plan expenditure could 
not be spread evenly over all the four qu arters of the year.  When asked to state the 
reasons in this regard, the Ministry of Textiles replied in a written note, as under:- 
 
“Plan expenditure could not be spread evenly over all the four quarters because 
of various reasons such as non-receipt of  bills during the first quarter, delay in 
approval of schemes, restrictions on advance payments etc.” 
 
3.8 When asked about the steps taken for ev en pace of expenditure during each 
quarter in the ensuing financial year and in th e Eleventh Plan as a whole, the Ministry 
of Textiles replied in a written note as under:- 
 
“The Ministry has put in place regular review and monitoring systems for fully 
utilizing the plan allocation evenly for all four quarters for 2008-09.  As all the 
major schemes of the Ministry have al ready been approved by the EFC/CCEA, 
the Ministry is confident of fully utilizing the plan allocation.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 18
Non-Plan Expenditure:- 
 
3.9 The following are the allocations and ac tual expenditure of the Ministry of 
Textiles during the first two years of XIth plan period. 
 
        ( R s .  I n  c r o r e )  
Sl. No. Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
% w.r.t. 
BE 
% w.r.t. 
RE 
1. 2007-08 893.68 813.68 633.66 
(upto Jan. 2008) 
70.90 77.88 
2. 2008-09 823.51     
 
 
3.10 The perusal of the above statistics shows that the actual expenditure during the 
year 2007-08 is less than the budgetary estima te.  When asked the reasons for such a 
huge amount left unspent despite the fact th at non-plan budget estimates are discussed 
in detail with the officials of the Ministry  of Finance and the expenditure is also 
monitored regularly in the senior officers m eeting, the Ministry of Textiles replied in 
written note as under:- 
 
“BE of Rs. 893.68 crore was reduced to Rs. 813.68 crore at RE 2007-08. The main 
reason for reduction is that the  Go vernment announces Minimum Price (MSP) 
for different varieties of cotton every ye ar to ensure remuneration prices to the 
cotton growers. The Cotton Corporation of India Ltd. purchases cotton under 
support price operation whenever prices touches the MSP level. The prices of 
cotton were higher during the cotton season of 2006-07 (Oct.-Sept.), therefore, 
Cotton Corporation of India Ltd. had un dertaken MSP operation for the limited 
period during the cotton season of 2006-07. This resulted in lesser expenditure 
during the year 2007-08.” 
 
3.11 When asked whether the amount left unspent (Rs. 180.02 crore) is only due to 
lesser expenditure by CCI in its MSP operatio ns, the Ministry replied in a written note 
as under:- 
 
“The saving of Rs. 180.02 crore during the year 2006-07 includes savings of Rs. 
170.16 crore due to lesser expenditure by CCI  in its MSP operations.  The saving 
of other Rs. 10 crore is attributed to the various heads for economic 
measures/non filling up of vacant posts, etc.” 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 19
 
 
 
 

 20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 21
3.13 On scrutiny of the above data, the Commi ttee noticed that the share of textile 
imports by USA from India was 5.4 per cent, 5.6 per cent and 5.5 per cent respectively 
during 2005, 2006 & 2007.  The share of China in USA’s textile import was 24.2 per cent, 
27.4 per cent and 31.4 per cent respectively during 2005, 2006 and 2007.  The growth rate 
of US textile imports from India also de clined from 25.92 per cent in 2005 to 1.39 per 
cent in 2007.  The exports and their growth rate is also declining with Europe as a 
whole.   When asked  whet her the rupee appreciation against US dollar is the only 
reason for such a steep decline in exports of textiles, the Ministry submitted in its post 
evidence written note as under:- 
 
“The average exchange of the Rupee in relation to the US dollar during 2006-07 
(April-Oct) was Rs. 45.71.  Due to apprecia tion in the value of the Rupee in the 
period following October 2006, the exchange rate hardened to an average of Rs. 
40.68 in the corresponding period in 2007- 08.  The textiles exports bodies and 
associations are of the view that the decline in exports is directly co-related to the 
appreciation of the rupee vis-à-vis US do llar.  However, the position is that the 
exports of textiles to US market had s een a considerable jump in 2005 at 24.6% 
over exports of 2004, following the cessation of quotas.  The exports in 2006 could 
only increase by 7.8% over 2005, and, in  2007, exports have risen only by 0.6%.  
Total imports by US from all countries have grown only by 2.8% in 2007 over 
2006, compared to growth of 6.4% in 2005 over 2004, which indicates overall 
decline in growth of imports by US.  Th e appreciating rupee vis-à-vis US$  could 
be only one of the causes for the overall sl ow growth of India’s exports to US.  In 
general, the textiles industry in India is also suffering to some extent from 
outdated equipment and processes le ading to low productivity and weak 
infrastructural supports like power, transport, berthing, etc., which raise prices 
and also contribute to the slow growth of export sector.  Apart from these, factors 
like high transaction costs, high power tariffs, shortage of skill man power, rigid 
labour laws, procedural delays, etc., are mostly in the jurisdiction of State 
Government and adversely affect the competitiveness of Indian textiles exports.” 
 
3.14 When asked about the alternative strategy made so far by the Government to 
check the decline of textiles exports to US as well as other countries, the Ministry 
further submitted :- 
 
“The Government has taken a number of  remedial measures, including tax and 
duty concessions, liberal bank loan rates, etc., since July, 2007 to provide relief to 
textiles exporters, in a bid to support the textiles industry.  In addition, concerted 
efforts are being made to provide financ ial and other assistance to the textiles 
industry through various schemes of the Government to retain and improve its 
global market share, and stand up to the increasing competitiveness arising from 
the entry of many players, like some of India’s neighbouring countries, in the 
textiles exports trade.” 
 

 22
3.15 The scrutiny of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Textiles reveals that the 
total outlay of Rs.  2,500 crore   for the year 2008-09 shows an increase of 177 crore 
rupees over the allocation of Rs. 2,323 crore for the year 2007-08.  However, the total 
expenditure during the year has been Rs.2,228 crore (provisional) leaving an unspent 
amount of Rs. 95 crore.  The reasons for under utilization of the allocation have been 
stated to be that during the first year of  the new Five Year Plan, the utilisatiion of 
planned fund is generally low as many schem es were required to be firmed up.  All 
the major schemes in the VSE sector were also re-structured and hence required fresh 
approval from the competent authority.  Launching of new schemes take a reasonable 
time, users takes substantial time to unders tand the benefits of the programmes, 
acceptance of the programmes by the targeted beneficiaries also requires time.  It has 
also been stated that the Ministry is ma king concerted efforts to improve the plan 
expenditure so as to utilize maximum budg et allocation.  The Committee observe 
that the overall expenditure is satisfa ctory yet there has been withdrawal, 
modification and merger of schemes with other schemes in handlooms and 
handicrafts sectors now forming part of VSE sector.  The Committee feel that the 
modification in the existing schemes hamper s the pace of expenditure as it involves 
completion of fresh procedural formalities.  The Committee also stressed earlier that 
developmental and welfare schemes of the tex tile sector should be selected carefully 
after thorough study involving past experie nces, ground realities and future needs.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that developmental schemes of the  
textile sector should be drawn up keeping all the factors in view.  This will help  not 

 23
only the proper and adequate utilization of  funds but will also be  successful in 
achieving the targets set out under the schemes and benefiting the targeted group.    

 24
3.16 The Committee note that the percentage of expenditure in each of the four 
quarters of the year 2007-08 is extremely skewed.  Financial rules of the Government 
clearly stipulate the spreading of expenditure evenly over the four quarters and bars 
the undue utilization of funds in the last qua rter of the year.  However, on close 
scrutiny of the progressive quarterly figu res, the Committee find that the actual 
quarterly expenditure under various Plan schemes have been 0.28% in the first 
quarter, 34.74% in the second quarter, 66.81% in the third quarter and only 82.02% 
(upto 17 March 2008) in fourth quarter. The reasons for uneven expenditure in every 
quarter are stated to be non-receipt of bills during the first quarter, delay in approval 
of schemes, restrictions on advance paym ent etc.   The Committee are not at all 
inclined to accept the explanation given by the Ministry in this regard. The 
Committee in their earlier reports also  stre ssed the need to spread the expenditure 
evenly during each quarter of the year,  but it seems that recommendations of the 
Committee have not been taken seriously.  The Committee are of the opinion that 
uneven distribution of funds directly affects the functioning of developmental and 
welfare schemes and consequently the growth of the sector is hampered.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that all the foreseeable hurdles in the even 
spending of allocations during each of the four quarters of a year should be taken 
into account alongwith the preventive measures before announcing any scheme for 
implementation.   The monitoring system of  the Ministry also needs to be toned up 
to ensure that expenditure on a scheme is  incurred as planned during every quarter 
of the year.  

 25
3.17 The Committee observe that the position re garding non-plan expenditure is also far 
from satisfactory.  The Committee find that in the first year of the XI plan period there is a 
huge variation in Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure.  The BE of 
Rs.983.68 crore was reduced to Rs.813.68 crore at RE stage.  An amount of Rs.633.66 crore 
was actually spent during the first Annual Pl an.  The reasons for variation in BE and 
actual spending during the year 2007-08 has been stated that CCI could not purchase 
cotton at MSP level during the cotton season of the year 2006-07 due to higher prices of 
cotton.  This resulted in lesser expenditu re during the year 2007-08.  The Committee are 
not convinced with the reasons adduced for non- utilization of funds and feel that it is more 
due to poor planning and short-sightedne ss on the part of the Government.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to ad opt a scientific approach of forecasting the 
Budget Estimates for non-plan expenditure so  as to avoid surrender of huge unutilized 
amounts and consequential locking of precious financial resources. 

 26
3.18 The Committee observe that the share of  textile imports by USA from India 
was 5.4 per cent, 5.6 percent and 5.5 per cent respectively during 2005, 2006 and 2007.  
The share of China in USA’s textile im port was 24.2 per cent, 27.4 per cent and 31.4 
per cent respectively during the corresponding period (2005, 2006 and 2007).  The 
growth rate of US textile imports from I ndia also declined from 25.92 per cent in 2005 
to a mere 1.39 per cent in 2007.  The exports and their growth rate is also declining 
with Europe as a whole.  The Committee are of  the opinion that the appreciation of 
rupee may be one of the contributory fact ors hitting textile exports, yet it cannot be 
attributed to be the sole reason for such  a poor performance in textile exports during 
the last three years as rupee has appreciated vis-à-vis dollar onl
y recentl y.                        
The other factors responsible have been stated to be outdated equipments and 
processes leading to low productivity, weak infrastructural support like power, 
transport, berthing etc. Apart from these, hi gh transaction costs, high power tariff, 
shortage of skilled manpower are other factors stated to be responsible for slow 
growth of export of textile.  The Committee are of the opinion that a long term and 
permanent solution will have to be explored to  the problems of weak infrastructural 
support, high transaction cost, power tariff, shortage of skilled manpower etc., if 
growth of textile export is desired to be accelerated.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that necessary re medial measures including strong 
infrastructural base, availability of uninte rrupted power supply at competitive rates, 
skilled manpower, tax and duty concessions, liberal bank loans to textile exporters, 
etc. be taken without any delay so that tex tile industry can improve its global market 
share and stand up to the increasing global competitiveness.  

 27
 
SCHEME FOR INTEGRATED TEXTILE PARKS (SITP) 
 
3.19 The Government launched the ‘Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks” (SITP) in 
August 2005, by merging the two existing schemes, viz. scheme of Apparel Park for 
Export (APES) and Textile Centres Infrastr ucture Development Scheme (TCIDS).  The 
SITP Scheme, a public-private partnership, is being implemented through  Special 
Purpose Vehicles (SPVs).   The industry associations/group of entrepreneurs are the 
main promoters of SITP.  
 
Scope of the Scheme 
 
3.20 The scheme targets industrial clusters/lo cations with high growth potential, 
which   require strategic inte rventions through provision of world-class infrastructure.  
The project cost covers common infrastructu re and buildings for production/ support 
activities.  
 
Funding Pattern  
 
3.21 The total project cost is funded thro ugh a mix of equity/grant – from the 
Government of India, State Government, St ate Industrial Development Corporation, 
Industry & Project Management Consultant and Loans – from banks/ financial 
institutions. The Government of India’s (G OI) support under the Scheme is either 
through grant or through equity, which is limit ed to 40% of the project cost subject to a 
ceiling of Rs. 40 crores. However, the combined equity stake of Government of 
India/State Government/State Industrial Deve lopment Corporation, if any, should not 
exceed 49%. Government assistance is released in advance in a phased manner as 
indicated below:- 
 
 
 
(i) 1 st instalment of 30% in two parts (10% on approval and 20% after tenders 
are awarded).  
 
(ii) 2 nd instalment of 30% and 3 rd instalment of 30% after utilization of 
previous instalment. 
 
(iii) Final instalment of 10% after 25% of the units starts production. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 28
 
 
 
3.22 The State-wise break up of Textile Park s sanctioned under SITP, so far is as 
under: 
 
Name of the State No. of Parks 
Sanctioned 
 
Andhra Pradesh 5 
Gujarat 7 
Maharashtra 5 
Tamil Nadu 6 
Rajasthan 4 
Karnataka 1 
Punjab 1 
West Bengal 1 
Bihar 1 
TOTAL 30 
 
 
3.23 When enquired about the criteria fixe d for sanctioning the Textile Parks, the 
Ministry in a written note, stated as under: 
 
 
“Under the SITP , Industry Associations / Grou ps of Entrepreneurs are main 
promoters of an Integrated Textile Park (ITP) by forming a  Special Purpose 
Vehicles (SPVs). The SPVs shall have ope rational autonomy so that they do not 
become surrogate Public Sector Enterpri ses or be controlled by Central/State 
Governments.  Further a Project Management Consultant (PMC) was engaged 
for implementing the Scheme. The PMC is responsible for the speedy 
implementation of the Projects in a professional manner right from formulation 
of project report to the execution of the project. The project proposal is 
formulated by PMC after conducting a diagnostic study of the requirements of 
common facility and infrastructure in the specific location and based on demand 
and potentiality. The Detailed Project Repo rt prepared by the PMC is considered 
by the Project Approval Committee (PAC) and the projects, which are in 
accordance with the provisions of the scheme and considered potentially viable, 
are approved.” 
 
3.24 When asked about the total investment ma de so far in the textile parks and the 
subsidy provided to the parks by the Governme nt during last three years, the  Ministry 
furnished the details as indicated below:- 
 
“Primary objective of the SITP is to facilitate world-class infrastructure for setting 
up of textile units. Government of India assistance is provided @40% of the 

 29
project cost (for common infrastructure  and common facilities) subject to a 
ceiling of Rs.40 Crore.   Estimated project cost of the 30 sanctioned projects is Rs. 
3046.33 Crore, of which Government of India assistance under the scheme would 
be Rs. 1056.94 Crore. So far Rs. 260.72 Crore ha s been released to the sanctioned 
projects. Although the infrastructure development cost is estimated at Rs. 3046.33 
Crore, total investment (including plant & machinery) in these parks is estimated 
to be Rs. 16,953 Crore.” 
  
3.25 Regarding the future plan to set up mo re such parks during the XI plan, the 
ministry stated in a written note as under:- 
 
“The scheme has received overwhelming response. There has been consistent 
demand to sanction more projects. Government has extended the scheme in the 
11
th Five Year Plan to sanction additional 10 projects in the first instance.” 
 
3.26 When asked to give reasons for sanctioning less number of projects in the 
eleventh plan particularly when there is  growing demand from entrepreneurs & 
industry, the Ministry in its post evidence note stated as under:- 
 
“ Development of fifty Textile parks wa s initially considered, however, it has 
been decided to take up te n (10) at the first instance.  Sanction of additional 
projects will be considered after a critical evaluation of 4 projects approved in 
2005-06 has been completed.” 
 
3.27 On being enquired about the steps taken by the Government to evenly distribute 
these parks throughout the country, the Mini stry replied in its post evidence written 
note as under:- 
 
 
“ The Scheme for Integrated Textiles Park s (SITP) is primarily demand driven.  
Industry Association/ Groups of Entr epreneurs are main promoters of the 
Textile Park.  Therefore, proposals from traditional textiles centers are generally 
received.  Proposal that may be received  from unrepresented States will be given 
preference during the 11
th Plan Period subject to the provisions of the guidelines 
of the scheme.” 
 
3.28 When asked the details of funds alloca ted under this scheme since its inception 
and the achievement of targets, both in ph ysical and financial terms, the Ministry 
informed through a written note as under:- 
 
 
“SITP was approved in 2005-06 by merging the then existing two (02) schemes, 
namely, Apparel Park for Exports Scheme (APES) and Textile Centers 
Infrastructure Development Scheme (TCIDS). After approval of the SITP, 
although no new projects under APES / TCIDS has been sanctioned, assistance is 
being provided to already sanctioned pr ojects where work had started before 

 30
31.07.2005. Details of funds allocated / utilized during 2005-06, 2006-07 & 2007-
08 are as under:-  
 
 
     (In Crore Rupees) 
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
Allocation Utilization Allocation Utilization Allocation Utilization 
120.00 106.16 170.00 101.55 375.00 308.00 
(till 
12.03.2008) 
Note:-For projects sanctioned under SITP/APES/TCIDS. 
 
 Twelve (12) Apparel Park projects, sanctioned under the Apparel Park for 
Exports Scheme (APES), are under implemen tation. Estimated total project cost of these 
12 projects is Rs.437.44 crore including Gove rnment of India assistance of Rs.184.22 
crore. So far Rs.105.58 crore has been released for these projects. Out of the 12 projects 
sanctioned under APES, 1 Park is fully functional and basic infrastructure facilities have 
been developed in 6 projects where production activities have started in some units. In 
the remaining 5 projects, basic infrastructu re development work is under progress.  
Eighteen (18) projects sanctioned under th e Textile Centers Infrastructure Development 
Scheme (TCIDS) are under implementati on. Estimated total project cost of  these 18 
projects is Rs. 463.25 Crore including Government of India assistance of Rs.267.73 Crore. 
Grant-in-aid amounting to  Rs. 157.85 crore has so far been released for these projects.  
Out of the 18 projects sanctioned under TCIDS, work has been reported to be completed 
in 3 projects, works in 9 projects are expected to be completed by March 2008 and works 
in 2 projects are expected to be comple ted in 2008. Implementation of remaining 4 
projects may spill over to 2009. 
 
 Thirty (30) Textiles Park projects under the Scheme for Integrated Textiles Parks 
(SITP) have been approved. The estimated project cost (for common infrastructure and 
common facilities) is Rs. 3046.33 Crore, of wh ich Government of India grant under the 
scheme is estimated at Rs. 1056.94 Crore.  Infrastructure development has already 
begun in 19 projects which are expected to be completed in 2009. Approximately 1783 
units are projected to be set up in the sanctioned parks. About 700 units have already 
prepared their project reports, which have been submitted or are in the process of being 
submitted to the financial institutions for term lending. Five (5) units have already 
started commercial production in one park. 
 
3.29 When asked the reasons for under utilizat ion of funds during all the three years, 
i.e. 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08, the Ministry replied in a written note as under:- 
 
"Slow execution of projects by the Im plementing Agencies, due to various 
reasons inter alia  including delay in obtaining st atutory clearances, insufficient 
working capital etc., is the reason for under utilization of budget provision.” 
 

 31
3.30 On being asked about the reasons for no t being able to complete sanctioned 
parks under APES & TCIDS even after a period of more than five years, the Ministry in 
its post evidence written note replied as under:- 
 
 
“The Apparel Parks for Exports Sche me (APES) and the Textiles Centers 
Infrastructure Development Scheme (TCI DS) were launched in the year 2002.  It 
was observed that even after 3 years of  implementation, these schemes did not 
make much progress.  A detailed review of the implementation of the Scheme 
reflected the following shortcomings:- 
 
 
• Lack of proper targeting, as the proj ect proposals were driven by the State 
Governments.  In many cases, there was no involvement of the industry at 
the planning and implementation stages. 
• Shortage of resources with the State Government to provide advance 
money as required under the scheme. 
• Protracted delays in acquisition/purchase of land. 
• The urgency of developing the inf rastructure was not appreciated, 
resulting in delays. 
• Funding was totally based on Government of India grant; virtually no 
effort was made to leverage market funds. 
 
 
Taking into consideration the shortcom ings in the APES/TCIDS, these schemes 
were merged into a new scheme, viz. the Scheme for Integrated Textiles Parks 
(SITP) in July 2005.  However, Government is providing assistance to the projects 
sanctioned under the APES & TCIDS, where work had started before 31.07.2005.” 
 
 
 
 
3.31 When enquired about the efforts being ma de by the Government to complete the 
sanctioned parks in a stipulated time frame,  the Ministry replied in a written note as 
under:- 
 
“Implementation of projects is being cl osely monitored.  The State Governments 
as well as the Implementing Agencies ha ve been sensitized to complete the 
essential infrastructure on priority basis and to revise the desirable infrastructure 
in consultation with the entrepreneur s.  Progress of the projects has now 
improved substantially.  Out of the 12 proj ects sanctioned under APES, 1 Park is 
fully functional.  Production activities have started in eight (8) projects, where 
basic infrastructure facilities have been developed.  In the remaining three (3) 
projects, basic infrastructure developmen t work is under progress and expected 
to be completed in 2008.  Under TCIDS, infrastructure facilities are being 
augmented in existing textiles centers.  Primarily special infrastructure like 
Common Effluent Treatment Plant, Water  supply, Power Supply and other basic 

 32
infrastructure.  Out of the 18 projects sanctioned under TCIDS, work has been 
completed in 3 projects, works in 11 proj ects are expected to be completed in 
2008.  Implementation of remaining 4 projects may spill over to 2009.” 
 
3.32 When asked about the targets fixed fo r generation of employment under the 
scheme and the facilities being provided to the workers as regard to their social 
security, insurance coverage etc., the Ministry replied in a written note, as under:- 
 
“The 30 sanctioned projects, after be ing fully functional, would facilitate 
employment generation (direct / indirect) for 5.76 Lakh persons. The projection 
is based on the size / activities propos ed in the park and prevalent industry 
norms and practices.  Primary objective of  the SITP is to facilitate world-class 
infrastructure for setting up of textile  units. The SITP does not have any 
component for social security, insurance coverage etc.” 
 
 
3.33 When asked the manner in which the in terest of workers/artisans/weavers will 
be protected in these parks in a situation when the Governmental assistance of 40 per 
cent of the total project cost is meant on ly for development of common infrastructure 
and common facilities, the Ministry in its post evidence written note replied as under:- 
 
 
“The primary objective of the SITP is to  facilitate world-class infrastructure for 
setting up of textile units.  Promoter s of the Textiles Park are developing 
workers’ hostels, crèches, etc.  Howeve r, there are other welfare schemes of the 
Government to address various issues of the workers/artisans/weavers, etc.” 
  
 
3.34 On a supplementary point whether the Government propose to provide similar 
infrastructure on a lower level, to the group of artisans/weavers/handloom workers 
etc. to enable them to carry out their profe ssions on the line that has been envisaged in 
Textile Parks, the Ministry replied as under:- 
 
 
“Under the SITP, assistance is provided to develop infrastructure facilities for 
Integrated Textiles Parks, where the benefi ciaries are textiles entrepreneurs.  The 
scheme in its present form provides for giving assistance @ 40% of the project 
cost {@ 90% for projects in North East ern Region and Jammu & Kashmir} subject 
to the limit of Rs. 40 crore.  At present there is no provision for higher or lower 
level of assistance.  Interested artis ans/weavers/handlooms workers may join 
hands and form a Special Purpose Vehicle to develop a Textiles Park as per their 
business plan.  It may be noted that an exclusive Handlooms Park is being 
developed at Pochampally, Andhra Pradesh, under SITP.” 
 
 
 
 

 33
 
3.35. When enquired whether the Government has any monitoring mechanism to 
evaluate the progress and achievement of this  scheme, the Ministry informed through a 
written note as under:- 
 
“The Project Approval Committee (PAC) wi th representative from Ministry of 
Textiles, Ministry of Finance, Minist ry of Commerce & Industry, Planning 
Commission and Textile Commissioner moni tor the progress of implementation 
of the projects. Besides, Secretary and ot her senior officers of the Ministry of 
Textiles regularly review the progress of the projects.” 
 
3.36 When asked about the manner in which the Ministry of Textiles evaluate the 
contribution of SITP in the growth of text ile industry, the following was stated through 
a written note:- 
 
“SITP has generated momentum for a dditional investment, employment 
generation, and textiles production. In  the already sanctioned 30 projects, 
additional investment of Rs.17,000 crore (approx.), employment generation for 
more than 5.76 lakh persons, and text iles production worth more than Rs.27,000 
crore is estimated. Weaving capacity will be increased due to installation of more 
than 20,000 shuttle-less loom. There will be additional annual processing 
capacity of 3400 million meters (approx.) and annual garmenting capacity of 425 
million pieces (approx.).” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 34
 
3.37 The Committee observe that the G overnment launched the Scheme for 
Integrated Textile Parks (SITP) in Augu st 2005, by merging the two existing Schemes 
viz. Scheme of Apparel Park for Export and the Textile Centres Infrastructure 
Development Scheme.  The Scheme, a public private partnership, is being 
implemented through Special Purpose  Vehicles (SPVs).  The industry 
associations/group of entrepreneurs are th e main promoters of SITP.  The primary 
objective of SITP is to facilitate world cl ass infrastructure for setting up textile units. 
The Government of India provides assistance @ 40 per cent of the project cost subject 
to ceiling of Rs.40 crore.  So far only 30 Textile Parks have been sanctioned (during 
the Tenth Plan) and out of 50 Textile Pa rks which were initia lly considered for 
development during the Eleventh Plan Period only 10 Parks have been taken up in 
the first instance.  Sanction of additional pr ojects have been subjected to completion 
of  critical analysis and evaluation of fo ur projects approved in the year 2005-2006.  
Although, it is a flagship scheme of the Ministry, the pace of progress in the 
development of these parks is far from satisfactory.  Only one park is fully functional 
out of 12 projects sanctioned under erstwhile APES, while work in only three 
projects have been completed out of 18 sanctioned under TCIDS.  This itself speaks 
about the poor functioning of the sch eme.  No doubt, the entire process of 
developing a Textile park involves enormous  efforts at least till it is sanctioned, yet 
these formalities and timely development of th ese parks cannot be protracted on any 
ground whatsoever more so, when enterpri sing entrepreneurs and other industrial 
associations form Special Purpose Vehicl e (Promoters of Textile Park) and the 
assistance of the Government of India is to th e tune of 40 per cent of the project cost.    

 35
The Committee, therefore, strongly reco mmend that a time bound action plan be 
drawn up for ensuring that the sanctioned Textile Parks become fully operational as 
any delay in this regard may not only involve the cost overrun but also run the risk of 
meeting the same fate which its earlier component, viz. i.e. APES and TCIDS met, 
besides disenchanting the focused and result oriented entrepreneurs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 36
 
3.38 The Committee observe that SITP (a flag ship scheme of Government of India)  
aims to develop world class infrastructure for setting up textile units.  All the items 
of work coming under textile will be undertaken in these parks.   Entrepreneurs and 
Industrial Associations have been identifie d as the main promoter of the Textile 
Parks but the Scheme looses sight of the fa ct that besides entrepreneurs and industry 
it is the worker, weaver, crafts persons wh o form backbone of the entire chain in the 
textile sector.  Notwithstanding the primac y given to entrepreneurs, the people 
associated with the primary and elementary  work to make these parks functional 
cannot be ignored if these parks are to run successfully. Therefore, it will be in the 
fitness of things if the role to be played by this section is also given due recognition.  
The Committee are distressed to note that  the Government feels disinclined to 
provide any kind of infrastructural facilities to the groups of artisans, weavers, textile 
workers, etc. either in the individual ca pacity or to their representative bodies, 
Cooperatives, Associations, etc. to enable them to carry out their profession.  The 
response of the Government that interested artisans, weavers may join hands and 
form a special purpose vehicle to develop a t extile park as per their business plan, is 
not acceptable to the Committee.  The deve lopment of textile parks through SITP 
may be the utmost priority yet we cannot be oblivious of the plight of persons who 
will be the main factors for success of these textile parks.   The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that infrastructural fa cilities under SITP should also be made 
available to the Cooperatives and other representative bodies of the artisans, 
weavers, textile workers, etc. providing th em with an opportunity to contribute their 

 37
mite in their own way in the development of textile sector.  Nevertheless, the interest 
of entire chain of workforce associated with th e textile are well taken care of as far as 
their wages, social security coverage a nd exact money value of their products is 
concerned.  

 38
 
 
 
C. TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION FUND SCHEME (TUFS) 
 
 
 
3.39 The Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme , the flagship scheme of the Ministry 
of Textiles, was launched on 1 April, 1999, wi th the objective of making funds available 
to the domestic textiles industry to upgrade th e technology of existing units, and also to 
set up new units with state-of-the-art technology in order to enhance its viability and 
competitiveness in the domestic and inte rnational markets. The Scheme covers 
spinning,  cotton ginning & pressing, silk, reeling & twisting wool, scouring & combing, 
synthetic filament yarn texturising, crimping and twisting, manufacturing of viscose 
filament yarn (VFY) / viscose staple fi bre (VSF), weaving/knitting including non-
wovens and technical textiles, garments, made -up manufacturing, processing of fibres, 
yarns, fabrics, garments and made-ups, and the jute sector. 
 
 
 
3.40 The identified sectors in the textiles industry, including spinning,  cotton ginning 
& pressing, silk reeling & twisting, wool sco uring & combing, synthetic filament yarn, 
texturising, crimping and twisting, manufa cturing of viscose filament yarn (VFY) / 
viscose staple fibre (VSF), weaving/knitting including non-wovens and technical 
textiles, garments, made-up manufacturing, processing of fibres, yarns, fabrics, 
garments and made-ups and the jute sector are  eligible to avail of these concessional 
loans for their technology upgradation requirements.   
 
 
 
3.41 IDBI, SIDBI and IFCI are the nodal agenci es for Non-SSI textile sector, SSI textile 
sector and Jute sector respectively.   However, in 2005, 13 additional nodal banks have 
been appointed under TUFS for determinin g eligibility & releasing the subsidy in 
respect of cases financed by them.  The Govt. has decided to continue the scheme for the 
Textiles and Jute industries with effect  from 1.11.2007 to 31.3.2012 (XIth Five Year Plan 
Period) and Rs. 1,140 crore has been earmarked for the Scheme during 2008-09. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 39
 
 
Progress:- 
 
3.42 The Progress of TUFS since its inception upto 31 December 2006 is as under:- 
 
 
                                                                  (Amount in Rs crore) 
Received Sanctioned Disbursed Year  
No. of 
applications 
Cost of 
project 
No. of 
applications 
Loan 
Amount  
No. of 
applications 
Amount  
 
1999-2000 407 5771 309 2421 179 746 
2000-2001 719 6296 616 2090 494 1863 
2001-2002 472 1900 444 629 401 804 
2002-2003 494 1835 456 839 411 931 
2003-2004 867 3356 884 1341 814 856 
2004-2005 986 7941 986 2990 801 1757 
2005-2006 1086 16194 1078 6776 993 3962 
2006-2007  6248 50154 6217 19863 6123 16530 
TOTAL 11279 93447 10990 36950 10216 27448 
 
 
3.43 The Segment-wise progress under TUFS is as follows:- 
  
S. No. Segment  Project cost  
(Rs. in Crore) 
Percentage share 
1. Composite upgradation 25602 29.8 
2. Garment 2582 3.0 
3. Knitting 2688 3.1 
4. Processing 8583 10.0 
5. Spinning 25176 29.3 
6. Weaving 13933 16.2 
7. Technical Textiles 427 0.5 
8. Others 7035 8.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 40
3.44 The state-wise number of units benefited through TUFS as on 31.03.2007 are as 
under:- 
 
 
 
Progress of TUFS (State wise ) (Provisional) 
 
(01.04.1999 to 31.03.2007) 
 
           ( R s .  i n  c r o r e )  
Received Sanctioned Disbursed Sl. 
No. 
State/U.T. 
No. of 
Applic
ations 
Project 
Cost* 
Amount of 
loan 
required 
No. of 
application
s 
Project 
Cost* 
Amount % to 
Total 
No. of 
applications 
Amount % to 
Total 
1. TAMIL NADU 2829 19752.51 11469.72 2715 18430.21 10388.70 28.12 2512 7893.04 28.76 
2. MAHARASHTRA 868 17558.45 10171.15 838 15976.86 7601.65 20.57 788 5779.28 21.05 
3. PUNJAB 1007 14970.32 5954.66 990 13028.02 5704.58 15.44 941 4074.92 14.85 
4. GUJARAT 4676 11047.25 4343.92 4632 10239.60 3730.27 10.10 4366 2993.60 10.91 
5. RAJASTHAN 593 13700.69 3849.81 562 13045.65 3172.01 6.58 504 2067.10 7.53 
6. ANDHRA 
PRADESH 
142 2438.64 1414.98 132 2247.10 1305.02 3.53 111 804.87 2.93 
7. KARNATAKA 274 2615.35 1434.10 268 2453.81 1165.31 3.15 238 991.56 3.61 
8. DELHI 176 2466.10 960.82 176 2466.10 812.99 2.20 169 636.14 2.32 
9. WEST BENGAL 183 1063.28 617.08 161 1038.04 545.82 1.48 146 393.01 1.43 
10. HARYANA 322 979.02 567.07 307 889.78 496.09 1.34 250 370.16 1.35 
11. MADHYA 
PRADESH 
45 1567.66 605.64 42 1399.43 476.54 1.29 40 446.33 1.63 
12. UTTAR PRADESH 74 1437.21 909.48 68 1372.98 466.57 1.26 60 285.70 1.04 
13. HIMACHAL 
PRADESH 
12 675.42 357.10 11 667.17 347.50 0.94 11 222.50 0.81 
14. KERALA 35 1006.91 492.24 33 974.15 330.95 0.90 28 163.38 0.60 
15. DADRA NAGAR 
HAVELI 
40 1957.07 659.74 33 1590.22 300.11 0.81 31 267.25 0.97 
16. UTTARANCHAL 2 110.34 41.38 2 110.34 41.38 0.11 2 16.95 0.06 
17. DAMAN & DIU 15 44.71 31.99 14 40.71 28.92 0.08 13 19.45 0.07 
18. PONDICHERRY 1 29.50 20.65 1 29.50 20.65 0.06 1 11.80 0.04 
19. CHANDIGARH 3 23.30 21.29 3 23.30 12.00 0.03 3 10.12 0.04 
20. ORISSA 1 1.90 1.66 1 1.90 1.66 0.00 1 1.27 0.00 
21. NAGALAND 1 1.57 1.41 1 1.57 1.41 0.00 1 0.43 0.002 
 TOTAL 11279 93447.20 43925.89 10990 86026.44 36950.13 100.00 10216 27448.86 100.00 
 
3.45 The Committee have been informed that  the financial and technical parameters 
of the Scheme have been reframed and fine  tuned to suit the changing scenario of 
textiles sector in the era of globalization.  The salient features of the Scheme after 
modifications are as under:- 
 
(i) The scheme will continue to provide a reimbursement of five percentage points 
on the interest charged by the lending agency on a project of technology 
upgradation in conformity with the Scheme.  However, for the spinning 
machinery the reimbursement will be four percentage points. 
(ii) The scheme will continue to provide co ver for foreign exchange rate fluctuation 
not exceeding 5%.  However, for the sp inning machinery the coverage will be 
4%. 

 41
(iii) The Scheme will now provide an additional option to the powerlooms units to 
avail of 20% subsidy under TUFS in lie u of 5% interest reimbursement on 
investment in TUF compatible specified machinery subject to a capital ceiling of 
Rs. 200 lakh and a ceiling on subsidy of  Rs.20 lakh.  A minimum of 15% equity 
contribution from beneficiaries will be ensured. 
(iv) The Scheme will now provide 15% subsid y for SSI textile and jute sector in lieu 
of 5% interest reimbursement on inve stment in TUF compatible specified 
machinery subject to a capital ceiling of Rs. 200 lakh and a ceiling on subsidy of 
Rs. 15 lakh.  A minimum of 15% equity co ntribution from beneficiaries will be 
ensured. 
 (v) The Scheme will continue to provide 5%  interest reimbursement plus 10% capital 
subsidy for specified processing machinery. 
(vi) The Scheme will now provide 5% interest reimbursement plus 10% capital 
subsidy for specified machinery required in manufacture of technical textiles and 
garmenting machinery.  
(vii) The Scheme will now provide Interest subsidy/capital subsidy on the basic value 
of the machinery and exclude the tax comp onent for the purpose of valuation in 
view of the decision for non-subsidizing the taxes. 
(viii) The Scheme will provide 25% capital subsidy on purchase of the new machinery 
and equipment for the pre-loom & po st-loom operations, handlooms/up-
gradation of handlooms and testing & Quality Control equipment, for 
handlooms production units.   
(ix) The entire range of imported second hand machinery will now be ineligible 
under the Scheme for any benefit except  automatic shuttleless looms with the 
value cap of Rs. 8.00 lakh per machine an d 10 years’ vintage and with a residual 
life of minimum 10 years.   
(x) Other investments such as energy saving  devices, effluent treatment plant, in-
house R&D, IT including ERP, TQM incl uding adoption of ISO/BIS standards, 
CPP etc (including non-conventional sources) as mentioned in Para 3.3(2) of the 
existing Scheme will now be eligible for benefits of the scheme only upto 25% of 
the cost of machinery. 
(xi) Investments like land, factory buildin g, pre-operative expenses and margin 
money for working capital will now be in eligible for benefit of reimbursement 
under the scheme except meant for appare l sector and handlooms with existing 
5 0 %  c a p .    I n  c a s e  a p p a r e l  u n i t  i s  engaged in other activity, the eligible 
investment under this head will only be related to plant & machinery eligible for 
manufacturing apparel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 42
3.46 When enquired whether the budgetary  provision of Rs. 1,140 crore under TUFS 
during the year 2008-09 is sufficient keeping in  view the vastness of textile sector and 
the future possible expansion of the sector, the Ministry in its written note as under:- 
 
“The Budget allocation of Rs. 1140 cr ore will be inadequate to meet the 
requirements of the Scheme.  However at RE stage, the Ministry of Finance is 
expected to provide more funds.” 
 
 In this regard, the Secretary of the Mini stry of Textiles added during the course 
of evidence, has put forth the following view point:- 
 
“I think, we need more.  We have a ba cklog of Rs. 984 crore of the year 2006-07.  
The revised allocation of Rs. 1143 crore for the year 2007-08 has taken care of all 
the demands of 2006-07.  Though we had asked for Rs. 1800 crore, this year we 
had asked for Rs. 1900 crore against whic h an allocation of Rs. 1090 crore has 
been given.  This may not be sufficient.” 
 
3.47 Regarding the reasons for less provision of funds under the scheme vis-à-vis the 
allocation made during the year 2007-08 which was Rs. 1,185.37 crore, the Ministry in its 
written note as under:- 
 
“Rs. 945 crore had been originally prov ided in the Budget of 2007-08.  At RE 
stage this amount has been enhanced to Rs. 1,185.37 crore.  On the other hand for 
the year 2008-09, the Budget provision is Rs. 1140 crore.  As such, there is no less 
provision for the 2008-09.  At RE stage, there is scope for further enhancement.” 
 
 
 
3.48 In a post evidence reply, the Ministry informed that there is still a backlog of 
approximately of Rs. 1149.96 crore and the BE allocation of Rs. 1090 crore for the year 
2008-09 is not sufficient to meet the spillove r of 2007-08.  When asked about the steps 
taken by the Ministry for the early settlem ent of pending cases, the following was 
submitted: 
 
“The claims of interest/capital subs idy upto March, 2007 has almost been 
released to the banks/financial instit utions for a backlog of Rs. 12 crore 
approximately.” 
 
 
3.49 On being asked whether the Government has received complaints from textile 
units regarding delay in disbursement of subsidy under TUFS and the remedial steps 
taken in this regard, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“Since the year 2005-06, due to extraordin ary performance of the Scheme, the 
requirement of funds have been increasi ng.  However, the budget allocation has 
not commensurate with the requirements.  Shortfalls and spilling over of 
liabilities to the successive financial years have led to the situation that the units 

 43
are getting subsidy after delay.  In the financial year 2007-08 nearly Rs. 232 crore 
more funds have been provided by the Ministry of Finance at RE stage which 
will ease out the situation.  In the year 2008-09 further enhanced budget 
allocation has been made.  The net im pact of these enhancements would be 
timely receipt of subsidy by the units.” 
 
3.50 During the oral evidence , when the Committee desired to know the reasons for 
reduction of subsidy/interest reimbursement for spinning segment from 5% to 4%, the 
representative of the Ministry stated as under:- 
 
“If you see earlier progress of performance, around 35 per cent of the investment 
has gone into spinning and composite sector, while spinning in India has 
substantially in the last five year.  Ar ound 13.74 million spindles have been set 
up, which is 30 to 40 per cent of the existing capacity.  It also includes 
modernization of the spindles.  But 30 to  40 per cent of the total capacity was 
invested in the last five years.  So, in  fact, in spinning, our country can very 
rightly be proud that we are comparable to the best anywhere in the world.  But 
in the other sectors, we are not that much strong.” 
 
3.51 The Committee noticed that an Inter- Ministerial Steering Committee (IMSC) 
under the chairmanship of Secretary (Tex tiles) monitors and reviews the scheme. 
Normally, the IMSC meetings have been held  quarterly but the last meeting was held 
on 24th July, 2006. 
 
 
3.52  When asked the reasons for not ho lding any meeting since July, 2006, the 
Ministry replied in a written note as under:  
 
“ The scheme was scheduled to be phased out 31 st March 2007. Accordingly at 
the fag end of the operation of the schem e there was no need to carry out any 
other modifications in the parameters of the scheme. Hence no meeting was 
held.” 
 
 
3.53  When asked whether IMSC was consulted before modifying TUFS recently, the 
ministry replied in a written note as under: 
 
 “The continuation of the TUFS was announced by Hon’ble Finance 
Minister in the budget 2007-08 in Febru ary, 2007. The Ministry of textiles was in 
receipt of various representations from v arious associations as well as the impact 
of the operation of the scheme was availab l e  t h r o u g h  d a t a  b a s e   i n  f o r m  o f  
investment in various segments. The repo rt of the working group constituted by 
Planning Commission on the textiles and jute industry had gone into details and 
had recommended the thrust areas  for fut ure growth of the sector. Accordingly, 
the revised parameters were drafted in line with the above recommendations. 

 44
The constitution of the members of IMSC was almost same as represented in the 
Planning Commission when the work ing group report was discussed. 
Accordingly, the Ministry of textiles did not desire to duplicate the effort in 
calling IMSC meeting.” 
 
3.54 Regarding the performance of TUFS in North Eastern States, the Secretary 
Textiles admitted before the Committee during the course of evidence as under:- 
 
“Out of the total expenditure, the main shortfall has been in the case of TUFS where 
I am sorry to admit that we could not spend a single penny.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 45
 
3.55 The Committee observe that Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme was 
launched to make funds available to the domestic textile industry to upgrade the 
technology of existing units and to set up  new units with the state-of-the-art 
technology to enhance competitiveness in the domestic and global market.     
Initially, the scheme was scheduled to be phased out on 31 March 2007.  However,  
due to the demand and satisfactory work ing of the scheme it has been extended 
beyond 31 March 2007.  There is an Inter-Mi nisterial Steering Committee (IMSC) to 
monitor and review the functioning of TU FS. Meetings of the IMSC are held every 
quarter to assess the functioning of TUFS.  However, the meeting of IMSC was last  
held in the month of July 2006 and reasons for not convening the meeting  thereafter 
has been stated that, at the fag end of th e operation of scheme there was no need to 
carry out any other modification in the parameters of the scheme hence no meeting 
was held.  It has also been stated th at constitution of both the, Working Group 
constituted by the Planning Commission on Textile and Jute Industry and the IMSC 
are similar.  Since the Working Group had gone into details of the impact of 
operation of scheme and recommended the thru st areas for the future growth of the 
sector, the revised parameters were accordingly drafted in line with its 
recommendations.  To avoid the duplicity of the work, the meeting of IMSC was not 
called.  The logic put forth by the Governme nt is far from convincing as there was a 
gap of more than eight months for the closure of the scheme since the last meeting of 
the IMSC.  Moreover, it was also decided much before that the scheme will continue 
to be in operation even after March 2007.   Even the parameters of the scheme were 
also modified on the recommendation of the Working Group completely sidelining 

 46
the IMSC.  The Committee do not find any justification in keeping two 
Governmental bodies viz. IMSC and Working Group of Planning Commission on 
Textiles and Jute Industry to review the functioning of TUFS when both these bodies 
are represented more or less by same member s.  This is a futile exercise wasting time 
and money besides delaying the timel y decision on TUFS.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that a cl ear and well thought out strategy be 
formulated for the operation of the schem e. Instead of loading TUFS with unwieldy 
bodies to review its functioning, a lean, expert and focused Committee of 
professionals be constituted to keep a tab on the scheme  and suggest modifications 
whenever and wherever essential.  

 47
3.56 The Committee note that TUFS was intro duced to provide financial assistance 
in the form of interest payment on the lo ans taken by entrepreneurs to upgrade the 
technology of their textile units.  For the purpose, the budgetary provision of Rs. 
1,140 crore have been made for the year 2008- 09.  On the question of sufficiency of 
allocation, it has been stated that th e budgetary allocation of Rs.1,140 crore will be 
inadequate to meet the requirements of the scheme.  However, at RE stage, the 
Ministry of Finance is expected to provide more funds on the lines it was done in the 
year 2007-08.  It has also been stated that  there is still a backlog of approximately 
Rs.1,149.96 crore and BE allocation for the year  2008-09 is not sufficient to meet even 
the spill over of the previous year.   Th e Committee observe that there is some 
serious malfunctioning in the planning and operation of TUFS otherwise the backlog 
could not have mounted to such an astr onomical figure surpassing the budgetary 
allocation for the year 2008-09.  If the backl og is not cleared immediately the scheme 
may loose its sheen and it will become a lagga rd.  The Ministry have also received 
letters from the textile units complainin g that huge amount of subsidy under the 
scheme still remains unpaid.  The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government 
that since the results of the scheme are encouraging, sufficient funds should be 
allocated to clear the backlog and keep the momentum going.    

 48
3.57 The Committee observe that TUFS is a flagship scheme of the Government.  
The implementation of the scheme has been envisaged through the length and 
breadth of the country.  Although the scheme has picked up in the rest of the country, 
it is virtually a non-starter in the North-Eastern States of the country.   Since the year 
2005-06 not even a single paisa has been spent under the scheme in North-Eastern 
States of the country.  This is a lopsided  implementation of the scheme and failure of 
the planning of the Government.  The Government has done nothing so far to make 
the scheme popular in that region of the country.  Now the Government proposes to 
initiate the process of awareness programme for the proper exposure of the scheme 
there.  The Committee welcome this belated step.  The Committee recommend that 
every steps should be taken to popularize th e scheme in that region so that not only 
the compulsory allocation of 10 per cent of the scheme but the previous unspent 
amount are also spent there for the successful operation of the scheme.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 49
D. HANDLOOM 
 
 
3.58 The handloom sector plays a very importan t role in the country’s economy.  It is 
the second largest sector in terms of employme nt,  next only to agriculture.  As per the 
Joint Census of Handlooms & Powerlooms 1995-96, 65.51 lakh persons are engaged in 
weaving and associated activities in ha ndloom sector.  Due to effective state 
intervention through financial assistance for the development and welfare of this sector, 
the persons engaged in handloom weaving and allied activities have been able to earn 
their livelihood.  As a result of these measur es the production of handloom fabrics has 
gone up to 6871 (anticipated) million sq. me ters during 2006-2007 from the  level of 500 
million sq. meters in the early fifties.  This  sector accounts for about 13% of the total 
cloth produced in the country (excluding wool, silk and Khadi). 
 
Handloom Weavers' Comprehensive Welfare Scheme 
 
3.59 This Scheme has been framed by th e Government by merging two separate 
Schemes namely the ‘Health Insurance Scheme ’ for providing health care facilities to 
the Handloom weavers in the country and ‘Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana’ for 
providing Life Indurance Cover to the handloom weavers in case of natural/accidental 
death, total/ partial disability due to accident. 
 
 Office of the Development Commission er for Handlooms is responsible for 
implementing the above schemes.  
 
 
(i) The Health Insurance Scheme: 
 
 
3.60 The Health Insurance Scheme is im plemented through the ICICI Lombard 
General Insurance Company Ltd. The Scheme covers not only the weaver but his wife 
and two children also. The ancillary handlooms workers like those engaged in warping, 
winding, dyeing, printing, finishing, sizing, Jhala making, jacquard cutting etc. are also 
eligible to be covered under the scheme. The scheme covers all pre-existing diseases as 
well as new diseases and a substantial prov ision has been kept for OPD. The annual 
limit per family is Rs. 15,000/- out of whic h OPD cover will be Rs., 7500/-. The total 
premium under the scheme for 2007-08 and 2008-09 has been reduced to Rs. 781.60/- 
(including Service Tax) from Rs. 1000/- + Service Tax as existed during the 10th plan.  
 
 
 
 
 

 50
 
3.61 The existing Funding pattern under the scheme is as under:- 
 
 
(i) Weavers’ share Rs.139.13/- per weaver per annum 
(ii) Government of India’ share Rs.642.47/- per weaver per annum 
 Total Rs.781.60/- (Includes Service Tax) 
 
           
3.62 The details of total number of weavers  covered under Health Insurance Scheme 
till date are given below:- 
 
 “The Health Insurance Scheme was in troduced in November, 2005.  The number 
of weavers covered upto Febreuary 2008 is as under:- 
 
  2005-06 and 2006-07    =6.98 lakh weavers 
   
  2007-08 (upto February 2008)  =16.19 lakh weavers 
 
  TOTAL     =23.17 lakh weavers 
 
 
3.63 Regarding the claim cases pending fo r settlement under the Scheme and the 
reasons for their pendency, the Ministry stated  in a written note that, as per the report 
received from the Implementing Agency namely ICICI Lombard General Insurance 
Company Ltd., upto February 2008, there are 12572 claims pending.  The details of these 
claims are as under:- 
 
 
 Number Amount 
OPD 9687 Rs. 1.97 Crore 
Hospitalization 2885 Rs. 1.41 Crore 
TOTAL 12572 Rs. 3.38 Crore 
These claims are under process 
 
 
 
3.64 When asked whether the Government prop oses to provide critical illness cover 
to the weavers under this scheme, the represen tative of the Ministry replied during the 
course of evidence as under:- 
 
“As far as critical care is concerned, th e Ministry of Finance had pointed out that 
the LIC is coming out with a much chea per scheme which, somehow, did not see 
the light of the day.  Now they are quotin g a rate which is quite high.  They have 
quoted Rs. 8 to Rs. 10 per cent on the co verage of every thousand rupees.  For a 

 51
by-pass surgery which costs Rs. 80,000 or Rs. 1 lakh, the premium will come to 
Rs. 800.  We are in touch with them again to try and bring down the premium for 
critical care.  It may be pointed out that this could mean additional budget.” 
 
 
(ii)  Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana 
 
3.65 A new Insurance Scheme called Mahatm a Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY) 
was launched on 2 October  2005, to provide insurance cover to the handloom weavers 
in case of natural as well as accidental de ath with a reduced premium. The Scheme is 
being implemented through Life Insurance Corporation of India. The annual premium 
under the scheme is Rs. 330/- of which Gove rnment of India’s share is Rs. 150/-, 
Weaver’s share is Rs. 80/-, and LIC’s share is Rs. 100/- per annum. 
 
        Eligibility :-          
 
• The weaver should be earning at least 50% of his income from handloom 
weaving. 
• All weavers, whether male or female , between the age group of 18 and 59 
years are eligible to be covered under the scheme.  
• Weavers being regular members of  a Co-operative Societies/State 
Handloom Development Corporations are eligible to be covered under the 
scheme.   
• Weavers outside cooperatives can also be covered under the scheme on a 
certificate from the State Director in -charge of Handlooms that they are 
fulfilling the eligibility conditions.  
 
Benefits:- 
 
3.66 The annual premium during the 11 th plan has been kept at the level of the X Plan 
but the benefits under the Mahatma Ga ndhi Bunkar Bima Yojana have been 
substantially increased during the 11 th Plan as compared to those that existed during 
the 10th plan, as per the details given below:                      
 
 
Sl. No.  Benefits during 
the 10th plan 
Benefits from 1.10.07 
(i) Natural Death Rs. 50,000/- Rs.   60,000/- 
(ii) Accidental Death Rs. 80,000/- Rs. 1,50,000/- 
(iii) Total Disability Rs. 50,000/- Rs. 1,50,000/- 
(iv) Partial Disability Rs. 25,000/- Rs.    75,000/- 
    
 
 
 

 52
Additional Benefits:- 
 
3.67 The “Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yoja na” also provides scholarship under 
“Shiksha Sahyog Yojana”.  to the children of parents who are covered under Mahatma 
Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana . A scholarship of Rs.300/- per quarter per child is 
available to students studying in standard IX to XII for a maximum period of four years 
or till they complete XII standard, whiche ver event occurs earlier. The benefit is 
restricted to two children of the member covered. 
 
  
3.68 The State-wise number of weavers cove red under the scheme during the last one 
year i.e. 2006-07 is as under:  
 
State 2006-07 
Andhra Pradesh 89293 
Assam 13017 
Bihar 738 
Chhattisgarh 1223 
Gujarat 2735 
Haryana 189 
Himachal Pradesh 1426 
J & K 520 
Karnataka 18746 
Kerala 7263 
Madhya Pradesh 1883 
Maharashtra 368 
Orissa 8282 
Rajasthan 3790 
Tamil Nadu 193611 
Uttar Pradesh 17165 
Uttarakhand 766 
West Bengal 42499 
Grand Total 403514 
 
3.69 The details of total number of weavers  covered under MGBBY since it inception 
are as under:- 
 
 The Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana was introduced in 2005-06.  
 
 October 2005 -March 2006    =1.96 lakh weavers. 
 April 2006 -March 2007    =4.04 lakh weavers. 
 April 2007 -February 2008   =3.87 lakh weavers. 
   
TOTAL     =9.87 lakh weavers. 
 
 

 53
3.70 When asked the reasons to cover only 18 states under the scheme so far and the 
status of left out states, the representative of the Ministry replied during the course of 
the evidence, as under:- 
 
“I have twice called a meeting of Stat e Commissioners and informed them that 
they should take full advantage of the scheme.  Unfortunately few States have 
not sent proposals.  So we are still in touch with them and told them that they 
must take advantage of the scheme.  Ever y State is fully competent to take full 
advantage of the scheme.  So, we are agai n getting in touch with those States 
which are left so that they should send us proposals and we are confident that in 
the coming year, the remaining States who have not sent their proposals are also 
get covered.” 
 
3.71 When asked about the plans of the Government regarding providing coverage to 
all the weave4rs of the country under the Scheme, the Ministry replied in its post 
evidence note as under:- 
 
“The Government of India has been ma king all out efforts for enrolling the 
maximum number of weavers under th e MGBBY.  LIC and State Government 
have been advised to generate awarene ss amongst the local weaver population 
about the scheme.  Many publicity campaigns and awareness camps are being 
held through the field offices for maximizing enrolments.” 
 
3.72 The details regarding total number of claims received and settled by LIC during 
last one year are as under:- 
 
“As per the report received from LIC,  during 2007-08, 2101 natural death claims 
and 26 accidental death claims were received and all of these have been settled 
upto February 2008.” 
 
3.73 When asked about the steps taken by the Government to increase the age limit to 
cover the weavers under the MGBBY from 59 years to 70, the Ministry replied through a 
written note, as under:- 
 
“The Government of India has been taki ng up the matter with the LIC and the 
Finance Ministry for extending the u pper age limit from 58 to 70 years for 
Handloom Weavers under the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana.  The 
matter was taken up with Ministry of Fi nance and LIC. The LIC informed that 
for raising the age limit, the premium would be Rs.1650/- per weaver.  Since the 
premium was very high, the Ministry  of Finance and the LIC were again 
requested to reduce the premium. The LI C have informed that the premium for 
the age group 60 to 70 years works out to Rs. 1600/- out of which Rs. 100/- will 
be drawn from Social Security Fund and remaining premium of Rs. 1500/- will 
have to be borne / shared by  the members and/ or by the Ministry.  This issue 

 54
was then again discussed with the LIC an d they were requested to reduce the 
premium further. Finally, LIC was agreea ble to reduce it to Rs. 1500/-.  
Therefore, raising the upper age limit  from 58 to 70 years will involve a 
substantial increase of premium (Rs. 1500/ -) as proposed by LIC out of which 
only Rs. 100/- is to be drawn from the social Security Fund and the remaining 
fund is to be borne/ shared by Ministry. It may be mentioned that this premium 
appears to be too high and consequently the number of beneficiaries shall have 
to be reduced substantially and the benefit of the scheme will have to be 
curtailed by huge numbers. Moreover, LI C has clarified that in case the claim 
outgo exceeds the premium for this grou p the excess of claim over premium is 
proposed to be made  by the Ministry.” 
 
  
3.74 The Committee observed that the proposal for increasing the age limit from 58 to 
70 years for the purpose of coverage under th e scheme is not been agreed to on the 
ground that the amount of premium will go up substantially.  In this regard, when 
asked the reasons for fixing similar prem ium for lower & higher age groups, the 
Ministry in its post evidence note stated as under:- 
 
“At present the annual premium for weavers in the age group of 18 to 59 years is 
Rs. 330/- per weaver per annum.  The premium proposed by the LIC for the age 
group between 60 and 70 years is Rs. 1500/- per annum.  From this it may be 
seen that the present premium for the lower age group is much less than the 
premium proposed for the higher age gr oup.  However, the matter is still under 
discussion with LIC to consider lowerin g the premium for higher age group to 
enable maximum coverage to the poor weavers.” 
  
3.75 The Committee noticed that the last cens us to ascertain the number of workers 
engaged in the handloom sector was cond ucted in the year 1995-96.  Fresh handloom 
census has been made a component of diversified handloom development scheme 
which has been approved for implementation during the 11 th Plan period. When asked 
about the progress made to begin  the exercise of handloom census in the country and 
by when it is likely to be completed, the Ministry replied in a written note, as under:- 
 
“Diversified Handloom Development Sche me has been formulated w.e.f. 11.9.07 
during the XIth Plan.   “Conducting Th ird Census for Handlooms & Issue of Photo 
Identity cards to Handloom Weavers” acro ss the country is one of its important 
component.  Expression of Interest (EOI ) for the proposed Census & Identity Cards 
had been invited during the month of Oc tober 2007.  Three agencies had been short-
listed on the basis of EOI. Request for Proposal (ROF) were invited and received 
from three short listed agencies. Based on the Technical and Financial bids 
submitted by them, one agency has been  selected and also approved by the 
Competent Authority for conducting th e Third Handloom Census and issue of 
Identity Cards.  Work order in this regard  would be issued shortly to the selected 
agency.  As per the Terms of Reference (TOR), work relating to the Census and 

 55
Identity cards is schedule to be complete d within 18 months from the date of 
awarding the work to the selected agency.” 
 
3.76 On being asked about the basis on  which schemes are formulated and 
implemented in the absence of authentic figure, the Ministry replied as under:- 
 
 
“The basic source of authentic figures is the latest Handloom Census of 1995-96. 
However, O/o DC(HL) also received in formation from State Governments, 
diagnostic study carried out as a part of cluster scheme and studies sponsored by 
Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 56
 
3.77 The Committee note that ‘Health In surance Scheme’ for handloom weavers 
was launched in the year 2005 and ICICI Lombard General Insurance Company 
Limited as the implementing agency of the scheme.   23.17 lakh weavers have been 
covered till date under the Insurance Scheme.  As regards, pending cases for 
settlement under the scheme, it has been stated that 12,572 cases involving Rs.3.38 
crore are still to be settled.   The present Health Insurance Scheme does not provide 
coverage for critical illness of the weavers.  On being enquired on this aspect, it has 
been stated that the proposal for covering critical illness was placed before EFC on 5 
July 2007 while considering the Handl oom  Weavers Comprehensive Welfare 
Scheme.  It was suggested that this co uld be covered under a new scheme to be 
launched by LIC and negotiations are going on with LIC as to the rate of premium  
payable by the Ministry.  For the purpose of covering general ailments and critical 
illness the engagement of two separate insu rance companies defies all logic.  It will 
be more appropriate if only one insurance company, preferably LIC, is entrusted 
with the responsibility of covering both kind of ailments i.e. General Ailment and 
Critical Illness.   The Committee, therefor e, recommend that the appropriate steps be 
taken in this regard.  The Committee fu rther recommend that immediate steps be 
taken to settle all the pending cases of claims under the scheme and devise a proper 
mechanism to make the process of claim settlement quick and hassle free in future. 

 57
3.78 The Committee note that a new scheme named Handlooms Weavers 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme has been initiated with Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar 
Bima Yojana becoming one of its components.  The Committee are happy to note that 
various benefits under the scheme have been  substantially enhanced for the benefit 
of the weavers, yet the coverage of weavers under the scheme remains an area of 
concern.  As per the census of 1995-96 th e approximate number of weavers is more 
than 65 lakh.  This census is more than 12 years old  and hence does not reflect the 
correct number of the weavers in the count ry as on date.  So far only 9.87 lakh 
weavers of 18 States have been c overed under Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima 
Yojana.  This number is just inadequate.   The raise in the benefits will not be 
meaningful unless it reaches all the intende d beneficiaries by bringing them within 
the insurance coverage.   Regarding covera ge of weavers from all the States it has 
been stated that they are eligible for the benefit of the scheme and LIC has been 
requested to cover weavers from all the St ates.  All State Governments have also 
been advised to enroll maximum number of  weavers of their States under this 
Scheme.  This is only a perfunctory approach and do not reflect the seriousness of the 
issue it merits. The Committee, therefore, st rongly recommend that special drives 
should be launched to identify the weaver s and cover them under Insurance Scheme 
in all those States which are hitherto uncovered.  Efforts should be intensified to 
identify the weavers for the purpose of cove rage in the rest of States so that 
maximum number of weavers can be brought within the fold of Insurance coverage 
under Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana.  

 58
3.79 The Committee are distressed to note that despite repeatedly stressing the 
need to raise the upper age limit from 58 to 70 for coverage under MGBBY, the 
Government is not taking up the issue with th e seriousness it deserves.  It is simply 
quoting the replies of LIC which are evasive in nature to shirk its responsibility.  The 
Government has stated that the matter wa s taken up with Ministry of Finance and 
LIC.  The LIC informed that for rais ing the age limit the premium would be 
Rs.1,650/- per weaver.  Since the premium was very high, the Ministry of Finance and 
the LIC were again and again requested to reduce the premium.  It has also been 
stated that at present the annual premium fo r the weaves in the age group of 18 to 59 
years is Rs.330/- per weaver per annum.  Th e premium proposed by the LIC for the 
age group between 60-70 years is Rs.1,500/ - per annum.  The Committee are not 
convinced by the logic of Insurance Compan y and the Ministry of Finance as it is 
prima-facie untenable.  Going by this yards tick there is no justification for keeping a 
uniform premium for beneficiaries of all ages  i.e. 18 to 58 years as mortality rate in 
the lower age group of the beneficiaries is far less than in the higher age group.  
Hence, the rate of premium should be stru ctured accordingly in the light of the 
perceived mortality rate for different age gr oups of beneficiaries.  Therefore, high 
rate of premium  for beneficiaries of 59 to  70 years does not hold any ground.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that  the issue of increasing the age of 
weavers from 58 to 70 years for the purpose of coverage under insurance be 
immediately decided  without any further de lay.   Being a public sector company, 
LIC should not shirk its social responsi bility towards the handloom workers   who 
are from the poor section of the society.  However, the Government may, if necessary, 

 59
create a fund to indemnify LIC in case the claim outgo of LIC in this segment (i.e 
between 59 to 70 years) is more than the premium collected by the company. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 60
 
E. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FASHION TECHNOLOGY (NIFT) 
3.80      NIFT was established in New Delhi by  the Ministry of Textiles as the apex body 
of human resource development for the text ile & garment and allied sectors in 1986 in 
response to the growing need of the fash ion industry, both in the domestic and 
international arena. With growing demand from industry across the country, NIFT 
established  six more centers in th e major garment centres of India viz. Kolkata, 
Chennai, Gandhinagar, Hyderabad and Mumb ai in the year 1995 and in Bangalore in 
1997.   
3.81      NIFT offers various full time de gree and part-time certificate programmes to 
develop professionals for Fashion Industry in India. NIFT also undertakes applied 
research studies and applications thereof in  relevant areas of the fashion industry; 
particularly concerning the integration of lo cally produced materials, the requirements 
of mass production, improved product design  and international marketing. It also 
provides technical assistance to artisans,  craftsmen, manufacturers, designers and 
exporters of fashion products.  
3.82 NIFT Act 2006 published in the Gazette of India on 14 th July, 2006 confers 
Statutory Status on NIFT.  The Act comes into effect from 1 st April,2007.   The Act 
empowers the institute to award degrees and other academic distinctions.   NIFT will be 
the first premier institute in the world to award its own Degrees in the field of fashion 
education.  
  
3.83 When asked whether any evaluation has been done to assess the achievement of 
the objective sector-wise i.e textiles, garmen ts and allied sector for which NIFT was set 
up, the Ministry replied as under:- 
“In 1999 at the behest of Ministry of Text iles, services of  International Business 
Services Dr. Sri Ram Khanna were hired to conduct an industry survey to assess 
NIFT’s impact on the Indi an Garment industry, ‘Role of Fashion Designer in 
future growth of Indian Apparel Indust ry’.   The Report brought out the 
following observations: 
 
• The need for exclusivity had enhanced the need for design input. 
• Expectations of the industry regard ing performance of multiple takes 
there by designers and the inability of  the designers to perform multiple 
tasks there by attributing low valu e to the fashion designer by the 
industry and thus leading to disillusionment of the trained fashion 
designer. 
• The students felt the need for p ractical and hands on training and 
hardship of floor level work as th e programme and was highly academic 
leading to a tinted, rosy hued, warped picture of the profession as there is 
a mismatch between the needs of the industry and skills of the designer.  

 61
• Orientation of the curriculum is towards the Western Markets and there is 
no element for the domestic requirement in terms of Indian designers.”  
 
3.84 When asked about the manner in which th e Government propose to redesign the 
set up of NIFT in the light of the evaluation  of its functioning, the ministry replied as 
under:- 
 
“In 2003, NIFT restructured its curriculu m and upgraded its programmes from 
three to four years, in consultation with the Industry as per its requirements and 
also in keeping with the internationa l fashion education formats. The NIFT 
undergraduate and postgraduate programme s are at par with the professional 
education programmes across the world.”  
 
3.85 The details regarding funds/grants rece ived by NIFT from the Ministry of 
Textiles during last three years along with their utilization are as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2005-06   2006-07 2007-08 % of sh ort fal l/excess exp ., 
year-wise 
% of 
achieve
ment for 
the la st 
three 
year  
2008-09 Sl. No. Name of 
the 
Scheme/P
roject/Pro
gramme 
BE             RE Actual
Exp. 
Shortfall 
excess 
exp. If 
any 
indicatin
g 
reasons 
in brief 
BE RE Actual Shortfall
excess exp. 
If any 
indicating 
reasons in  
brief 
BE RE Actual
exp. 
(expected) 
Shortfall 
excess 
exp. If 
any 
indicatin
g reasons 
in brief 
2005-
06 
2006-07 2007-08  
 
1.            Plan 2500 2500 0.00 110
(Existing) +  
200 **
(New) 
 
1100 
(Existin
g) + 
200** 
(New) 
0.00 2000 900 900 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 100% 3225
2             Non Plan 1000 1000 0.00 1000 1000 0.00 1050 1050 1000 50*** 0.00 0.00 0.00 100% 1050
               R s. in Lakhs

3.86 Generation of funds by NIFT through it s own resources during the last three 
years are as under:- 
 
(Rs. In Lacs) 
Sl. No. Account Head 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08** 
1. Fees etc from students & 
others 
3,528.32 4,458.08 4,557.23 
2. Interest Earned 385.69 496.25 629.17 
3. Surplus from Project 101.66 143.11 302.17 
4. Other income 209.44 141.35 560.22 
 TOTAL 4,225.11 5,238.78 6,048.79 
 
 
3.87 When asked whether the funds collected by  NIFT at its own, have been sufficient 
to run the affairs of NIFT, the Ministry in a written note, stated as under:- 
 
“Yes the funds so collected have been sufficient to run the affairs of NIFT and we 
have been generating surplus. However since now we are not receiving any 
funds for the Capital expenditure our surpluses will be affected to meet the 
capital expenditure.” 
 
3.88 When asked whether any of the Branch es of NIFT has included handicrafts, 
based on our cultural history and area specific arts of the country, in its curriculum to 
promote it in the national/international arena of fashion industry, the Ministry stated 
through a written note as under:- 
 
“NIFT undertakes Diagnostic study as an integral part of the curriculum wherein 
students at the end of the 2 nd year of study, visit various Craft Clusters as 
identified by each NIFT centre, to stud y the craft in its original environment, 
interact with the craftsmen and provide an opportunity for the craftsmen to cater 
to emerging markets. The students in teract with the craftsmen during their 
cluster visit to develop new products using their traditional handcrafting skills.”    
 
3.89 The details of various branches of course s being offered by NIFT to its students 
are given below:- 
  
“The three streams of study at NIFT ma y be broadly categorized under Design 
Technology and Management.  These are further subdivided into Undergraduate 
and Post Graduate programmes. The details are as under:-    
 
 
 
 
 
 

 64
DESIGN:  
 
I. Undergraduate Programmes : 
• Fashion Design 
• Leather Design 
• Knitwear Design 
• Textile Design 
• Accessory Design 
• Fashion Communication 
 
II. Post Graduate Programme in Design  
 
TECHNOLOGY 
 
I. Undergraduate Programme in Fashion Technology  
II. Post Graduate Programme  in Fashion Technology 
 
MANAGEMENT  
 
Post Graduate Programme in Fashion Management 
 
3.90 When asked about the extent to which the above courses are relevant to the 
careers of its students and enable them to  compete successfully in the International 
market and to boost the country’s export, th e Ministry replied in a written note as 
under:- 
 
“Each department and each programme has been started after much deliberation 
and in response to market and industry needs. With increasing globalization the 
market has undergone paradigm shifts cr eating both generic as well as niche 
areas in the area of fashion.  Toda y the scope of fashion has widened 
considerably, transcending geographical boundaries thereby creating new 
increasing opportunities both in the dome stic as well as international market.  
Today the graduates who showcase th e immense talent of India through 
participation in International Fashion Weeks in New York, London, Paris and 
Milan to name a few, in addition to  retailing through stores abroad, are 
testimony to their global vision as well as their financial acumen in boosting 
India’s export.  To meet the ever ch anging needs of the Industry, Common 
Elective courses/subjects are offered ac ross all streams to give more holistic 
information to the students.  The curricu lum of NIFT is periodically upgraded 
for incorporating the emerging needs an d changing facets of the industry 
through Industry Coordination Committees  at all centres for a more dynamic 
synergy between NIFT and the industry at the centre.”    
 

 65
3.91 When asked whether any survey/ stud y has ever been conducted by the 
Institute or  the Government to access the ou tcome of the courses offered, the Ministry 
replied in a written note as under:- 
  
“NIFT remains in constant touch with th e Apparel industry through internships, 
placements, guest lectures, experts on  advisory committees for curriculum 
development and other related issues. In 2005-06 Peer review by IIM Ahmedabad 
was done and the report submitted in 2006-07.  As per the report of the review 
committee the flagship programmes (Four year Under Graduate programme)  are 
very much needed for the industry and the assessment of the industry that the 
program mix of these programme are appropriate.  Even the small Private Institute 
which has been setup to exploit the boom  in demand  for trained technically 
qualified people are guided   by the cour ses offered in the NIFT programmes. This 
indicates that NIFT provides the format , title and even structure of these  
programmes implying that NIFT courses are  indeed relevant  and appropriate for 
the prevailing industry demand.  The common elective courses provides a bouquet 
of options for the students to focus based on their interest.  Involvement of the 
industry and outside experts in design ing the programmes has made it more 
practice oriented.  Several meetings are he ld with industry members from time to 
time  to receive feedback from industry  which is incorporated in the curriculum 
making the courses better suited to the needs of the changing industry.” 
 
 
3.92 Regarding the fee structure  of variou s courses offered by NIFT, the Ministry 
submitted the following details:- 
 
There are two types of regular programme s being offered by NIFT i.e. Under 
Graduate Programme (4-years i.e. 8 semester s)  and Post Graduate Programme (2-years 
i.e. 4 semesters).  Existing fee structure for one semester of 6 months for both the 
programmes are same, which  is appended below:-  
 
Academic Fee  (in Rupees) 
Tuition Fees    27,500/- (Non-Refundable) 
Security Deposit     5,000/- (One Time) (Refundable) 
Library Fee      3,000/- (Per-Year) (Non-Refundable) 
Mediclaim & Student    1,250/- (Per Year) (Non-Refundable) 
Development Fee  
TOTAL    36,750/-  
 
 
3.93 To a query whether any scholarship/financ ial assistance is provided to poor 
students and those belonging to SCs/STs/OB Cs Category, the Ministry in its written 
note stated as under:- 
 
  

 66
“NIFT has a Scholarship Policy for student s from financially weak background. Under 
this policy, Students with parental income upto 1 Lakh rupees per annum are given. 75% 
of annual tuition fee (Full Scholarship) and t hose with parental income between 1-2 Lakh 
rupees are given 50% of annual Tuition Fee (Half Scholarship). These scholarships are 
irrespective of any reservation provisions. Currently, there is no cap on the number of 
students who may be given full scholarship. For students belonging to SC/ST 
category, the Central Scholarship constituted by the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment and Tribal Affairs respectively is applicable and NIFT is a 
notified institute under those policies.” 
 
3.94 When asked whether any progress has been made for opening of more NIFT 
centres in the country, the Ministry furnished the current status of 11 proposed centres:- 
 
Sl. No. State in which 
proposal to open a 
NIFT Centre is 
pending 
Status of the Proposal 
 
1 Lucknow 
 
Proposal considered and approved by BOG of 
NIFT in its meeting on 30.3.05. Proposal could 
not materialize for want of long term 
commitment from State Govt. However, NIFT 
Centre has been opened in Rae Bareli. 
2 For conversion of 
NIIFT, Mohali to a 
NIFT Centre 
 
Proposal considered and approved subject to 
certain conditions by the BOG in its meeting on 
30.11.05. Commitment of Govt. of Punjab for 
deficit land and funds is awaited. 
3 Guwahati 
(Assam) 
Commitment of Government of Assam for land 
and funding support not received. 
4 Gurgaon 
(Haryana) 
 
Proposal considered by BOG in its meeting dt. 
30.3.06. At that time in view of the on going 
strengthening and consolidation, the BOG felt 
that it would not be desirable to review the 
policy for opening new Centre at that stage. 
5 Shillong The proposal placed before the Board for 
consideration in its meeting dated 19/12/07. 
The estimated fund and land requirement was 
conveyed to Chief Secretary, Govt. of 
Meghalaya vide letter dated 17/9/07.Funding 
possibilities for this center are being tied up.  
6 Sikkim VIP reference from MOT and a letter from Sh. 
Dava Narbula, Member of Parliament were 
received regarding setting up of NIFT Centre in 
Sikkim.  Response from State Government is 
awaited. 

 67
7 Uttarakhand 
(Public  Private 
Partnership) 
A letter dated 18.6.07 was received from 
Padamshree Group based in Uttarakhand to 
Chairperson, BOG NIFT for considering setting 
up of NIFT Centre in Uttarakhand as a Public 
Private Partnership (PPP). A team was 
constituted by DG-NIFT to examine the 
feasibility of setting up of NIFT Centre on PPP 
model and prepare a base paper together with 
draft policy and guidelines  for consideration of 
BOG of NIFT. Based on the report, further 
action would be taken up.  
8 Bihar (Patna) Status update on  setting up of NIFT Centre in 
Bihar was placed before the BOG on 19.12.07. 
Firm commitment regarding funds and land has 
been received from Director (Technical), Govt. 
of Bihar, Patna.  
9 Kerala(Kannur) Administrative sa nction of Govt. of Kerala for 
provision of funds and a letter from Managing 
Director KINFRA regarding allotment of 3.774 
hect. of land in Morazha Village, Taliparamba 
Taluk, Kannur, district for setting up of NIFT 
Centre in Kannur have been received.  
10 Mauritius Status update on setting up of NIFT Centre in 
Mauritius was placed before the BOG on 
19.12.07 and as advised by the Board update 
was sent to MOT & MOT has approved the 
status. Further follow up has been undertaken 
with Govt. of Mauritiu s. The MOU has been 
finalized. 
11 Surat(Gujarat) A letter received from MOT regarding setting 
up of NIFT Centre in Surat. Proposal considered 
and approved by BOG of NIFT in its meeting on 
30.3.05. The Board discussed the matter and felt 
that it would not be desirable to review the 
policy at this stage.  
 
3.95 Regarding fixing of any time period by  the Government for completion of these 
projects, the reply of the Ministry was negative.  The reason stated is as under:- 
 
“The Institute is in correspondence with the respective State Governments. It is 
difficult to commit a time period.”  

 68
 
3.96 The Committee take note of the fact  that National Institute of Fashion 
Technology  was set up as an apex body of human resource development for textile 
garment and allied sectors to cater to the growing needs of the fashion industry both 
in domestic and international arena.  W ith the passage of time NIFT has been 
successful in so far as the objective of its establishment is concerned.  Its courses are 
becoming increasingly popular and the demands of the students for joining the 
institute is growing year after year. To meet the growing demands of the students 
from across the country, NIFT has undertaken  an expansion plan wherein eleven 
more branches will be opened in other parts of the country and abroad.   This will be 
in addition to seven  already functioning br anches in various cities of the country.  
This is a praiseworthy step, yet the desired progress is not being achieved due to one 
or the other reason in all the proposed centres. All the eleven projects are plagued by 
one or the other problem and are not progressing on the expected lines.   The 
Committee are distressed at the state of affairs prevailing in the expansion of NIFT.  
They therefore, strongly recommend that due care and coordination should be 
ensured among various agencies which are involved in the establishment of the 
centres of NIFT in various parts of the count ry so that these centres come up within   
a specific time frame and start their academic session benefiting the students from all 
sections of the society.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 69
 
 
 
F.  Fashion Hub 
  
3.97 It is proposed to set up fashion hubs  in the country with the objectives of 
strengthening the entire textile value chain and to provide an interface between 
stakeholders by creating a permanent mark et place for the Indian fashion industry 
which would serve as a single stop fashio n business point in India. These hubs would 
have latest collection ranging from textile accessories to the finished products. 
 
3.98 An amount of Rs.30.00 crore has been proposed for 11 th Plan period and an 
amount of Rs.1.00 crore allocated during Annual Plan 2007-08 as a token provision. The 
expenditure is meant for setting up the centre, developing production and design 
studios for commercial purposes including that of accessories. 
 
Salient Features:- 
 
3.99 A Fashion Hub/ Fashion Market Centre is conceived as a dedicated area for 
promotion of fashion industry and as a support for marketing to Indian designers .  The 
focus of the hub would only be on the fashion industry. It could perform a range of 
functions such as: 
 
 
• offer a wide variety of designer wear products such as apparels, 
accessories from the Indian fashio n manufacturing Industry through a 
permanent exhibition 
• hosting market meets/ fashion shows during all the seasons  
• provide facilities for design, rese arch on products and producers, 
fashion photo shoots, etc. 
• produce literature on a wide range of fashion business related issues. 
 
 
Objectives: - 
 
3.100  A Fashion Hub/ Fashion Market Centre can have one or more of the following 
objectives :- 
 
• To provide an interface between stak eholders by creating a permanent 
market-place for the Indian fashion Industry. It would serve as a single 
stop fashion business point in India. 

 70
• To showcase Indian fashion trends  and highlight the craftsmanship 
and design legacy of India . 
• To project an image of India’s contemporary look and to serve  
       as a center for creative fashion activity. 
• To be a fashion gallery and to  facilitate the organization of 
International fashion events and competitions  
• To strengthen the entire su pply chain which would include 
establishing backward linkages with suppliers. 
• Venture financing and incubation  for new budding entrepreneurs 
among NIFT alumni, students and facu lty in diverse areas of fashion, 
lifestyle and traditional crafts. 
• Management development programmes (MDP) for strengthening and 
upgrading the management cadre in various fashion and garment 
units in the country and to create change agents among the emerging 
generation.  
  
Funding:- 
 
3.101 The Fashion Hub/ Fashion Market Centre will be structured as an SPV under the 
Companies Act. The representation on th e Board could again be from different 
stakeholders. Cost of the project is es timated as Rs 125 crores.  Government 
participation in capital costs would be to an extent of Rs 25 crores, the rest coming from 
presale advances and some debt. 
 
3.102 The committee have been informed that on e fashion hub is proposed to be set up 
in Delhi during the XI th plan period. Re garding its current progress, the Ministry 
stated in a written note that Planning co mmission has given in principle approval for 
the project.  Ministry of Textiles is in the process of acquiring land for the same. Once 
land is allotted scheme will be formulated for implementation.  
 
 
3.103 The Plan Outlay under the scheme for the year 2008-09 is Rs. 1 crore whereas an 
amount of Rs. 30 crore has been proposed for 11 th Plan period. Regarding the reasons 
for allocating such a paltry amount for th e annual plan for 2008-09, the Ministry  in a 
written note stated as under:- 
 
“In principle approval of the execution of the project was given by Planning 
Commission on the condition that Fashio n Hub should be setup as a SPV and 
land should be made available to SPV before Government puts its equity or 
Grant.  Ministry is in the process of ac quiring land. Once land has been allotted, 
Ministry will formulate a scheme and im plement after obtaining the approval 
from competent authority.”  
 
 
 

 71
 
 
3.104 When asked about the manner in which the acquisition of land hinders the 
formulation and firming up of scheme and th e reasons for not taking both the matters 
simultaneously, the representative of the Ministry replied during the course of evidence 
as under:- 
 
“It has been rightly pointed out that we sh ould not wait till the land is allotted 
and we can formulate the project.  So, I would like to tell you that broadly we 
have made up a concept paper which was ci rculated to the Planning for their, in 
principle, approval and we received the, in principle, approval of the Planning 
Commission.  But the Planning Commission has said that unless the land is made 
available, the Government should not pu t in any grant into the project.  For 
putting in any grants, we have to have the EFCs approval and that does not take 
much time.” 
 
3.105 On being asked the current status reg arding acquisition of land, the Ministry 
replied in a post evidence written note as under:- 
 
“In spite of several attempts, the responses from the Delhi Development 
Authority (DDA) has not been encouraging.   We are exploring the possibility of 
taking land in NOIDA and Gurgaon.” 
 
3.106 The Committee have been informed that only  one hub is proposed to be set up in 
Delhi during the XIth plan period.  When asked whether a single hub will be able to 
meet the broad objectives of the scheme k eeping in view the  vastness of the fashion 
industry of our country, the Ministry of Text iles replied in a post evidence written note 
as under:- 
 
“To begin with, the Ministry proposed to set up a single fashion hub in Delhi, 
since it is the center of the Fashion industry.  Once this is successfully 
implemented, depending on the progress, this Ministry may consider 
implementation of similar projects in other places.” 
 
3.107 On being asked about the manner in which the Government will monitor the 
performance of the proposed fashion hub, the Ministry stated in a written post evidence 
note as under:- 
 
“Ministry proposes to incorporate a co mponent of Monitoring in the project 
proposal itself and will periodically mo nitor the performance of the proposed 
project, once the project takes off.” 
 
 
 
 

 72
 
 
3.108 The Committee take note of the fact that Government propose to set up 
`Fashion Hubs’ with a view to strengthen the entire textile value chain and to provide 
an interface between the stakeholders by creating a permanent market place for the 
Indian Fashion Industry.  It would also serve as a single stop fashion business point, 
show casing Indian fashion trends, crafts manship and design legacy of India.  It 
would also involve strengthening of th e entire supply chain which would include 
establishing, backward linkages with supplie rs.  However, it appears that the entire 
plan is still in conceptual stage as the Ministry itself is not aware of the availability 
and the cost of the land.  The size of la nd and cost would determine the facilities to 
be created and also the methodology of the operation of the entire project.   The 
concept of creation of `Fashion Hub’ is laudable as it will help in the generation of 
employment opportunities in addition to disp laying the skills and talents of Indian 
crafts persons and providing them an opport unity to create a niche for themselves in 
the global arena.  The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government to take all 
necessary steps for establishing the `Fashion Hub’ at the earliest.  If feasible, land for 
fashion hub may either be acquired through outright purchase by the Government or 
a private agency or may be taken on lease from private parties or such land owners 
may be associated as partners with specific  percentage of their shareholding in the 
project.  Search of land cannot be prolonge d indefinitely lingering on the project for 
want of land from Government agencies.   
NEW DELHI      SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY, 
16 April, 2008                                            Chairman, 
27 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Labour. 
 

 73
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SI TTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR  
 
The Committee sat on 31 March 2008 from 1030 hrs. to 1245  hrs. and again from 
1400 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.   
  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Subrata Bose 
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
7. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
8. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
9. Shri Mohan Rawale  
10. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
  
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
11. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
12. Shri Gandhi Azad 
13. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
14. Shri Dilip Ray 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N. K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 

 74
      
PART-I  
 
 
2.  XX    XX   XX 
 
3.  XX    XX   XX 
 
4.  XX    XX   XX 
 
5.  XX    XX   XX 
 
6.  XX    XX   XX 
 
7.             XX    XX   XX 
 
8.  XX    XX   XX 
 
9.  XX    XX   XX 
 
PART-II 
Witness 
10. In the afternoon at 1400 hrs., the Committ ee met again to take evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Textile s.  The following representatives of the 
Ministry were present:- 
 
 
Sl
.N
o 
Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri A.K. Singh Secretary  
2. Dr. Sutanu Behuria AS & FA 
3. Ms. M. Sathiyavathi Member Secretary (CSB) 
4. Shri B.K. Sinha DC (Handlooms) 
5. Shri J.K. Sharma Joint Secretary 
6. Shri B. Singh Joint Secretary 
7. Shri R.K. Chaturvedi  Joint Secretary  
8. Shri J.M. Singh Joint Secretary 
9. Shri Vinod Kispotta Jute Commissioner 
10. Shri N.D. George Economic Advisor 

 75
11. Shri Sanjay Agarwal DC (Handicrafts) 
12. Shri J.N. Singh Textile Commissioner  
13. Shri K.R. Pillai CMD (NTC) 
 
14. Shri M.A. Ibrahimi CMD (CCIC) 
15. Shri K.K. Sinha CMD (HHEC) 
16. Shri Rajiv Takru Director General (NIFT) 
17. Shri S.C. Grover CMD (CCI) 
18. Shri Deepak Das CCA 
19. Shri Anjani Nandan Sharan Director 
20. Shri B.V. Uma Devi Director  
21. Shri J.K. Prasad Director 
22. Shri B. Sinha Director 
23. Shri M.K. Gupta Director 
24. Smt. Sarita Mittal Director 
25. Smt. Promodita Dy. Economic Advisor 
26. Dr. Sandeep Singh Srivastava Addl.DC (Handicraft) 
27. Mohd.  Nazmuddin Addl. DC (Handlooms) 
28. Shri R.K. Pathak Dy. Jute Commissioner 
29. Ms. Mukta Nidhi Samnotra Director (Wool) 
30. Ms. Tripti Ghosh Director, Finance (NIFT) 
  
 
11.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri A.K. Singh, Secretary and other  
officers of the Ministry of Textiles and invited their attention to the provisions 
contained in Direction 55 (1) of the Directio ns by the Speaker and asked them to brief 
the Committee regarding the Demands for Grants (2008-09).   
 
12. The Secretary, Ministry of Textiles then briefed the members about the budgetary 
allocations for the year 2008-09 and the expenditure incurred so far on various 
schemes/programmes undertaken by the Ministry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 76
 
13. Subsequently, the Committee held detailed deliberations with the 
representatives of the Ministry of Textile s.  The important topics discussed in the 
meeting inter-alia included (a) General Performance; (b) Scheme for Integrated Textile 
Parks; (c) Handlooms; (d) Mahatma Gand hi Bunkar Bima Yojana; (e) Integrated 
Handloom Cluster Development Scheme; (f) Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
(TUFS); (g) National Institute of Fashion Te chnology; (h) National Textile Corporation, 
etc.   
 
14. The Hon’ble Chairman and Members raise d several queries on various subjects 
under examination of the Committee in respect of the Demands for Grants (2008-09). 
 
15.  The Secretary and other officials of th e Ministry then replied to some of the 
queries raised by the Chairman and Members.  The Chairman also directed the 
Secretary to send the written replies to th e Supplementary List of Points and queries 
raised by the Members to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
 
16. The Chairman thanked the Secretary an d other officials for giving valuable 
information to the Committee on the subjects. 
 
 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
 
{The witnesses then withdrew} 
 
    The Committee then adjourned.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 77
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTI NG OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 16 APRIL 2008  
 
The Committee sat from 0930 hours to 1055 hours in Committee Room `D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to co nsider and adopt draft Twenty Eighth 
and Twenty Ninth Reports on Demands for Grants for the year 2008-09 of the 
Ministries of Labour and Employment and Textiles respectively. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Subrata Bose   
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Shri  Devidas Pingle 
7. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
  
  8. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
9.         Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
10.        Shri Gandhi Azad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
           
1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Additional Secretary (NK) 
2. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary (B) 
 3. Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
4.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them about 
the agenda for the day.  He informed that Draft Twenty-Eighth and Twenty Ninth 
Reports on Demands for Grants for the year 2008-09 of the Ministries of Labour and 
Employment and Textiles respectively had been  circulated to the Members.  He also 
invited suggestions of the Members in regard to recommendations contained in the 
Reports. 
 

 78
3. After discussing the Draft Reports in detail, the Committee adopted the same 
with some minor modifications.  
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the above Reports after making 
consequential changes, arising out of factua l verification by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment and the Ministry of Textiles, if any and present the same to the Parliament. 
 
5. The Committee also placed on records thei r appreciation for the service rendered 
to the Committee by the officers/staff attached to the  Committee.  
 
    The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 79
 APPENDIX 
 
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE REPORT 
Sl. No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations 
1. 3.15 The scrutiny of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Textiles reveals that the total outlay of Rs.  2,500 crore   for 
the year 2008-09 shows an increas e of 177 crore rupees over 
the allocation of Rs. 2,323 crore for the year 2007-08.  
However, the total expenditure  during the year has been 
Rs.2,228 crore (provisional) leaving an unspent amount of Rs. 
95 crore.  The reasons for under utilization of the allocation 
have been stated to be that during the first year of the new 
Five Year Plan, the utilisatiion of planned fund is generally 
low as many schemes were required to be firmed up.  All the 
major schemes in the VSE sector were also re-structured and 
hence required fresh approval from the competent authorit y.  
Launching of new schemes take a reasonable time, users 
takes substantial time to understand the benefits of the 
programmes, acceptance of the programmes by the targeted 
beneficiaries also requires time.  It has also been stated that 
the Ministry is making concerte d efforts to improve the plan 
expenditure so as to utilize m aximum budget allocation.  The 
Committee observe that the overall expenditure is 
satisfactory yet there has been withdrawal, modification and 
merger of schemes with other schemes in handlooms and 
handicrafts sectors now forming part of VSE sector.  The 
Committee feel that the modifi cation in the existing schemes 
hampers the pace of expenditure as it involves completion of 
fresh procedural formalities.  The Committee also stressed 
earlier that developmental and welfare schemes of the textile 
sector should be selected carefully after thorough study 
involving past experiences, ground realities and future 
needs.  The Committee, theref ore, strongly recommend that 
developmental schemes of the  textile sector should be drawn 
up keeping all the factors in vi ew.  This will help  not only 
the proper and adequate utilization of funds but will also be 
 
successful in achieving the ta rgets set out under the schemes 
and benefiting the targeted group.    
 
2. 3.16 The Committee note that the percentage of expenditure in 
each of the four quarters of the year 2007-08 is extremely 
skewed.  Financial rules of th e Government clearly stipulate 
the spreading of expenditure evenly over the four quarters 
and bars the undue utilization of funds in the last quarter of 
the year.  However, on close scrutiny of the progressive 
quarterly fi gures, the Committee find that the actual 

 80
quarterly expenditure under various Plan schemes have been 
0.28% in the first quarter, 34.74% in the second quarter, 
66.81% in the third quarter and only 82.02% (upto 17 March 
2008) in fourth quarter. The reasons for uneven expenditure 
in every quarter are stated to be non-receipt of bills during 
the first quarter, delay in approval of schemes, restrictions on 
advance payment etc.   The Committee are not at all inclined 
to accept the explanation given by the Ministry in this regard. 
The Committee in their earlier reports also  stressed the need 
to spread the expenditure evenly during each quarter of the 
year,  but it seems that recommendations of the Committee 
have not been taken seriously.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that uneven distribution of funds directly affects the 
functioning of developmental and welfare schemes and 
consequently the growth of the sector is hampered.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that all the foreseeable 
hurdles in the even spending of allocations during each of 
the four quarters of a year should be taken into account 
alongwith the preventive measures before announcing any 
scheme for implementation.   The monitoring system of the 
Ministry also needs to be toned up to ensure that expenditure 
on a scheme is incurred as pl anned during every quarter of 
the year. 
 
3. 3.17 The Committee observe that th e position regarding non-plan 
expenditure is also far from satisfactory.  The Committee find 
that in the first year of the XI plan period there is a huge 
variation in Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual 
Expenditure.  The BE of Rs.983.68 crore was reduced to 
Rs.813.68 crore at RE stage.  An amount of Rs.633.66 crore was 
actually spent during the first Annual Plan.  The reasons for 
variation in BE and actual spending during the year 2007-08 
has been stated that CCI could not purchase cotton at MSP 
level during the cotton season of the year 2006-07 due to 
higher prices of cotton.  This  resulted in lesser expenditure 
during the year 2007-08.  The Committee are not convinced 
with the reasons adduced for non-utilization of funds and 
feel that it is more due to poor planning and short-
sightedness on the part of th e Government.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to adopt a scientific approach 
of forecasting the Budget Estimates for non-plan expenditure 
so as to avoid surrender of huge unutilized amounts and 
consequential locking of precious financial resources. 
 
4. 3.18 The Committee observe that the share of textile imports by 
USA from India was 5.4 per cent, 5.6 percent and 5.5 per cent 

 81
respectively during 2005, 2006 and 2007.  The share of China 
in USA’s textile import was 24.2 per cent, 27.4 per cent and 
31.4 per cent respectively during the corresponding period 
(2005, 2006 and 2007).  The growth ra te of US textile imports 
from India also declined from 25.92 per cent in 2005 to a mere 
1.39 per cent in 2007.  The exports and their growth rate is 
also declining with Europe as a whole.  The Committee are of 
the opinion that the appreciatio n of rupee may be one of the 
contributory factors hitting textile exports, yet it cannot be 
attributed to be the sole reas on for such a poor performance 
in textile exports during the last three years as rupee has 
appreciated vis-à-vis dollar only  recently.  The other factors 
responsible have been stated to  be outdated equipments and 
processes leading to low productivity, weak infrastructural 
support like power, transport, berthing etc. Apart from these, 
high transaction costs, high power tariff, shortage of skilled 
manpower are other factors stated  to be responsible for slow 
growth of export of textile.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that a long term and permanent solution will have to 
be explored to the problems of weak infrastructural support, 
high transaction cost, power tariff, shortage of skilled 
manpower etc., if growth of textile export is desired to be 
accelerated.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that necessary remedial measures including strong 
infrastructural base, availability of uninterrupted power 
supply at competitive rates, skilled manpower, tax and duty 
concessions, liberal bank loans to textile exporters, etc. be 
taken without any delay so that textile industry can improve 
its global market share and stand up to the increasing global 
competitiveness.  
 
5. 3.37 The Committee observe that the Government launched the 
Scheme for Integrated Textile  Parks (SITP) in August 2005, 
by merging the two existing Schemes viz. Scheme of Apparel 
Park for Export and the Textile Centres Infrastructure 
Development Scheme.  The Scheme, a public private 
partnership, is being implemented through Special Purpose 
Vehicles (SPVs).  The industry associations/group of 
entrepreneurs are the main promoters of SITP.  The primary 
objective of SITP is to facilita te world class infrastructure for 
setting up textile units. The Government of India provides 
assistance @ 40 per cent of the project cost subject to ceiling 
of Rs.40 crore.  So far only 30 Textile Parks have been 
sanctioned (during the Tenth Plan) and out of 50 Textile 
Parks which were initially co nsidered for development 
durin
g the Eleventh Plan Period onl y 10 Parks have been 

 82
taken up in the first instance.  Sanction of additional projects 
have been subjected to completion of  critical analysis and 
evaluation of four projects approved in the year 2005-2006. 
 
Although, it is a flagship scheme of the Ministry, the pace of 
progress in the development of these parks is far from 
satisfactory.  Only one park is fully functional out of 12 
projects sanctioned under erstwhile APES, while work in 
only three projects have been completed out of 18 sanctioned 
under TCIDS.  This itself speak s about the poor functioning 
of the scheme.  No doubt, the en tire process of developing a 
Textile park involves enormous efforts at least till it is 
sanctioned, yet these formalities and timely development of 
these parks cannot be protracted on any ground whatsoever 
more so, when enterprising entrepreneurs and other 
industrial associations form Special Purpose Vehicle 
(Promoters of Textile Park) and the assistance of the 
Government of India is to th e tune of 40 per cent of the 
project cost.    The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that a time bound action plan be  drawn up for ensuring that 
the sanctioned Textile Parks become fully operational as any 
delay in this regard may not only involve the cost overrun 
but also run the risk of meeting the same fate which its 
earlier component, viz. i.e. APES and TCIDS met, besides 
disenchanting the focused and result oriented entrepreneurs.  
 
6. 3.38 The Committee observe that SITP (a flagship scheme of 
Government of India)  ai ms to develop world class 
infrastructure for setting up tex tile units.  All the items of 
work coming under textile will be undertaken in these parks.  
Entrepreneurs and Industrial Associations have been 
identified as the main promoter of the Textile Parks but the 
Scheme looses sight of the fact that besides entrepreneurs 
and industry it is the worker, weaver, crafts persons who 
form backbone of the entire ch ain in the textile sector. 
 
Notwithstanding the primacy given to entrepreneurs, the 
people associated with the prim ary and elementary work to 
make these parks functional canno t be ignored if these parks 
are to run successfully. Therefor e, it will be in the fitness of 
things if the role to be played  by this section is also given 
due recognition.  The Committee are distressed to note that 
the Government feels disinclin ed to provide any kind of 
infrastructural facilities to the groups of artisans, weavers, 
textile workers, etc. either in  the individual capacity or to 
their representative bodies, Cooperatives, Associations, etc. 
to enable them to carry out their profession.  The response of 
the Government that interested artisans, weavers ma
y join 

 83
hands and form a special purpose vehicle to develop a textile 
park as per their business plan , is not acceptable to the 
Committee.  The development of textile parks through SITP 
may be the utmost priority yet we cannot be oblivious of the 
plight of persons who will be th e main factors for success of 
these textile parks.   The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that infrastructural facilities under SITP should 
also be made available to the Cooperatives and other 
representative bodies of the artisans, weavers, textile 
workers, etc. providing th em with an opportunity to 
contribute their mite in their own way in the development of 
textile sector.  Nevertheless, the interest of entire chain of 
workforce associated with the textile are well taken care of as 
far as their wages, social security coverage and exact money 
value of their products is concerned.  
 
7. 3.55 The Committee observe that Technology Upgradation Fund 
Scheme was launched to make funds available to the 
domestic textile industry to upgrade the technology of 
existing units and to set up  new units with the state-of-the-
art technology to enhance comp etitiveness in the domestic 
and global market.     Initia lly, the scheme was scheduled to 
be phased out on 31 March 2007.  However,  due to the 
demand and satisfactory working of the scheme it has been 
extended beyond 31 March 2007.  There is an Inter-
Ministerial Steering Committee (IMSC) to monitor and 
review the functioning of TU FS. Meetings of the IMSC are 
held ever
y quarter to assess the functionin g of TUFS.  
However, the meeting of IMSC was last  held in the month of 
July 2006 and reasons for not convening the meetin g  
thereafter has been stated that, at the fag end of the operation 
of scheme there was no need to carry out any other 
modification in the parameters of the scheme hence no 
meeting was held.  It has also been stated that constitution of 
both the, Working Group constituted by the Planning 
Commission on Textile and Jute Industry and the IMSC are 
similar.  Since the Working Group had gone into details of 
the impact of operation of scheme and recommended the 
thrust areas for the future gro wth of the sector, the revised 
parameters were accordingly drafted in line with its 
recommendations.  To avoid the duplicity of the work, the 
meeting of IMSC was not called.  The logic put forth by the 
Government is far from convin cing as there was a gap of 
more than eight months for th e closure of the scheme since 
the last meeting of the IMSC.  Moreover, it was also decided 
much before that the schem e will continue to be in o
peration 

 84
even after March 2007.   Even the parameters of the scheme 
were also modified on the recommendation of the Working 
Group completely sidelining the IMSC.  The Committee do 
not find any justification in  keeping two Governmental 
bodies viz. IMSC and Work ing Group of Planning 
Commission on Textiles and Jute Industry to review the 
functioning of TUFS when both these bodies are represented 
more or less by same members.   This is a futile exercise 
wasting time and money besides delaying the timely 
decision on TUFS.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that a clear and well thought out strategy be 
formulated for the operation of the scheme. Instead of 
loading TUFS with unwieldy bodies to review its 
functioning, a lean, expert and focused Committee of 
professionals be constituted to keep a tab on the scheme  and 
suggest modifications whenever and wherever essential.  
 
8. 3.56 The Committee note that TUFS was introduced to provide 
financial assistance in the form of interest payment on the 
loans taken by entrepreneurs to upgrade the technology of 
their textile units.  For the purpose, the budgetary provision 
of Rs. 1,140 crore have been ma de for the year 2008-09.  On 
the question of sufficiency of allocation, it has been stated 
that the budgetary allocation of Rs.1,140 crore will be 
inadequate to meet the requirements of the scheme. 
 
However, at RE stage, the Minist ry of Finance is expected to 
provide more funds on the lines  it was done in the year 2007-
08.  It has also been stated th at there is still a backlog of 
approximately Rs.1,149.96 crore and BE allocation for the year 
2008-09 is not sufficient to meet even the spill over of the 
previous year.   The Committee observe that there is some 
serious malfunctioning in the planning and operation of 
TUFS otherwise the backlog could not have mounted to such 
an astronomical figure surpassing the budgetary allocation 
for the year 2008-09.  If the backlog is not cleared 
immediately the scheme may loose its sheen and it will 
become a laggard.  The Ministry have also received letters 
from the textile units compla ining that huge amount of 
subsidy under the scheme still remains unpaid.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government that since 
the results of the scheme are encouraging, sufficient funds 
should be allocated to clear  the backlog and keep the 
momentum going.    
 
9. 3.57 The Committee observe that TUFS is a flagship scheme of the 
Government.  The im plementation of the scheme has been 

 85
envisaged throu gh the len gth and breadth of the countr y.  
Although the scheme has picked up in the rest of the country, 
it is virtually a non-starter in the North-Eastern States of the 
country.   Since the year 2005-06 not even a single paisa has 
been spent under the scheme in North-Eastern States of the 
country.  This is a lopsided implementation of the scheme 
and failure of the planning of the Government.  The 
Government has done nothing so far to make the scheme 
popular in that region of the country.  Now the Government 
proposes to initiate the process of awareness programme for 
the proper exposure of the scheme there.  The Committee 
welcome this belated step.  The Committee recommend that 
every steps should be taken to popularize the scheme in that 
region so that not only the compulsory allocation of 10 per 
cent of the scheme but the previous unspent amount are also 
spent there for the successful operation of the scheme.     
 
10. 3.77 The Committee note that ‘Health Insurance Scheme’ for 
handloom weavers was launched in the year 2005 and ICICI 
Lombard General Insurance Company Limited as the 
implementing agency of th e scheme.   23.17 lakh weavers 
have been covered till date under the Insurance Scheme.  As 
regards, pending cases for settlement under the scheme, it 
has been stated that 12,572 cases involving Rs.3.38 crore are 
still to be settled.   The pres ent Health Insurance Scheme 
does not provide coverage for critical illness of the weavers.  
On being enquired on this aspect, it has been stated that the 
proposal for covering critical illness was placed before EFC 
on 5 July 2007 while considering the Handloom  Weavers 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme.  It was suggested that this 
could be covered under a new scheme to be launched by LIC 
and negotiations are going on with LIC as to the rate of 
premium  payable by the Ministry.  For the purpose of 
covering general ailments and critical illness the engagement 
of two separate insurance compan ies defies all logic.  It will 
be more appropriate if only one insurance company, 
preferably LIC, is entrusted with the responsibility of 
covering both kind of ailments i.e. General Ailment and 
Critical Illness.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the appropriate steps be taken in this regard.  The Committee 
further recommend that immediate steps be taken to settle all 
the pending cases of claims under the scheme and devise a 
proper mechanism to make the process of claim settlement 
quick and hassle free in future. 
 
11. 3.78 The Committee note that a new scheme named Handlooms 

 86
Weavers Comprehensive Welfare Scheme has been initiated 
with Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana becoming one of 
its components.  The Committee are happy to note that 
various benefits under the scheme have been substantially 
enhanced for the benefit of the weavers, yet the coverage of 
weavers under the scheme remains an area of concern.  As 
per the census of 1995-96 the approximate number of weavers 
is more than 65 lakh.  This census is more than 12 
years old  
and hence does not reflect the correct number of the weavers 
in the country as on date.  So  far only 9.87 lakh weavers of 18 
States have been covered under Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar 
Bima Yojana.  This number is just inadequate.   The raise in 
the benefits will not be meanin gful unless it reaches all the 
intended beneficiaries by bringing them within the 
insurance coverage.   Regarding coverage of weavers from all 
the States it has been stated th at they are eligible for the 
benefit of the scheme and LIC has been requested to cover 
weavers from all the States.  All State Governments have also 
been advised to enroll maximu m number of weavers of their 
States under this Scheme.  Th is is only a perfunctory 
approach and do not reflect the seriousness of the issue it 
merits. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
special drives should be launched to identify the weavers 
and cover them under Insurance Scheme in all those States 
which are hitherto uncovered.  Efforts should be intensified 
to identify the weavers for the purpose of coverage in the rest 
of States so that maximu m number of weavers can be 
brought within the fold of Insurance coverage under 
Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana.  
 
12. 3.79 The Committee are distressed to note that despite repeatedly 
stressing the need to raise the upper age limit from 58 to 70 
for coverage under MGBBY, the Government is not taking up 
the issue with the seriousness it deserves.  It is simply 
quoting the replies of LIC whic h are evasive in nature to 
shirk its responsibility.  The Government has stated that the 
matter was taken up with Ministry of Finance and LIC.  The 
LIC informed that for raisin g the age limit the premium 
would be Rs.1,650/- per weaver.  Since the premium was very 
high, the Ministry of Financ e and the LIC were again and 
again requested to reduce the premium.  It has also been 
stated that at present the a nnual premium for the weaves in 
the age group of 18 to 59 years is Rs.330/- per weaver per 
annum.  The premium proposed by the LIC for the age group 
between 60-70 years is Rs.1,500/- per annum.  The Committee 
are not convinced b
y the logic of Insurance Company and the 

 87
Ministry of Finance as it is pr ima-facie untenable.  Going by 
this yardstick there is no ju stification for keeping a uniform 
premium for beneficiaries of a ll ages i.e. 18 to 58 years as 
mortality rate in the lower age group of the beneficiaries is 
far less than in the higher age group.  Hence, the rate of 
premium should be structured accordingly in the light of the 
perceived mortality rate for different age groups of 
beneficiaries.  Therefore, high rate of premium  for 
beneficiaries of 59 to 70 years do es not hold any ground.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the issue of 
increasing the age of weaver s from 58 to 70 years for the 
purpose of covera
ge under insurance be immediately decided  
without any further delay.   Be ing a public sector company, 
LIC should not shirk its soci al responsibility towards the 
handloom workers   who are from the poor section of the 
society.  However, the Government may, if necessary, create a 
fund to indemnify LIC in case the claim outgo of LIC in this 
segment (i.e between 59 to 70 years) is more than the 
premium collected by the company.
 
 
13. 3.96 The Committee take note of the fact that National Institute of 
Fashion Technology  was set up as an apex body of human 
resource development for textile garment and allied sectors to 
cater to the growing needs of the fashion industry both in 
domestic and international aren a.  With the passage of time 
NIFT has been successful in so  far as the objective of its 
establishment is concerned.  Its courses are becoming 
increasingly popular and the demands of the students for 
joining the institute is growing year after year. To meet the 
growing demands of the students from across the country, 
NIFT has undertaken an expansion plan wherein eleven 
more branches will be opened in  other parts of the country 
and abroad.   This will be in addition to seven  already 
functioning branches in various cities of the country.  This is 
a praiseworthy step, yet the desired progress is not being 
achieved due to one or the other reason in all the proposed 
centres. All the eleven projects are plagued by one or the 
other problem and are not progressin
g on the expected lines.  
The Committee are distressed at the state of affairs prevailing 
in the expansion of NIFT.  They therefore, strongly 
recommend that due care and coordination should be 
ensured among various agencies  which are involved in the 
establishment of the centres of NIFT in various parts of the 
country so that these centres come up within   a specific time 
frame and start their academic session benefiting the 
students from all sections of the society.  

 88
 
 
14. 3.108 The Committee take note of the fact that Government 
propose to set up `Fashion Hubs ’ with a view to strengthen 
the entire textile value chain and to provide an interface 
between the stakeholders by creating a permanent market 
place for the Indian Fashion Industry.  It would also serve as 
a single stop fashion business point, show casing Indian 
fashion trends, craftsmanship and design legacy of India.  It 
would also involve strengthening of the entire supply chain 
which would include establishing, backward linkages with 
suppliers.  However, it appears th at the entire plan is still in 
conceptual stage as the Ministry itself is not aware of the 
availability and the cost of the land.  The size of land and 
cost would determine the facilities to be created and also the 
methodology of the operation of  the entire project.   The 
concept of creation of `Fashion Hub’ is laudable as it will 
help in the generation of employment opportunities in 
addition to displaying the skills and talents of Indian crafts 
persons and providing them an opportunity to create a niche 
for themselves in the global arena.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Government to take all necessary 
steps for establishing the `Fashion Hub’ at the earliest.  If 
feasible, land for fashion hub may either be acquired 
through outright purchase by the Government or a private 
agency or may be taken on leas e from private parties or such 
land owners may be associated  as partners with specific 
percentage of their shareholding in the project.  Search of 
land cannot be prolonged indefinitely lingering on the 
project for want of land from Government agencies.   
 
 