 
 
 
17 
  SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2006-07) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES  
 
 
           THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD BILL, 2006 
 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 24 November 2006 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24 November 2006 
 
 
 
  
      
  
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
November 2006/  1928 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
 
              
         
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE        
 
 
INTRODUCTION           
 
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE         ……………………       
 
ANNEXURE-I  List of Organisations who have submitted their suggestions  
Writing to the Standing Committee on Labour on  
“The National Jute Board Bill, 2006”. 
 
ANNEXURE – II The National Jute Board  Bill, 2006 
     
 
ANNEXURE - III Minutes of the  sittings of the Standing Committee on Labour  
 held  on 3.7.3006, 13.10.2006  and 2.11.2006   
 
  
 
 2

COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
      (2006-2007) 
  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Subrata Bose    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hassan    
7. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
10. Shri Virendra Kumar     
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
12. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil   
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
    16. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
17. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
  18. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  19. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  20. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  21. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
22.       Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
23.       Shri Gandhi Azad 
24.       Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
25.       Shri Dilip Ray 
      26.       Shri Rahul Bajaj 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -           Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.S. Misra   - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
5.    Shri C. Kalyanasundaram- Committee Officer 
 
 3

 
 
     INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the  Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour   ha ving been a uthorised by the 
Committee to submit the report on their  behalf present  this Seventeenth Report on “The Nat ional Jute 
Board Bill, 2006” of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 22 May 2006 and was referred to the Committee by  
the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E (b ) of the Rules of Pro cedure and Conduct of 
Business in L ok Sabha for examination and report with in three m onths from the date of publi cation of 
the reference of the Bill i n Bulletin Pa rt-II of Lok Sabha dated 25 Ma y 2006.  Since the  Committe e 
sought more time to complete their examination of the Bill, Hon’ble Speaker granted extension of tim e 
for a period of three months upto  25 November 2006 to present the Report.  
 
3. The Committee in their meeting held on 3 July  2006 heard the views of the r epresentatives of 
the Ministry  of Textiles,   Ministry  of Law and Justice on the Bill. The Committee took the oral 
evidence of the represent atives of the Ministry  of Textiles on 13 October 2006.  The Committee 
considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill at their sitting held on 2 November 2006.    
 
4.  The Committee also undertook on-the-spot study visits to Guwahati, Shillong and Kolkata from 
11 to 15 July 2006 and to Bhubaneshwar, Visakhapatnam, Vijaynagaram, Hyderabad and Kolkata fro m 
21 to 26 Se ptember 2006 to hear the views of the va rious stakeholders such as jute farm ers, jute 
workers, manufacturers, State Governments etc. on the Bill.  
 
5. The Committee wish to express their th anks to the farmers, workers, manufacturers and othe rs 
for placing their views on the Bill before the Committee.  
 
6. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Mi nistry of Textiles and 
National Jute Board for placing before them detailed written notes on the Bill and for furnishing the 
desired information  in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 
          
         
Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy 
NEW DELHI;       Chairman, 
 2 November 2006                        Standing Committee on Labour 
 11 Kartika, 1928 (Saka)  
 
 4

REPORT 
 
Introductory 
 
 
1. The Jute Industry occupies an important place in the national economy.  It is one of the m ajor 
industries in the eastern region, particularly in West Bengal. It supports nearly 4 million farm families, 
besides providing direct employment to about 2.6 lakh industrial work ers and livelihood to another 1.4 
lakh people in the tertiary sector  and allied activities.  The produc tion process in Jute Industry goes 
through a variety of activities, which include cultivation of raw jute, processing of jute fibres, spinning, 
weaving, bleaching, dy eing, finishing and m arketing of both raw jute and its finished products.  The  
Jute Industry is labour intensive an d as such its labour-output ratio is  also high.  In spite of various 
difficulties faced by the industry, capacity utilizati on of th e industry is around 75  per cent.  These 
apart, the jute industry also cont ributes to exports to the tune of nearly Rs.1,000 crores.  The Jute 
Manufactures Development Council (JMDC), incorpor ated under the Jute Manufactures Developm ent 
Council Act, 1983 and t he National Centre for Jute Diversification (NCJD), a Society set up by the 
Central Gov ernment in the Minis try of Textiles  and registered under th e Societies Registration  Act, 
1860 are the institutions which are presently coor dinating the operations of  the large num ber of 
functions in the Jute Sector. 
 
 
National Jute Policy 
 
2. On account of its eco-friendly a nd biodegradable characte ristics, jute is poised to becom e one 
of the most favoured products.  The Government has announced a comprehensive National Jute Policy 
in April 2005 with a view to deve lop a strong and vibrant jute sector.  The polic y enunciates that the 
approach for the jute sector wi ll be directed towards reviving the jute econom y through supportive 
measures covering research and developm ent; technology up gradation; creating of infrastructure for  
storage and m arketing of raw jute and m arket deve lopment activities  f or jute an d divers ified jute  
products.   
 
3. The National Jute Policy also enunciates the cr eation of a National Jute Board which is a major 
organizational initia tive of  the policy.   National Ju te Board will be the agency to coordina te and 
implement the various programm es of jute sector.  The B oard will synthesi zes various layers of 
Government decision making and to make for a cohesive approach.    
 
Rationale for Establishment of National Jute Board  
 
4. In a written note submitted to the Committee by the Ministry of Textiles, it has been stated that 
5 organizations under Minis try of Textiles, 2  orga nizations assisted by Ministry  of Textiles and 3 
organizations under Ministry of Agri culture are presently in volved in jute related activities.  As such, 
there is lack of coordination am ong the organiza tions while executing various prom otional schemes 
and activities relating to jute sector.  So, the following rationale have been put forward by the Ministry 
of Textiles for the establishment of the National Jute Board:- 
 
(a) Need for coordination among the large num ber of organizations f unctioning in the jute 
sector; 
(b) Need to avoid multiplicity of organizations catering to the same target group; 
(c) Need for harmonization of the disjointed activities of such institutions for an integrated 
approach for development of the jute sector; and 
 5

(d) The Jute Board is pro posed to address th e sy stemic ills of  lack of  coordina tion and 
disjointed approach in the jute sector. 
 
5. In regard to the m ultiplicity of organization in the jute sec tor and th e need to c reate synergy 
between the activities of  different organizations, the Secretary (Textiles) stated durin g the b riefing as 
follows:- 
 
“Apart from the National Jute Policy in whose compliance we are proceeding, the Jute sector in 
India, if you look around presently, is characterized by multiplicity of organisations and there is 
inadequate co-ordination in their functioning.  For the benefit of Members I would like to name 
the organisations that are under th e control of the Min istry of Te xtiles: (1) Office o f the Jute 
Commissioner,  it is based in Kolkata.  It deals with the entire regulatory framework of the jute 
industry. (2) Jute m anufactures Development Council.  This is known as JMDC in short. (3 ) 
National Centre for Jute Diversification, in short, known as the NCJD. (4) The Jute Corporation 
of India. (5) Then we have the Indian Jute In dustries Research Association which  in brief  is 
known as the IJIRA.  All these organisations are based in K olkata.  Then we have the Indian 
Jute Technology, that is the IJT which was jointly founded by the University of Kolkata and the 
Indian Jute Mill Association and w as registered under West Bengal Societies Regis tration Act.  
The three organisations under the Ministry of Agriculture are as follows: (1) Directorate of Jute 
Development, based  in  Kolkata. (2)  Nationa l In stitute of  R esearch on Jute and  Allied F ibre 
Technology, in brief kn own as the NIRJAF and fi nally (3) The Central Research Institu te of 
Jute and Allied Fibre, in  short known as the CRIJAF. The Hon’ble  Comm ittee will notice that 
there are many organisations functioning, som e dealing with research and som e dealing with 
extension and productivity problems. Some are dealing with the improvement of jute seeds and 
productivity, some are dealing with technology, how to improve the fibre technology pertaining 
to jute, some are dealing with pure research, like the IJT or IJIRA for that m atter.  So, what we 
need is that, and that is the proposal before  you and the hon. Committee, how to create synergy 
between th e activ ities of  these various org anisations so that at the end of t he day the 
coordination is adequate and we avoid the multiplicity of organisations and we strengthen them 
and enable them to ensure optimum use of resources both human and otherwise”. 
 
The National Jute Board Bill, 2006 
 
6. The Ministry of Textiles has stated that the National Jute Board Bill 2006 has been prepared in 
consultation with the Legislative Departm ent of the Ministry of Law.  Inter- Ministerial consultations 
were held on the proposal of establishment of Jute Board and Jute Board Bill.  As advised, the meeting 
of the Expenditure Finance Comm ittee (EFC) wa s held on 12.01.2006 which approved the aforesaid 
proposal.  The Cabinet approved the proposal of establishm ent of  National Jute Board and the 
introduction of National Jute Board Bill 2006 in the Parliament on 9.3.2006.  Accordingly, the Bill was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 22.5.2006.   
 
Salient feature of the National Jute Board Bill, 2006 
 
7. Structure of the Jute Board 
 
(i) As per the  National Jute Policy, 20 05 th e prop osed Board will be the apex f ield 
organization to im plement the Jute Tec hnology Mission and to coordinate with the 
various agencies; 
(ii) The National Jute Board (NJB) will be  a statutory body incor porating the existing 
mandate of the JMDC and NCJD; 
 6

(iii) For the time being, the Jute Board will be constituted by merging the JMDC and the 
NCJD.   However, subsequently, other organizations of the Ministry of Textiles may 
come under  the purview of the pr oposed Board, depending upon the need of the 
time and if  such asso ciation will f urther the objective for which the Jute Board is 
proposed to be set up;  
(iv)       The Board shall be body corporate with its head office at Kolkata; 
(v) The Board may establish office/agencies within and outside India; and  
(vi) After merger of JMDC and NCJD the em ployees will hold office on the same terms 
and conditions as they had before merger. 
 
8. Constitution of the Board 
 
(iv) The Board will hav e 2 0 Mem bers draw n fro m Jute Industry, Labou r Institu tions 
functioning in the jute sector and the Government; 
(v) Secretary (Textiles) will be the Ex-Officio Chairperson of the Board; 
(vi) Out of 21 Mem bers 10 Mem bers are func tionaries of Central Governm ent and 2 
Members are nominated by the Central Government from amongst the Research and 
Educational Institutions (IJIRA and IJT) which received grants from the Ministry; 
and 
(vii) The Members Secretary of the Board will be appointed by the Central Government. 
 
9. Budget and Finance 
 
(viii) There shall be constituted a fund called Jute Board Fund. 
(ix) The Central Government will provide  necessary fund after approval of the 
Parliament. 
 
10. The Mandate and Functions of the Jute Board 
 
The following are the mandates of the National Jute Board:- 
 
a. To restructure the p resent regulatory framework with a view to providing adequate 
incentive to all stakeholders in the jute sector to produce goods and services in an 
efficient manner and maximize socio-economic benefits; 
b. To establish a Jute Research and Development Fund and Venture Capital Assistance 
Fund for the developm ent of efficient jute m anufacturing m achinery, and the 
commercialization of new products; 
c. To streng then and f acilitate the  growth of Hum an Resource Developm ent 
Institutions like the Institute of Jute Technology (IJT) on innovative lines; 
d. To review and revitalize the working of the Research and D evelopment Institutions 
like the Ind ian Jute Indu stries Research Association (IJIRA) and focus research on 
the needs of the jute industry; 
e. To subsume, m erge and professionalis e th e Jute Man ufactures Developm ent 
Council (JMDC) and the National Centre fo r Jute Diversification (N CJD) and to 
play their assigned role of facilitators of change and growth, effectively. 
 
11. The following will be the functions of the National Jute Board:- 
 
 7

(i) Evolve an integrated approach to jute cultivation in the m atters of formulation of 
schemes, extension work, im plementation and evaluation of sche mes aim ed at 
increasing the yield of jute and improving the quality thereof; 
(ii) Promote production of better quality raw jute; 
(iii) Enhance productivity of raw jute; 
(iv) Promote or undertake assignments for better marketing and stabilization of raw jute 
and jute products; 
(v) Promote and undertake measures for quality control of raw jute and jute products; 
(vi) Assist and encourage studies and res earch for improvem ent of processing, quality , 
techniques of grading and packaging of raw jute; 
(vii) Promote standardization of jute manufactures; 
(viii) Sponsor, assist, coordinate, encourag e or undertake scien tific, technological, 
economic and marketing research pertaining to the jute sector; 
(ix) Maintain and im prove existing m arkets and to develop new markets within the  
country and outside for jute m anufactures and to devise m arketing strategies in 
consonance with the dem and for such manufactures in the d omestic an d 
international markets; and 
(x) Sponsor, assist, coordinate or encour age scientific techno logical and econom ic 
research in the m atters related to m aterials, equipm ent, m ethods of production, 
product developm ent including discovery and developm ent of new m aterials, 
equipment and m ethods and im provements in  those already in use in the jute 
industry. 
 
12. Miscellaneous functions 
 
(i) The proposed Board may outsource its activities provided they are within the am bit 
of its mandate; 
(ii) When the JTM comes into being the Jute Board will coordinate the execution of the 
Mini Mis sions pertainin g to Ministry of Textiles.  It will be the nodal agency to  
execute the 9 Schemes under the proposed Mini Mission IV of the Jute Technology 
Mission; and 
(iii) The mandate of the Jute Board is in keeping with the future vision of the jute sector 
under a liberalized and globalizes economic framework. 
 
Supremacy of the Government over the proposed Jute Board: 
 
13. The Governm ent will have the power to supersede th e Board on the accou nt of grave 
emergency or on accou nt of persis tent default by the Board in not carrying out the instructions of the 
Government or in public interest. 
 
Examination by the Standing Committee on Labour 
 
14. The National Jute Board  Bill, 2006 which wa s introduced in Lok Sabha on 22 May  2006, was 
referred to the Standing Comm ittee on Labour by Hon’ble Speaker for exam ination and report within 
three months from the date of pub lication in Bulletin Pa rt-II of Lok Sabha, i.e. 25 May 2006 in term s 
of Rule 331 E of the Rulles of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  Subsequently, on the 
request of the Comm ittee, Hon’ble Speaker has gr anted an extension of three months upto 25 
November 2006 to present a report o n the Bill.  Th e Committee were briefed by the repres entatives of 
the Ministry of Textiles on 3 July 2006.  Thereafter,  the Committee undertook two study visits to hear 
the views of  the various  stakeholders such as ju te farmers, jute workers,  manufacturers and the State 
 8

Governments etc. on the National Ju te Board B ill 2006.  The Comm ittee visited Gu wahati, Shillong 
and Kolkata from  11 to 17 July 2006 and to Bhubaneshwar, Visakhapa tnam, Vijaynagaram , 
Hyderabad and Kolkata from  21 to 26 Septem ber 2006.  Various stakehol ders have generally 
welcomed t he Bill.  However, they had m ade certain suggestions regarding co mposition of the 
National Ju te Board and  its f unctions etc.  Unio ns of jute farm ers, trad e unions of workers and  the 
organizations engaged in the sector had also sub mitted their suggestion s in writing to  the Comm ittee.  
These suggestions were sent to the Ministry of Textiles and its comm ents were obtained.  Som e of the 
important suggestions and the comme nts of the Ministry of Textiles  have been analyzed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
National Jute Board as an Umbrella Organisation 
 
15. In the statement of objects and reasons of the National Jute Board Bill, 2006, it has been stated 
that the National Ju te Board Bill will ac t as an um brella body for the entir e jute s ector to avo id the 
multiplicity of efforts and programmes of various organizations in the jute sector.  All India Agragami 
Kishan Sabha, Kolkata and Federation of Chatkal Mazdoor Unions, Kolkata ha ve suggested that all 
jute related institutions should be merged and brought under one um brella organization i.e. National  
Jute Board.  In this regard, it has been stated by the Ministry of Textiles in a written reply as under:- 
 
“The Jute Board is not expected to be an um brella organization taking over the activities of all 
other agencies working in jute sector.  It is supposed to be a facilitator of change and growth.  It 
is also reiterated that the m erger of other organizations engage d in the jute sector involves 
various administrative and legal complications.  The proposed Jute Board will be a facilitator of 
change and  growth effectively as w ell as achie ve its targ ets la id down  in the  National Ju te 
Policy, 2005.  For exam ple, Jute Corporation of India stands vest ed with comm ercial 
prerogative on the other hand, Jute Board is not expected to be a body with profit objective.  
IJIRA is a research organizati on, w hile the Jute Board is expe cted to prom ote research and 
development in jute, it is, not expected to do  it by itself.  All these organizations would 
ultimately b e guided by  the Ju te Board.  In th at sens e, th e Jute Boa rd will be a n um brella 
organization, and not in the sense of taking over all other organizations”. 
 
16. When it was asked to explain the reasons for m aking National Jute B oard only a facilitator  
rather than an apex body in jute sector to look after every single activity of the sector and thus 
deviating from the objective of Umbrella Organisation as stated in the statement of objects and reasons 
of the Bill, the Ministry of Textiles in a written reply clarified as below:- 
 
“It has righ tly been stated that the National Ju te Board is to act as an um brella body for the 
entire jute sector to avoid the multiplicity of efforts and programmes of various organizations in 
the jute sector.  However, this may be only a long-term objective.  Initially, the prim ary 
objective of establishing the National Jute Bo ard is to coordinate and integrate the 
developmental program mes of various organizatio ns pertaining to the jute sector.  Such 
programmes are aimed at bringing benefits to various stakeholders in the jute sector, especially 
to Jute farm ers, workers, manufacturers and d istributors.  Theref ore, the National Jute Board 
Bill, 2006 envisages establishment of the proposed National Jute Board by m erging JMDC and 
NCJD.  Both these organizations are havi ng overlapping functions and are under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Textiles .  As regards to m erger of other organizations 
in the Ministry of Textiles with the proposed Ju te Board, it was felt that these organizations are 
performing their assigned duties effectively.  The proposed National Jute Board will not expand 
its activities to actua lly carry out func tions like Minim um Support Price (MSP) operations of  
 9

Jute Corporation of India (JCI),  regulatory functions of the Of fice of Jute Comm issioner, and 
manufacturing and tradi ng activitie s of  the Na tional Ju te Manufactures Corporation Lim ited 
and the Birds Jute and Exports Limited.  However, the Jute Board will definitely coordinate the 
functions of these organizations as well as others  in bringing an integrated development in the 
jute sector.  The proposed Jute Board will be a lean organisation havi ng a minimum staff and 
experts for the core functions of the Board and fo r other matters it will outsource the  activities.  
Merging JCI, Office of Jute Commissioner etc. will create legal and administrative hassles and 
may lead to cover bureaucratiz ation.  Moreover, su ch a behem oth m ay lose focus on its 
assigned duties”. 
 
Jute Corporation of India 
 
17. Joint Council of Employees’ Officers’ of the Jute Corporation of India Limited appeared before 
the Committee on 14 July 2006 and 26 September 2006 at Kolkata and  apprised th e Committee that 
the objectives of the proposed National Jute Boar d and the objectives defi ned in Mem orandum of 
Association of JCI are more or less identical.  They requested the following:- 
 
(a) The JCI should be included in the National Jute Board; 
(b) Role of JCI is not clear resulting in confusion am ongst the staff of JCI.  
Hence, the role of JCI should be clearly defined in the Bill; 
(c) Overlapping functions should be amended. 
 
18. In this regard, the Ministry of Textiles furnished its comments as below:- 
 
“The broad functions and objectives of JCI are to conduct Minim um Support Price 
Operations as per the MSP declared by Govern ment of India every year, (ii) JC I also 
undertakes commercial procurem ent of raw jute depending upon the market situations 
which provides better rem unerative prices to th e farmers and JCI also perform s other 
functions like dissem ination of latest t echnology to jute growers, supplem ent in 
distribution of certified jute seeds and tim e to t ime conduct se minars and programm e 
for benefit of jute growers.  The JCI is a Public Sector Undertak ing of Governm ent of 
India and it was establis hed under the Com panies Act, 1956.  It is a commercial en tity 
that plays in the market to meet its objectives.  Otherwise, it does not have any statutory 
powers to control the m arket.  On the ot her hand, the Jute Bo ard by itself is not 
proposed to perform  any comm ercial operati ons.  As stated earlier, the prim ary 
objective of Jute Board is to coordinate and integrate developm ental programmes.  
Therefore, there is no conflict of objectives of  the two organizations.  Merger of such a 
Company with the proposed statutory body re quires a complex legal and administrative 
exercise.  The question of merger of large num ber of  em ployees of JCI with a 
comparatively thin s taff strength of propos ed Jute Board will create in ter-cadre 
problems.  Moreover, the JCI is perform ing its assigned duties effectively for the 
benefit of the jute growers.  The JCI has been made the nodal agency for operating Mini 
Mission III & IV under the Jute  Technology Mission (JTM).  He nce, the merger of JCI 
in Jute Board is not advisable in public interest at this stage”. 
 
Office of the Jute Commissioner 
 
19. During the recent vis it of the Committee to Hyde rabad, representatives of the Gove rnment of 
Andhra Pradesh have stated that there is no provision  in the Bill to regulate the jute sector.  They have 
also suggested that Ju te Commissioner (JC)  should be part of th e National Jute Board since control 
 10

orders and regulations are adm inistered by other Commodity Boards such as Tea Bo ard. The reaction 
of the Ministry of Textiles to the above suggestion is as below:- 
 
“At presen t, the regu latory functions are be ing carried out by the Office of the Jute 
Commissioner.  However, the r esponsibility of  the Jute B oard is to evolve an integra ted 
approach to promote and develop the jute sector as a whole and therefore, it is likely to monitor 
and coordinate the regulatory fram ework in jute secto r.  As stated earlier, the merger of the JC 
Office in the proposed Jute Bo ard involves various adm inistrative and legal com plications.  
Therefore, the National Jute Board Bill, 2006  does not propose for such merger.  However, the 
Board is  free to  propo se th e m erger of th e JC Office subsequently and the sam e can be 
considered after the Board has been established”. 
 
 
Research Institutions such as IJIRA 
 
20. Joint Actio n Comm ittee of Unions and Associat ions of Autonom ous Research Institution s 
(JACARI), West Bengal had requested  that the present imp asse in Indian Jute  Industries R esearch 
Association should be brought to an end and it should be m ade as an integral part of the National Jute 
Board.  In this regard, the Ministry of Textiles in its comments has stated that the The Jute  Board Bill, 
2006 proposes for m erger of two Governm ent Institutions i.e. JMDC and NCJD.  IJIRA is a private 
body.  The m erger of IJIRA in Ju te Board will require a detailed  study regarding adm inistrative 
financial and other im plications.  Governm ent of Andhra Pradesh ha s also suggested that research 
institution  should be part of the proposed National Jute Board.  Response of the Ministry to the above 
suggestion was, “there are m any institutions conducting research in Textiles and J ute Sector, such as 
IITs  IJT, I JIRA, Textile Researc h Associatio ns etc.  The Jute Board  is f ree to out source various  
requirements as per the need of the hour.  It has earli er been stated that the inclusion of IJIRA in the 
Jute Board is not f easible.  It is  not possible to m erge institutions like IIT s, IJT etc. which are not 
under the supervision of Ministry of  Textiles in Jute Board either  for obvious reasons”.  During the 
study tour of the Committee to Kolkata it was also tr anspired that 80 per cent of the staff of IJIRA are  
non-technical while only 20 per cent are Scientific sta ff and that m any scientists have already lef t the 
research organization. 
 
Composition of the National Jute Board 
 
21. Chapter-II, Sub-Clause 3 (4) of  the Bill deal with the com position of the National Ju te Board.  
As per this Sub-Clause, the following will be composition of the National Jute Board:- 
 
“(a)      the Secretary in charge of the Ministry of the Central Government  
dealing with textiles, who shall be the ex-officio Chairperson of the Board; 
 
(b) the Additio nal Secre tary and Fin ancial Adviser, Min istry of  Textiles, 
Government of India, ex-officio; 
(c) the Joint Se cretary (Jute) in the Min istry of Textiles, Govern ment of India, 
ex-officio; 
(d) two members of the rank of Joint S ecretary to be nom inated by the Central 
Government to represen t respec tively the Minis tries of  the Ce ntral 
Government dealing with— 
(i) agricu lture, and 
(ii) food and public distribution; 
 11

(e) three members to be nom inated by th e Central Governm ent by rotation in 
the alphabetical order to represent respectively the Government of the States 
of Andhra Pradesh, Assam , Bihar, Me ghalaya, Orissa, Tripura and West 
Bengal; the  nom ination shall be f rom of ficials of the State Government 
holding the rank of Secretary to the State Government and dealing with Jute 
or Textile matters; 
(f) two members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent  
(g) the jute industry in the organized sector; 
(h) two members to be appointed by th e Central Government to represent the 
jute industry in the decentralized sector; 
(i) two members to be appointed by th e Central Government to represent the 
exporters of jute products; 
(j) the Director, Indian Jute Industries Research Association, ex-officio; 
(k) the Principal, Institute of Jute Technology, ex-officio; 
(l) the Direc tor, National Institute o f Research on Jute and Allied Fibre  
Technology, Kolkata, ex-officio; 
(m) the Direc tor, Central Research Inst itute f or Jute and Allied Fibres, ex-
officio; 
(n) the Chairman and Managing Director, Jute Corporation of India, ex-officio; 
(o) the Jute Commissioner, ex-officio; 
(p) the Secretary, National Jute Board, w ho shall be the ex-officio Secretary of 
the Board”. 
 
Separate representations for jute farmers and jute workers etc. 
 
22. From the above proposed com position of the Board, Out of 20 Mem bers, 11 Mem bers would 
be from the Union Government and its organisations, 3 would be from the State Governments.  Only 6 
Members would represent the Jute Industry.  In other words, 70 per cent of the Members of the Board 
would be from Government side.  Only 30 per cent of Members would be from Industry.  As such, the 
decision of the Board would always go in favour  of t he Governm ent.  In t his regard, m any 
organisations have pointed out that there is no separate representation for jute farmers and jute workers 
in the Board.  Governm ent of West Bengal, Federation of Chatkal Mazdoor Unions, Kolkata, Paschim 
Bengal Pradeshik Krishak Sabha, Kolkata, W est Bengal Provincial Kisan Sabha, JMDC’s Em ployees’ 
Association, Paschim Banga Chatkal Mazdoor Federation, Kolkata, All India Agragami Kishan Sabha, 
Kolkata, Bengal Provincial Chatkal Mazdoor U nion, Kolkata, Assam Jute Gr owers Association, The  
Jute Baler s Association  and Jute Corporation  of  India Lim ited Staff Organistion, Kolkata   have 
suggested that separate representati on should be given to jute farm ers, jute workers (Trade Unions), 
Jute Balers etc.  The Ministry of Textiles has stated its position on the above issue as under:- 
 
“The proposed National Jute Board will have 10  members representing v arious organisat ions 
of the Ministries of Textiles and Agriculture.  These organizations are directly dealing with 
various aspects of jute in the country.  Hence, it is appropriate that the expertise and knowledge 
of these o rganizations are better harmonized and reflected in the com position of the National 
Jute Board to achieve its avowed  objectives.  These organ izations loo k after th e interes ts o f 
various stakeholders like jute growers, traders, manufacturers, workers and exporters in the jute 
sector.  In  addition, 6 mem bers from these stak eholders have been propos ed to b e included in 
the proposed National Jute Board to  give direct representation to them.  However, the Ministry 
of Textiles is not aver se to include more members from such stakeholders if required specially 
from the farmers and workers representatives”. 
 
 12

23. Federation of Chatkal Mazdoor Unions, Kolkata has specifically suggest ed that two m embers 
from each of the Central Trade Unio ns and Central Kishan Sabha should be incorporated in the Board. 
In this regard, the Ministry of Textiles has comm ented that the Ministry does not feel it appropriate to 
recommend for incorporation of so  many members in the Board as this may make it unwieldy and the 
decision making process very cumbersom e.  Howeve r, the Min istry is not a verse to in clude 
representatives of re cognized trad e unions  as  represen tatives of jute  workers  in  the  Nation al Ju te 
Board.   
 
 
24. In this regard, it is pertinen t to note that as pe r the provisions of th e Jute Manufactures 
Development Council Act, 1983, there were three m embers to represent the growers of jute and three 
members to represent the interests of workers employed in factories producing jute manufactures in the 
Jute Manufactures Development Council. 
 
 
 
 
 
25. As per Sub-Clauses 4 (f) and (g) of clause 3 of Chapter-III of the Bill, two mem bers to 
represent jute indust ry in the organized sector  and two m embers to repres ent jute industry in the 
decentralized sector.  When the Min istry of Te xtiles was ask ed to explain why such broad term s viz. 
organized sector and decentralized sector have been used in the Bill inste ad of specific terms viz. jute 
farmers, jute workers and jute distributors etc. the Ministry of Textiles has explained in a written reply 
as below:- 
 
“The terms ‘Organised Sector’ and ‘Decentralised Sector’ have been used in the Bill to connote 
the large  ju te m ill sec tor (o rganized sec tor) an d the  tiny  an d sm all ind ustries (dec entralized 
sector) manufacturing jute products.  These are fairly acceptable economic terms widely used .  
They never connote jute farmers, jute workers and jute distributors.  However, if need be, these 
terms may be substantiated by defining them  under section 2 of the proposed Bill m eant for 
definitions.  There is no  need to cha nge these terms to give repres entation to jute farmers, jute 
workers and jute distributors, for whom a separate provision may be made”. 
  
26. JCI officers Association, Kolkat a has suggested that there should be workm en participation in 
the Board from  JCI as it is being the nodal agency for Support Price O peration.  In this regard, the 
Ministry of Textiles has stated that the CMD, JC I will be a m ember of the proposed Jute Board.  
Hence, the participation of the JCI in the Board has been ensured. 
 
27. In the Jute Manufactures Developm ent Counc il Act, 1983, a provisi on was m ade for the 
inclusion of five experts in jute technological research, jute marketing or agricultural economics in the 
Jute Manufactures Development Council.  However, no such representation has been proposed in this 
Bill. 
 
Representation of State Governments in the Board  
 
28. In Sub-Clause 4 (e) of Clause  3 of Chapter-II of the Bill, it is proposed to nom inate three 
members from  the States of A ndhra Pradesh, Assam , Bihar, Megha laya, Orissa, Tr ipura and W est 
Bengal on rotational basis.  Many stakeholders incl uding the Government of W est Bengal, Paschim 
Bengal Pradeshik Krishak Sabha, Kolkata, Jute Co rporation of India Sta ff Organisation, Kolkata, 
Indian Jute Mills Association, Sanjukta Kishan Sabha, Paschim  Banga Chatkal Mazdoor Union, 
 13

Kolkata, All India Agragam i Kishan Sabha, Ko lkata, Bengal Provincial Chatkal Mazdoor Union, 
Kolkata and Federation of Chatkal Mazdoor U nion, Kolkata have suggested that West Bengal should 
be a perm anent m ember in the National Jute Boar d.  One of the suggestion was that W est Bengal, 
Assam and Bihar should be perm anent members and rest of the m embers may be on rotational basis 
from other States like Andhra Pradesh, Meghalaya , Orissa and Tripura.  Governm ent of Andhra 
Pradesh and Federation of Chatkal Mazdoor Unions, Kolkata have suggested that Andhra Pradesh may 
also be permanent member in the Board.  The Minis try of Textiles has stated its p osition to the above 
suggestions as below:- 
 
“In a federal set up like India, various State Governm ents having a stake in jute developm ent 
should get an opportunity of bein g represented in the proposed Jute Board.  Nom ination of a 
particular State perm anently will create hear tburns among other jute growing and consum ing 
States.  Therefore, jute growi ng States including W est Bengal would get representation in the 
Jute Board by rotation.  The dynamics of raw ju te production and consum ption in f uture may 
not remain the sam e as i t is today.  Moreover, most of the organizations representing jute are 
headquartered at Kolkata and they  are proposed to be m embers of the Jute Board.  H owever, if 
the Comm ittee feels that there shou ld be a pe rmanent representative from  the State of West 
Bengal in the Board, the sam e can be included. The Ministry does not recomm end any special 
treatment to Andhra Pradesh as other States similarly situated may also demand similar status”. 
 
Chairman of the Board 
 
29. The Chairman of the proposed National Jute Bo ard will be the Secretary (Textiles) who will be 
at Delhi.  The Board will be headquartered at Kolkata.  When it was asked, how can a body of this kind 
will be able to carry out the m ultifarious functions proposed in the Board, the Ministry of Textiles  in a 
written reply stated as follows:- 
 
“Secretary (Textiles) lo cated at Delhi is the ex -officio Chairm an of va rious other Boards of  
different organizations under this Ministry, which are located outs ide Delhi.  Past experience 
has been that it does not have any adverse effect on the working of these organizations.  The 
role of the Chairman is not to hand le the day to day activities of the board; such powers would 
be delegated to subordinate f unctionaries of the Board.  Th e Chairm an would provide an 
overall supervisory guidance to the Board.  Si nce Secretary (Tex tiles) would be having 
experience, background and resources to coordi nate the activities of  the board, and is non-
political he would be the best choice for s mooth functioning of the Board.  Mem ber Secretary 
of Jute Board would be the key f unctionary for day-to-day activities.  He will be  full time, and 
located in Kolkata to take care of multifarious functions of the Board”. 
 
30. As proposed in the Bill, there will b e six members from the jute indus try.  When the Minis try 
of Textiles was asked to comm ent whether the Chairman of the Board  can be elected from among the 
members from the jute industry, the Ministry’s comments were as below:- 
 
“It is a general practice to ha ve ex-officio chairpersons of the commodity boards under various 
Ministries of Government of India.  The positio n with regard to each of t he commodity boards 
under Ministry of Comm erce are T obacco Board – Chairman is appoin ted by Governm ent of 
India (Section 4 (4) (a) of The Tobacco Board Act; (ii) The Spices Board – Chairm an is  
appointed by Government of India (Section 3 (a) of The Spices Board Act, 1986); (iii) The Tea 
Board – Chairm an is appointed by Governm ent of India (S ection 4 (3 ) (a) of The Coffee Act,  
2006); and The Rubber Board – Chai rman is appointed by Governm ent of India (Section 4 (3) 
(a) of The Rubber Act, 2006).  The position w ith regard to the lone commodity Board under 
 14

Ministry of Rural and Agro Industries i.e. the Co ir Board is that the Ch airman is appointed by  
the Central Government under Section 4 (4) of the Coir Ind ustry Act, 1953.  The position with 
regard to the Silk Board under Mi nistry of Textiles is that th e Chairman is appointed by the 
Central Governm ent under Section 4 (3) (a) of the Central Silk Board Act, 1948.  From the  
above, it is clear that the commodity boards under the Govern ment of India have Chairpersons 
either nom inated/appointed by the Central G overnment  or a functi onary of the Central 
Government is m ade ex-officio Chairperson of the Boards.  As m ost of the m embers are ex -
officio members of the Board, election to the p ost of Chairperson will not add any qualita tive 
value to the post of Chairperson”. 
 
31. Government of W est Bengal and All India Ag ragami Kishan Sabha, Kolkata have suggested 
that the Secretary in charge of the Ministry of Agri culture should be ex-officio Chairman of the Board.  
In this regard, the Ministry of Te xtiles has comm ented that the M inistry of Agriculture is primarily 
concerned with cultivation of jute as a crop.  Thereaf ter, all activities relating to the post harvesting of 
raw jute an d the value addition in it and its div ersification pertains to the Minis try of Textiles.  All 
major commodity Boards like Tea Board, Coffee Board, Rubber Board etc. are outsid e the Ministry of 
Agriculture.  Theref ore, the Minis try of Textiles is the m ost appropriate Ministry to handle the  issues 
relating to the Board.  Thus, Secretary (Textiles) has been proposed as Chairman. 
 
Other issues on composition of the Board 
 
32. In this Bill, it has been stated that n on-official members of the Board will also be nom inated.  
When asked whether the non-official m embers of the Board m ay be elected for the democratic 
functioning of the Board, the Minis try of Textiles had commented that election as a mode of  selecting 
members from the respectiv e categories will entail a  lot of adm inistrative and legal responsibility on 
the Jute Board, which m ay take c onsiderable tim e and effort as we ll as funds for conducting such 
elections.  It has been further stat ed by the Ministry that if the sugge stion is accepted, this may lead to 
politicization of the Board, as well as digress the Board from its primary functions. 
 
33. Sub-Clause 5 of the Clause 3 of Chapter-II of the Bill states that the term of offi ce of the 
members other than the  ex-officio members, and the manner of filling vacancies a nd the procedure to 
be followed in the discharge of their functions by, such members hall be as may be prescribed. In 
this regard, when the Ministry of Textiles were asked, whether it would feasible to fix the term of the 
members other than ex-officio members as three years, the Ministry has replied as follows:- 
 
“Ex-officio m embers of the propos ed Nationa l Jute Board  will be from  the Governm ent 
officials holding appropriate office either in th e Central or the Sta te Governments.  They will 
not hold th e m embership of  the Board in their ind ividual capac ity.  Hence, it will be 
inappropriate to fix the term  of these m embers.  The reason for fixing the term  for the non-
official members for three years is to give re presentation to other indi viduals having sufficient 
knowledge and expertise in the jute sector to be represented in the propos ed Board.  However, 
fixing such term for non-official members does not preclude their being nominated again to the 
Board.  Moreover, in a Federal set up like India, various segments of society having a stake in 
jute development should get an opportunity of being represented in th e proposed Jute Board.  
For this reason, a fixed term  has been proposed.  The proposed Board will be deprived of the 
opportunity to use the services of  other representatives when the term of existing non-official  
members is fixed permanently”. 
 
34. In regard to determ ination by regulations of the procedure to be followed in discharge of the  
functions of the Board and the quorum  at meetings of the Board, the Mi nistry of Textiles clarified that 
 15

it is a general practice in drafting a legislation that the procedural issues are handled in subordinate 
Legislations i.e. Rules and Regulations, incorporating the procedures in the Bill would result in rigidity 
in the functioning of the Board.  The Board should ha ve flexibility in fram ing and altering procedural 
matters for effective functioning.  Therefore, these are not part of the Bill. 
  
35. All India Agragami Kishan Sabha, Kolkata also suggested that one member of the rank of Joint 
Secretary of the Department of Cooperation of Central Government should be a member of the Board.  
The Ministry in its co mments has stated that it is no t averse to  the suggestion  if the Co mmittee 
recommends for the sam e.  Howe ver, it should be taken care of that the Board does not becom e 
unwieldy . However, only those orga nizations that m ay have direct bearing on the objectives of the 
Board should have a representation, otherwise there is a fear of the Board becoming politicized.  
 
36. Paschim Be ngal Pradeshik Krishak Sabha, Kolk ata and A ll India Agragani Kishan Sabha, 
Kolkata had suggested that Mem bers of Parliament  and Members of Le gislative Assembly concerned 
with jute cultivation should be nominated to the Na tional Jute Board.  The Minis try of Textiles is not 
averse to this suggestion. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Suggestions regarding functions of the Board 
 
37. Paschim Bengal Pradeshik Krishak Sabha, Kolkat a has suggested that a sub-clause should be  
incorproqted in the Bill to ensure research on Jute seed to improve the quality and shortening gestation 
period of jute crop.  The Ministry of Textiles is not averse to this suggestion. 
 
38. Sub-Clause 2 (xiv) of Clause 5 of Chapter-III of the Bill is as under:- 
 
“maintain and im prove existing m arkets and to develop new m arkets w ithin the country and 
outside for jute m anufactures and to devise marketing stra tegies in consonan ce with the  
demand for such manufactures in the domestic and international markets”. 
 
39. Paschim Bengal Pradeshik Krisha k Sabha, Kolkata has suggested th at the word “m aintain” of 
this Sub-Clause should be replaced by the word “protect”.  The Ministry of Textiles has commented on 
this suggestion that the word “p rotect” may entail res ponsibilities having huge fi nancial implications 
which cannot be forseen now.  Therefore, it is felt that “maintain” may remain. 
 
40. Paschim Bengal Pradeshik Krishak Sabha, Kolkata, All India Agragami Kishan Sabha, Kolkata 
and Bengal Provincial Mazdoor U nion, Kolkata have suggested that an assurance of rem unerative 
price to jute growers is to be in cluded in the Bill.  In this r egard, the Ministry has stated that the Jute 
Corporation of India Lim ited is th e agency concerned th e procurement of raw jute and allied m atters.  
Therefore, it m ay not be necessary to include th e proposed provision in  the Bill.  It has further been 
stated by the Ministry that the Jute Board has a m andate for overall development of Jute Sector which 
in turn will take ca re o f ensuring r emunerative pri ces to jute growers  and that th e inclu sion of  the 
remunerative prices for raw jute in the Jute Boar d Bill may not be proper as it does not fall under the 
direct jurisdiction of th e National Jute Board.  
 
 16

41. Institute of Jute Techno logy, Kolkata has app ealed to the Comm ittee to include a Sub-Clause 
under Clause 5 (2) of Chapter-III of  the Bill, “To undertake measures for sustainable Human Resource 
Development of the ju te secto r an d provide the n ecessary funds for the sam e”.  The Ministry of 
Textiles welcomed this suggestion and has stated that  the Jute Board is likely to m ake endeavors for 
the sustainable development in jute sector.  
 
42. Indian Jute Mills Ass ociation (IJ MA), Kolk ata has sug gested that the whole Chapter on 
modernization and technology developm ent is missing from the Jute Board.  The Ministry of Textiles 
has welcomed this suggestion and is of the view th at a clause on m odernization may be inserted under 
Clause 5 Chapter-III of the Bill. 
 
43. Indian Jute Mills Association has suggested that Clause 5 (2) (xv) may be expanded to include 
a concerted programme for modernization and technological upgradatio n of the m anufacturing sector, 
bench m arking through technology Audit to assess the technological status of the jute industry, 
formulation of five-year plan for machinery development for the organized sector and establishment of 
a separate R&D set up in th e area of public-private partnership.  This w ill be in a ccordance with the 
guidelines in the Nation al Jute Policy 2005..  The Mi nistry of Textiles in  its comm ents on th e above 
suggestion has stated that the Board, after form ation will fram e its own policies on the subject of 
modernization technology, upgradation etc.  As these are a m atter of policy details, they cannot be the 
part of the Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
44. Indian Jute Mills Association ha s also suggested that a provision should be incorporated in the 
Bill for the incorporation of an Export Promotion Council.  In this re gard, the Ministry of Textiles has 
stated that creation of an Export Prom otion Council will be a policy decision of the Jute Board, 
depending upon the requirem ent, resources, availability etc.  Therefore, it m ay not form a part of the 
Bill. 
 
45. Representatives of Government of Andhra Prades h has suggested that it should be specified in 
the Bill that which organizati on will determine Min imum Support Price for ju te and who will 
implement Minimum Support Price.  In this regard, the Ministry of Textiles stated as follows:- 
 
“No Ministry of Textiles does not agree.  The remunerative prices of agricultural commodities 
is declared by the Ministry of Agricultu re based on the recommendation of the Commission of 
Agricultural Commodities and Pricing (CACP).  M.S.P. operations are concluded by Jute  
Corporation of India.  National Jute Board does not have jurisdiction to fix M.S.P.”. 
 
46. In regard to the welfare of the jute workers the suggestions received from various organizations 
and the comments of the Ministry of Textiles there to are as follows:- 
 
Sl.No. Name of 
Stakeholders 
Clause Thrust of the suggestion Comments of the Ministry 
of Textiles 
1 Paschim Bangal 
Pradeshik 
Krishak Sabha, 
Kolkata 
 
 
Chapter-III 
5 (xviii) 
Jute board should secure 
better working co ndition 
and initiate  provision for 
process of i mplementation 
of social sec urity measures- 
To m ake efforts for the 
In order to  provide flexibility 
to the Board, it should be left 
to its wisdom to take it up. 
 17

 
Bengal 
Provincial 
 Chatkal    
Mazdoor Union,  
Kolkata 
 
JCI Off icers 
Association, 
Kolkata 
 
welfare of workers. 
2. Sanjukta Kisan 
Sabha, Kolkata 
-do- The Jute Board Bill will 
take adequate measures f or 
the welfar e of workers 
engaged in the jute industry 
It is already a part of the 
functions of  the propo sed 
Board. 
3. Federation of 
Chatkal Mazdoor  
Unions, Kolkata 
  In the introduction of t he 
Bill, suitable words should 
be inserted to protect the 
interest and  i mprove the 
livelihood and workin g 
conditions of  jute grower s 
and jute workers. 
There is no need to insert  
such words as the proposed 
Jute Board is aimed at 
development of the 
cultivation, manufacture and 
marketing of jute and jute 
products an d for  m atters 
connected therewith.  H ence, 
the protection of the interests 
of the jute growers and jute 
workers are im plicit and 
employed. 
 
Miscellaneous suggestions 
 
47. Government of West Bengal, Paschim Bengal Pradeshik Krishak Sabha, Kolkata, and All India 
Agragani Kishan Sabha, Kolkata have suggested that head office of the national Jute Board should be  
located at K olkata and r egional c enters of  the Board m ay be opened.  The Minis try of Textile s has 
clarified in this regard that although the Head Office will be located at Kolkata, the provision of “other 
places” has been made only as  a means to be adopted  in the event of any unforeseen exigencies.  The  
Ministry has agreed to the suggestion that regional offices may be opened. 
 
48. Jute Manufactures Developm ent Council, Kolkat a has suggested that a provision should be 
incorporated in the  proposed Bill f or getting exemption from the payment of  Income Tax and W ealth 
Tax, since the Government fund is proposed to be involved in the discharge of the Board, and also 
since the Board does n ot seek to m ake any c ommercial transaction.  The Minis try of Textiles is not 
averse to this suggestion. 
 
49. Paschim Be ngal Pradeshik Krishal Sabha, Kolk ata and A ll India Agragani Kishan Sabha, 
Kolkata have  suggested that Sub-Clause 13 (1) of Chapter V of the Bill may be omitted as it may give 
blanket permission for the Government to supersede the Board.  In this re gard the Ministry of Textiles 
clarified its position as under:- 
 
“The Jute Board will get com plete autonomy to function.  However, in order to ensure certain 
unforeseen circumstances apart from the condition of non discharge of duties by Jute Board and 
the financial or the administrative crises, the clause 13 (C ) has been proposed in the Bill which 
will take care the interest of the Jute Board in rea l sense.  This has f urther been stated that th is 
 18

provision is only envisaged to be an enabling provision to be used during grave em ergencies 
that might severely affect the functioning of the Board”. 
 
50. During the recent vis it of the Committee to Hyde rabad, the representatives of the Governm ent 
of Andhra Pradesh app rised th e Comm ittee th at the  Ju te  is bast natural fibre and is an importan t 
renewal resource.  Mesta is also a bast fibre but belongs to a sepa rate breed called Kenaf.  Andhra 
Pradesh is an im portant hom e for Mesta (Ken af) part icularly in th e d istricts of  Vizian agaram and 
Srikakulam.  In the Bill it is im portant that Jute should be define d to include Mesta specifically.  
Further, with the recent launch of Jute Technology Mission which also looks at fibres like ramie, sisal, 
it is im portant th at the  express ion Jute is de fined com prehensively keeping future developm ent 
milestones in mind.  The Ministry of Textiles in its comments on the incorporation of a comprehensive 
definition on jute has stated  that this requires a se parate exercise to be completed in consultation with 
the Ministry of Agriculture, Depa rtment of Science and Technology etc.   Som e of the natural fibres 
have narcotic effects and therefore, bringing the m into the a mbit of the jute f ibres will cau se serious 
complications.  Theref ore, including other f ibres while def ining jute in the Nation al Jute Boa rd Bill 
may cause complications instead of helping the jute fibres. 
 
Functioning of Jute Corporation of India 
 
51. During the study v isits of the Comm ittee to Guwahati, Kolk ata, Bhubaneshwar and  
Vijaynagaram (Andhra Pradesh) jute farmers have aired their views on the inadequacy of operations of 
Jute Corporation of India particul arly in regard to less num ber of procurement centers operated by JCI 
and to procurement of very less amount of raw jute from farmers.  They are of the view that JCI should 
procure m ost of the raw jute produced by them .
 19

 
 
 
52. The Committee note that the Bill seeks to  establish a National Jute Board for the 
development of  the cultiva tion, manufacture and marketing of jute and jute  products.  The 
propossed National J ute Board w ill act as an umbrella body  for the e ntire ju te sector,  
particularly to avoid the multiplicity of efforts and programmes of various organi zations in the 
jute sector.  However, subsequently, it has been clarified by the Ministry of Textiles that this may 
be a long te rm objective.  Initially the primary objective of establishing the National Jute Board 
is to coordinate and integrate the developmen tal programmes of various organ izations engaged 
in the jute secto r.  Presently,  seven organi zations of the Mi nistry o f Textiles and three 
organizations of the Ministry of Agriculture are engaged in jute sect or.  However, it is propose d 
to merge only two organizations, namely, The Jute Manufactures Development Council (JMDC) 
and the National Centre for Jute Diversifica tion (NCJD).  The Committee have noted that bot h 
these organizations are having ove rlapping functions. As regards merger of oth er organizations 
engaged in the sector such as Jute Corporation of  India, Office of the Jute Commissioner, etc., it 
has been stated that these organiz ations are performing their assigned duties effectively and that 
their merger at this sta ge will create legal and administrative hassles and such a behemoth may 
lose focus on its assig ned duties.  The reaso ns put forth by the Ministry  of Textiles for not 
merging various organizations engaged in the jute sector in the proposed National Jute Board is 
not acceptable to the Committee due to th e fact that the goals of the Bill, i.e.  formation of an 
umbrella body for the entire jute sector, can only be ach ieved by bringing in all the cons tituents 
under one roof.  The Committee,  therefo re, recomm end that the N ational Jute Board may be 
established by merging various organi zations engaged in the jute sector for the integrated and 
effective developmen t of the jute  secto r.   
 
 
 20

 
53. The Committee regret to note that no represen tation has been made for the jute farmers 
and the jute w orkers in the National Jute  B oard Bill particu larly w hen provision of three 
members to represent jute farmers and three members  to represen t jute w orkers  exists in the 
Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983.  In this regard, the Committee also note that 
overwhelming majority of stakeh olders have sugge sted to make a suitable  provision to include 
representatives of farmers and workers in the Board.   In the Bill, provisions h ave been made to 
include rep resentatives of manufa cturers o f both the  organiz ed and the decentraliz ed sectors 
and exporters, but th e interes ts of jute farmers  and jute w orkers have been ignored.  The 
Committee take a s erious view of this lapse a nd feel that the a im of integrated development of 
the jute sector may prove futile due to  non-participation of jute farmers and jute w orkers in the 
Board. The Committee, therefore, recommend that three of  representatives of farmers,  one 
from the State of West Bengal  and tw o from other States on rotational basis an d three 
representatives of w orkers, one from the State of  West Bengal and t wo from other States on 
rotational basis, should be included in the National Jute Board. 
54. The Committee have also noted that no pr ovision has been made for the inclusion of 
experts from jute tech nology and the related fiel ds in th e Board, while  the Jute Manufactures 
Development Council Act, 1983, provides for appoin tment of five such members in the Jute  
Manufactures Develo pment Council.  The Committee  fail to understand the logic behind this  
non-inclusion of experts in the B oard.  In this  regard, the Committee  are of the view  that th e 
suggestions of the expe rts in the ju te field will be of immense value to the Board in its  initiatives 
for the dev elopment o f jute secto r.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recomme nd th at at leas t two 
experts from the field of jute technology and related fields should included in the Board. 
  
 
 21

 
55. The Committee have noted that tw o  Members  each will represent jute industry in the 
organized sector and the decentra lized sector.  Organized sector an d decentralized sectors are 
broad terms that connote the larg e mill sector and tiny and small industries, respectively.  No 
definition is available in the Bill to substantiate  these terms.  The Committee are of the view that 
the term “ decentralized sector” may be suitably de fined as it w ill actually be nefit the tiny and 
small industries engaged in the manufacture of ju te products.  The Com mittee, therefore, 
recommend that definition of thes e terms should be  incorporated in  the definition part of the 
Bill. 
56. The Committee are of the view that Participation of People’s representatives in the Board 
will help  various sec tions of  the  jute s ector to  air  the ir view s in the Board and to arrive a t 
decisions w hich w ill r esult in ov erall developmen t of the sec tor, particu larly  guarding the  
interests of the farmers, w orkers and tiny a nd small industries.  The Committee, therefore 
recommend that three representatives from Parliament, i.e. two Members of Lok Sabha a nd one 
Member of Rajya Sabha should also be Members of the Board. 
57. In regard to functions of the Board, th e Committee recommend that Provisions should be 
made in the Bill on th e following suggestions made by various stakeholders:  (a) To undertake 
research on jute seed to improve quality and to sh orten the gesta tion period of jute crop ; (b) to  
incorporate measures for susta inable Huma n Reso urce Development of the jute secto r and to  
provide necessary funds for th e same; (c) Mo dernization of jute sector and technology 
development; and (d) to take step s to protec t the interests of jute g rowers and w orkers and to 
promote th eir w elfare by improving their live lihood avenues and by providing them social 
security benefits. 
 
 
 22

 
 
58. The Committee note that jute is  a bast natural fibre an d Mesta is also a bast fibre w hich 
belongs to a separate breed called Kenaf.    In the Bill,  the term “jute” has not been defined.  As 
such, this Bill may  not actually  benefit the Mesta gro wers in various State s.  The Commit tee, 
therefore, recommend that a definition of “jute” should be incorporated in the definitions part of 
the Bill w hich should include Mes ta (Kenaf) to benefit the jute farmers in the Mesta prod ucing 
States, particularly Andhra Pradesh. 
 
59. During the study visits of the Committee to  West Bengal, Orissa and Andhra Pradesh, 
farmers had aired their view s strongly on the inad equacy of operations of Jute Corporation of  
India particularly w ith regard to less number of  procurement centres being operated by them.  
Moreso, the procurement centers are not being oper ated on an  even pace in all the States 
resulting  procuremen t of very less quantity of raw  jute by JCI fro m farmers.  The Committee  
are of the view that Jute Corporation of India is  the field level organization directly dealing with 
the farmers and if there is any sh ortcoming in its func tions,  it would impede the grow th of the 
jute sector in general and  w elfare of the jute farmers in pa rticular.   Hen ce, the Committe e 
recommend that sufficient number of procuremen t cen ters, including mob ile ones, should be 
opened by the appropriate body which w ould be established after the formation of the National  
Jute Board, to procure maximum quantity of raw jute from the far mers.    Action taken in this 
regard should be intimated to the Committee every three months. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY  
           CHAIRMAN, 
2 November, 2006                             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
11 Kartika, 1928 (Saka)                                     
 23

 
       ANNEXURE-I 
 
 
List of O rganisations w ho have subm itted their suggestions in w riting to the 
Standing Committee on Labour on “The National Jute Board Bill, 2006.” 
 
1. All India Kisan Sabha, Assam State Council, Guwahati 
2. Assam Employees’ Union, Guwahati 
3.      Jute Corporation of India Officers’ Association, Kolkata 
4.      Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkata 
          5.       The Jute Corporation of India Staff Organisation, Kolkata 
   6. Paschim Banga Pradeshik Krishak Sabha, Kolkata 
7.      Jute Manufactures Development Council, Kolkata 
8. Joint Action Committee of Unions and Associ ations of Autonom ous 
Research Institutions (JACARI), West Bengal 
9. JMDC Employees’ Association, Kolkata 
10.  Joint Council of Officers & Employees of the Jute Corporation of       India 
Limited, Kolkata 
11.  West Bengal Provincial Kisan Sabha, Kolkata 
          12. Bengal Chatkal Mazdoor Union, Kolkata 
13. Sanjukta Kisan Sabha, Kolkata 
14.      Institute of Jute Technology, Kolkata 
15.      Assam Jute Grower’s Association, Nagaon 
16.      The Jute Balers’ Association, Kolkata 
17. Bengal Provincial Chatkal Mazdoor Union, Kolkata 
18. National Union of Jute Textile Workers, Kolkata 
19. All India Agragami Kishan Sabha, Kolkata 
20. Paschim Banga Chatkal Mazdoor Federation, Kolkata 
21. Orissa Krushak Mahasangh, Bhubaneswar 
22. All India Kishan Sabha 
23. Federation of Chatkal Mazdoor Unions 
24. Orissa Krushak Mahasangh, Bhubaneshwar 
 
State Governments :- 
 
1.   Government of West Bengal 
2.   Government of Meghalaya 
3. Government of Assam 
 
 
 
 
 
 24

 
 
     ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD BILL, 2006 
_________ 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
_________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD 
3. Constitution and incorporation of Board. 
4. Secretary and other officers. 
 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTION OF THE BOARD 
5. Functions of Board. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT 
 
6. The Council and Society to vest in Board. 
7. General effect of vesting of Council and Society in Board. 
8. Licences, etc., to be deemed to have been granted to Board. 
9. Tax exemption or benefit to continue to have effect. 
10. Guarantee to be operative. 
11. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of Council and 
Society. 
 
CHAPTER V 
POWER OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
 
12. Directions by Central Government. 
13. Supersession of Board. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
14. Grants and loans by Central Government. 
15. Budget. 
16. Annual report 
 25

17. Accounts and audit. 
18. Laying of annual and auditor's report before Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
SERVER 5 \ BILL2004 \ LAW \ 142LAW.p65 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
CLAUSES 
 
19. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
20. Officers and employees of Board to be public servants. 
21. Power to make rules. 
22. Power to make regulations. 
23. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
24. Power to remove difficulties. 
25. Amendment of Act 28 of 1983. 
26. Repeal and savings. 
 
SERVER 5 \ BILL2004 \ LAW \ 142LAW.p65 
(ii) 
 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
 
 26

           
THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD BILL, 2006 
A 
BILL 
 
to provide for the establishment of a National Jute Board for the development of the 
cultivation, manufacture and marketing of jute and jute products and for matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Jute Board Act, 2006. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 49 of 2006 
 
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
(a) “appointed day” m eans such date as the Central Government may, by notifi cation in the Official 
Gazette, appoint for the purpose of section 3; 
(b) “Board” means the National Jute Board constituted under section 3; 
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board; 
(d) “Council” m eans the Jute Manufactures Developm ent Council established under section 3 of t he 
Jute Manufactures Development Council Act,1983; 
(e) “jute manufacture” shall have th e same meaning as assigned to it in the Jute Manufactures Cess 
Act, 1983; 
(f) “member” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairperson; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(h) “regulations” means regulations made by the Board 3. ( 1) With effect from the appointed day, the 
Central Government shall, by  notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, for th e purposes of this  
Act, a Board to be called the National Jute Board. 
 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the na me afore said, having  perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dis pose of property, both mova ble and immovable, and 
to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
 
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Kolkata in the State of West Bengal or such other places as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Of ficial Gazette, specify and the Board m ay, with 
the previous approval of the Centra l Government, establish offices or agencies at o ther places in o r 
outside India under this Act; 
 
 
 
 27

 
 
 
(i) “Society” m eans the Na tional Centre for Jute Diversifica tion, a society set up by the C entral 
Government in the Ministry of Textiles and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; 
(j) “year” m eans the year comm encing on the 1st day of April and ending on the 31st day of March 
next following. 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD 
  
(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) the Secretary in charge of the m inistry of the Central Government dealing with textiles, who shall 
be the ex officio Chairperson of the Board; 
(b) the Add itional Secr etary and F inancial Adviser, M inistry of  Textiles, Govern ment of  India, ex 
officio; 
(c) the Joint Secretary (Jute) in the Ministry of Textiles, Government of India, ex officio; 
(d) two m embers of the rank of J oint Secretary to  be nom inated by the Central Governm ent to 
represent respectively the ministries of the Central Government dealing with— 
 
(i) agriculture, and 
(ii) food and public distribution; 
 
(e) three members to be nominated by the Central Government by rotation in th e alphabetical order to 
represent respectively the Governme nts of the States of Andhra Prad esh, Assa m, Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Orissa, Tripura and W est Bengal; the nom ination sha ll be from  officials of the State Governm ent 
holding the rank of Secretary to the State Government and dealing with Jute or Textile matters; 
 
Definitions. 
 
Constitution and incorporation of Board. 
 
27 of 1983. 
28 of 1983. 
21 of 1860. 
 
3 
(f) two m embers to be appointed by the Central Governm ent to repres ent the jute industry in the 
organized sector; 
(g) two m embers to be appointed by the Central Gove rnment to represent the jute industry in the 
decentralized sector; 
(h) two m embers to be appointed by the Central G overnment to represent the exporters of jute 
products; 
(i) the Director, Indian Jute Industries Research Association, ex officio; 
(j) the Principal, Institute of Jute Technology, ex officio; 
(k) the Director, Nation al In stitute of Research  on Jute an d A llied Fibre Techno logy, Kolkata, ex 
officio; 
(l) the Director, Central Research Institute for Jute and Allied Fibres, ex officio; 
(m) the Chairman and Managing Director, Jute Corporation of India, ex officio; 
 28

(n) the Jute Commissioner, ex officio; 
(o) the Secretary, National Jute Board, who shall be the ex officio Member- 
Secretary of the Board. 
 
(5) The term of office of the m embers, other than the ex officio members, and th e manner of f illing 
vacancies among, and the procedu re to be followed in the discharg e of their functions by, such 
members shall be as may be prescribed. 
(6) The office of members of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being 
a member of either House of Parliament. 
(7) The Chairperson shall, in addi tion to presiding over the m eetings of the Board, exercise and 
discharge such powers and duties of  the Board as may be assigned to him by the Board and such other 
powers and duties as may be prescribed. 
(8) The Board shall elect from  among its members a Vice-Chairperson who shall exercis e such of the 
powers and perform  such of the functions of the Ch airperson as m ay be prescribed or as m ay be  
delegated to him by the Chairperson. 
(9) The Board shall m eet at such tim es and places a nd shall observe such procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its m eetings (including the quorum at m eetings) as may be determ ined by 
regulations. 
 
4. (1) The Central Government may appoint the Secretary and such other officers and employees 
as it considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of the functions of the Board under this Act. 
 
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board 
shall be such as may be determined by regulations. 
 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD 
 
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote th e development of jute a nd jute products by such 
measures as it thinks fit. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Board may 
undertake measures to— 
(i) evolve an integrated approach to jute cultivation in the matters of formulation 
of schemes, extension work, implementation and evaluation of schemes aimed at 
increasing the yield of jute and improving the quality thereon; 
(ii) promote production of better quality raw jute; 
(iii) enhance productivity of raw jute; 
 
Secretary and other officers  
 
Functions of Board. 
 
4 
 
(iv) promote or undertake arrangements for better marketing and stabilization of the prices of raw jute; 
(v) promote standardisation of raw jute and jute products; 
(vi) suggest norms of efficiency for jute industry with a view to eliminating waste, obtaining optimum 
production, improving quality and reducing costs; 
(vii) propagate information useful to the growers of raw jute and manufacturers of jute products; 
(viii) promote and undertake measures for quality control of raw jute and jute products; 
 29

(ix) assist and encourag e studies an d research for improvement of processing, quality, techn iques of 
grading and packaging of raw jute; 
(x) promote or undertake surveys or studies aimed at collection and fo rmulation of statistics regarding 
raw jute and jute products; 
(xi) promote standardisation of jute manufactures; 
(xii) prom ote the developm ent of production of jute manufactures by increas ing the efficiency and 
productivity of the jute industry; 
(xiii) sponsor, assist, coordinate, encourage or undertake scientif ic, technological, econom ic and 
marketing research pertaining to the jute sector; 
(xiv) m aintain and im prove existing m arkets and to  develop new m arkets within the country and 
outside for jute m anufactures and to  devise marketing strategies in consonance with the dem and for 
such manufactures in the domestic and international markets; 
(xv) sponsor, assist, coordinate or encourage scient ific, technological and econom ic research in the  
matters related to m aterials, equipm ent, me thods of production, product developm ent including 
discovery and developm ent of ne w m aterials, equipm ent and m ethods and im provements in those 
already in use in the jute industry; 
(xvi) provide and create necessary infrastructural facilities and conditions 
conducive to the development of diversified jute products by way of assisting the 
entrepreneurs, artisans, craftsman, designers, manufacturers, exporters, non- 
Governmental agencies in the following manner, namely:— 
(a) transfer of technolog y from research and dev elopment institutions and other organisations in India 
and abroad; 
(b) providing support services  to the entrepreneurs for the implem entation of their pr ojects including 
technical guidance and training; 
(c) organizing entrepreneurial development programmes; 
(d) planning and executing m arket promotion strategies including exhibitions, dem onstrations, media 
campaigns in India and abroad; 
(e) providing financial assistance by way of subsidy or seed capital; 
(f) providing a forum  to the people engaged or intere sted in dive rsified jute products for interacting 
with various national and international agencies, engaged in the jute and jute textile sector; 
(xvii) organize workshops, conferences , lectures, sem inars, refresher courses and set up study groups 
and conduct training programm es for the purpose of promotion and developm ent of jute and jute 
products; 
(xviii) secure better working conditions and pro visions and im provement of am enities and in centives 
for workers engaged in the jute industry; 
(xix) register jute growers and manufacturers on optional basis; 
 
5 
 
(xx) collect statistics with regard to jute and jute products for compilation and publication; 
(xxi) subscribe to the share capital o f or enter into any arran gement (whether by way of partnership,  
joint venture or any other manner) with any other body corporate for the purpose of promoting the jute 
sector or for promotion and marketing of jute and jute products in India and abroad. 
 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Board— 
 
(a) to advise the Central Government on all matters relating to the development 
of raw jute and the jute industry, including import and export of jute and jute 
products; 
(b) to prepare and furnish reports relating to the jute sector as may be required 
 30

by the Central Government from time to time. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
CHAPTER IV 
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT 
 
6. (1) On and from  the appointed day, there shall be tr ansferred to, and vest i n, the Board constituted 
under section 3, the Council and the Society. 
 
(2) The Council and the Society w hich is transferred to, and whic h vests in, the Board under sub-
section ( 1) shall b e dee med to include all asse ts, r ights, p owers, auth orities and privileges and all 
property movable and immovable, real or personal, co rporeal or incorporeal, pr esent or contingent, of 
whatever nature and wheresoev er situate, incl uding lands, buildings, m achinery, equipm ents, cash 
balances, capital, reserves, reserv e funds, investm ents, tenancies, leases and book debts and all other 
rights and interests arising out of such property as were im mediately before the appointed day in the 
ownership or possession or power of the Council, or as the case may be, the Society, whether within or 
outside India, all books of account a nd documents relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include 
all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting 
of the Society, or as the case may be, the Council. 
 
7. (1) All contracts,  agreem ents and workin g ar rangements subsisting imm ediately before the 
appointed day and affe cting the C ouncil, or as the cas e may be, the Society shall, in so far as they 
relate to the Council, or as the case may be, the Society, cease to have effect or be enforceable against 
the Council, or as the case m ay be, the Society and sh all be of as full force and effect against or in 
favour of the Board in which the Council and the So ciety have vested by virtue of this A ct and 
enforceable as fully and effectively as if, instead of  the Council, or as the case may be, the Society, the 
Board had been named therein or had been a party thereto. 
 
(2) Any proceeding, su it or cause of action pend ing or existing immediately before the appointed day  
by or against the Council or the Society may, as from that day, be continued and enforced by or against 
the Board in which it has vested by virtue of this Act,  as it might have been enforced by or against the 
Council or the Society if this Act had not been passe d, and shall cease to be enforceable by or against 
the Council or, as the case may be, the Society. 
 
8. With effe ct from  the appointed day, all licences , perm its, quotas and exem ptions, granted to the 
Council or the Society in connectio n with the affairs and business of  the Council, or as the case m ay 
be, the Society , under any law for t he time being in force, shall be deemed to have been granted to the 
Board in which the Council and the Society have vested by virtue of this Act. 
 
9. (1) Where any exemption from, or any assessment with respect to, any tax has been granted or made 
or any benefit by way of  set off or carry forward,  as the case m ay be, of any unabsorbed depreciation 
or investment allowance or other allowance or loss has been extended or is available to the Council or 
the Society, under the Income-tax Act, The Council and Society to vest in Board. 
General effect of vesting of Council and Society in Board. Licences, etc., to be deemed to have been 
granted to Board. Tax exemption or benefit to continue to have effect. 
 31

 
1961, such exem ption, assessment or benefit shall contin ue to have effect in relation to the Board in 
which the Council and the Society have vested by virtue of this Act.  
 
(2) W here any paym ent m ade by the Council or the Society is exem pted from  deduction of tax at 
source under any p rovision of the Incom e-tax Act, 1961, the exem ption from tax will con tinue to b e 
available as if the provisions of the said Act m ade applicable to  the Council or the Society were 
operative in relation to the Board in which the Council and the Societ y have vested by virtue of this 
Act. 
(3) The transfer and vesting of the Council or the Society in terms of section 6 shall not be construed as 
a transfer within the meaning of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the purposes of capital gains. 
 
10. Any guarantee given for or in favour of the Council or the Society with respect to any loan or lease 
finance shall continue to be operative in relation to the Board in which the Council and the S ociety 
have vested by virtue of this Act. 
 
11. (1) ( a) Every officer or other em ployee of the C ouncil serving in its em ployment i mmediately 
before the appointed day shall, in so far as such  officer or other em ployee is em ployed in connection 
with the Council which has vested in  the Board by virtue of this Act,  becomes, as from the appointed 
day, an officer, or as the case may be, other employee of the Board. 
 
(b) Every of ficer or other em ployee of the Society serving in its em ployment immediately before the 
appointed day shall, in so far as such officer or  other em ployee is em ployed in connection w ith the 
Society which has vested in the Bo ard by virtue of this Act, becom es, as from  the appointed day, an 
officer, or as the case may be, other employee of the Board. 
 
(2) Every officer or other em ployee of the Council or  the Society who becom es an officer, or as the 
case may be, other em ployee of the Boar d, as referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall hold his office or 
service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration, upon the same terms and conditions, with 
the same obligations and rights and privileges as to leave, insurance, superannuation scheme, provident 
fund, other funds, retirem ent, pensi on, gratuity and other be nefits as he would have held under the  
Council, or as the case may be, the Society, if it had not vested in the Board and shall continue to do so 
as an officer or other employee, as th e case may be, of the Board, or until the expiry of a period of one 
year from  the appointed day if such officer or ot her em ployee opts not to be the officer or other 
employee of the Board within such period: 
 
Provided that if the Board thinks it expedient to extend the period so fixed, it may extend the same up 
to a maximum period of one year. 
 
(3) Where an officer or other em ployee of the Council or the Society op ts under sub-section (2) not to 
be in the em ployment or service of the Board in which the Council and the Society have vested, such 
officer or other employee shall be deemed to have resigned from the respective cadre. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any other law for the 
time being in force, the transfer of  the services of any o fficer or other employee of the Council or the  
Society to the Board sh all not entitle such officer  or other em ployee to any com pensation under this 
Act or any other law for the tim e being in force a nd no such claim  shall be entertained by any court, 
tribunal or other authority. 
(5) The officers and other employees who have retired before the appointed day from the service of the 
Council or the Society and ar e entitled to any benefits, rights or pr ivileges shall be entitled to receive 
 32

the sam e benefits, rights or priv ileges from  the Board in which the Council and the Society have 
vested. 
(6) The trusts of the Provident Fund and Group In surance and Superannuation Schem e of the Council 
or the Society for the welfare of officers or em ployees would continue to disc harge their functions i n 
the Board as was being done hither to in the 43 of 1961. Guarantee to be operative. Provisions in 
respect of officers and other employees of Council and Society. 
14 of 1947. 
43 of 1961. 
43 of 1961. 
 
 
 
 
 
Council or the Society and tax exem ption gran ted to Provident F und or Group Insurance and 
Superannuation Scheme would continue to be applied to the Board. 
 
(7) After the expiry of the period of one year, or the extended pe riod, as referred to in sub-section ( 2), 
all the officers and other employees transferred and appointed to the Board, other than those opting not 
to be the officers or em ployees of the Board with in such period, shall be governed by the rules and 
regulations made by the Board in respect of the service conditions of  the officers and other em ployees 
of the said Board. 
 
CHAPTER V 
POWERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
 
12. (1) The Board shall, in the discha rge of its functions and duties under the relevant statute be bound 
by such direction on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time 
to time: 
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views before 
any direction is given. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final. 
13. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion that— 
(a) on account of grave emergency, the Board is  unable to discharge th e functions and duties imposed 
on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or 
(b) the Board has persistently m ade default in co mplying with any direction issued by the Central 
Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions 
and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default, the 
financial position of the Board or the administration of the Board has deteriorated; or 
(c) that circum stances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do, the C entral 
Government m ay, by notification in the Official G azette, supersede the Board for such period, not  
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification— 
(a) all the members of the Board shall, as from the date of supersession vacate their offices as such; 
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or  under the provisions of the relevant Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on  behalf of the Board shall,until the Board is recon stituted under sub-
section (3), be exercised and discharged by such pers on or persons as the Central Governm ent may 
direct; and 
(c) all prop erty owned or controlle d by the Bo ard shall, until the Boa rd is reconstituted, vest in th e 
Central Government. 
 33

(3) On the expiration of the period  of supersession specified in the notification issued under sub-
section (1), the Centra l Government may reconstitute the Board by  a f resh appointment and in  such 
case any person or persons who vaca ted their offices und er clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2), shall not be 
deemed disqualified for appointment: 
 
Provided that the Central Govern ment m ay, at any tim e, before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, take action under this sub-section. 
 
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification to be issued under subsection 
(1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action 
will be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest. 
Directions by Central Government  
Supersession of the Board. 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
14. (1) The Central Governm ent may, after due appropr iation m ade by Parliam ent by law, in this 
behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sum s of money as that Governm ent may consider 
necessary. 
(2) There s hall be cons tituted a fu nd to be called th e Jute Board Fund and there shall be credited  
thereto— 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government; 
(b) all sum s received by  the Board from such othe r sources as m ay be decided upon  by the Central  
Government. 
(3) The Fund shall be applied for meeting— 
(a) salary, allowances and other re muneration of the m embers, offi cers and other em ployees of the 
Board; 
(b) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions; and 
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act. 
15. The Board shall prepare in s uch form  and at su ch tim e during each fina ncial year, as may be 
prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Board, and forward the same to the Central Government. 
16. The Board shall p repare in such f orm and at s uch time, each financial year , as may be prescribed, 
its annual report, giving a full accoun t of its activities during the prev ious financial year and subm it a 
copy thereof to the Central Government. 
17. The accounts of the Board shall be m aintained and audited in such manner as may, in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be p rescribed and the Board sh all furnish to th e 
Central Government before such date, as m ay be prescribed, an audited copy of its accounts, together 
with the auditor’s report thereon. 
18. The Central Governm ent shall cause the annual repo rt and auditor’s report to  be laid, as so on as 
may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
19. No suit, prosecution  or other legal proceed ing sh all lie agains t the Central Gov ernment, or the 
Board or any member of the Board,  or any officer or other employee of the Ce ntral Government or of 
 34

the Board or any other person aut horised by the Central Governm ent or the Board, for anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder. 
20. All officers and employees of the Board shall, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the 
provisions of this Act or of any ru le or regulation m ade thereunder, be deemed to be  public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
21. (1) The Central Governm ent may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to car ry out 
the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without pr ejudice to the generality of th e foregoing power, such rules m ay 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the term of office and other conditions of serv ice of the m embers of the Board under sub-section 
(5) of section 3; 
(b) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (7) of section 3;  
 
Grants and loans by the Central Government. 
Budget. 
Annual report. 
Accounts and audit. 
Laying of annual and auditor’s report before Parliament. 
Protection of action taken in good faith. 
Officers and employees of Board to be public servants. 
Power to make rules. 
 
45 of 1860. 
 
(c) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairperson under sub-section (8) of section 3 ; 
(d) the form in which, and the time at which, the Board shall prepare its budget under section 15; 
(e) the form in which, and the time at which, the Board shall prepare its annual report under section 16; 
(f) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited, and the date before 
which the audited copy of the accounts may be furnished to the Central Government under section 17; 
(g) any other m atter which is to be, or m ay be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be, or  
may be, made by the rules. 
22. (1) The Board m ay, with the previous approval of  the Central Governm ent, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with th e provisions of this Act and the rules generally to 
carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudi ce to the generality of the fore going power, such regulations m ay 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the manner in which the busin ess of the Board shall be conducted under sub-section ( 9) of section 
3; and 
(b) the terms and conditions of serv ice of the Secretary and  other officers and employees of the Board 
under section 4. 
 
23. Every rule and every regulation m ade under this Ac t shall be laid, as soon as may be afte r it is 
made, before each Hous e of Parliam ent while it is in  session, for a total period of th irty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or th e successive sessions aforesaid, bo th Houses agree in 
making any m odification in the rule or regulation or  both Houses agree that the r ule o r r egulation 
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 
 
 35

24. (1) If any dif ficulty arises in giv ing effect to th e provisions of this Act, the Central Governm ent 
may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, m ake such provisions not inconsistent with th e 
provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be m ade after the expiry of a period of two years from the  
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order m ade under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as m ay be afte r it is m ade, before 
each House of Parliament. 
 
25. In the Jute Manufactures Cess Act, 1983,— 
(a) in section 3,— 
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words and figures “the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 
1983”, the words and figures “the National Jute Board Act, 2006” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), the words “and Salt” shall be omitted; 
(iii) in sub-section (4), the words “and Salt” shall be omitted; 
(b) in section 4, for the words, brackets and figur es “the Jute Manufactures Developm ent Council, 
from time to time, from out of such proceeds (aft er Power to make regulations. Rules and regulations  
to be laid before Parliam ent. Power to rem ove difficulties. Am endment of Act 28 of 1983. deducting  
the cost of collection which shall not  exceed four per cent. of such pro ceeds) such sums of money as it 
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 
1983”, the words, brackets and figure s “the National Jute Board from  time to tim e, from out of such 
proceeds (after deducting the cost of collection which shall not exceed four per cent. Of such proceeds) 
such sums of money as it m ay think fit for being utilised for the pu rposes of the Na tional Jute Board 
Act, 2006” shall be substituted. 
 
26. (1) On and from  the appointed day, the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983 shall 
stand repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or 
taken under the Act so  repealed shall, in so far as it  is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
Repeal and savings. 27 of 1983. 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The jute sector occupies an im portant place in  the econom y of the countr y in general, and the 
eastern region in particular. Aroun d 0.14 m illion people are engaged in the tertiary secto r and allied 
activities, supporting the jute economy. These apart, the jute industr y also contributes to exports to the 
tune of nearly Rs. 1,000 crores. The Jute Manuf actures Development Council (JMDC), incorporated 
under the Jute Manufactures Developm ent Council  Act, 1983 and the National Centre for Jute 
Diversification (NCJD), a Society s et up by the  Central Government in the Min istry of Textiles and 
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 are the institutions wh ich are presently co-
ordinating the operations of the large number of functions in the jute sector. 
 
2. In pursuance to the National Jute Policy, 2005, the Governm ent has approved the creation of a  
National Jute Board. Creation of the Board is a major organisational initiative and it will be the agency 
to co-ordinate and im plement the programmes of the jute sector. The proposed Jute Board will be 
constituted and incorporated by merging the existing Jute Ma nufactures Developm ent Council 
(JMDC), and the National Centre for Jute Dive rsification (NCJD) along with their funds and 
manpower. To avoid the m ultiplicity of eff orts and programmes of various organ isations in th e jute 
sector, the National Jute Board will act as an umbrella body for the entire jute sector. 
 
 36

3. The salient features of the proposed legislation are as follows:— 
 
(i) it proposes to m erge Jute Ma nufactures Developm ent Council and the National Centre for Jute 
Diversification, and in place of these two entities constitution and incorporation of a Board to be called 
the National Jute Board; 
(ii) the proposed Board shall be consisting of 20 m embers to be appointed by the Central Governm ent 
from the jute sector, representing the jute industry, labour institutions and organisations functioning in 
the jute sector, and from  the Mini stry of Textiles, Ministry of Ag riculture and Ministry of Food and 
Public Distribution. The Secretary, Ministry of Textiles will be the ex officio Chairperson of the Board; 
(iii) the Central Government is being empowered to appoint the Secret ary to the Board and such other 
officers and employees, as it cons iders necessary fo r the efficient discharge of its functions and the 
terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board shall be 
such as may be determined by regulations; 
(iv) the functions of the Board inter alia to prom ote the developm ent of jute an d jute  prod ucts; to  
promote production of better quality raw jute; to enhance productivity  of raw jute; to prom ote and 
undertake arrangements for better marketing and standardization of the prices of raw jute; to assist and 
encourage studies and research for im provement of processing, quality, techniques of grading and 
packaging of raw jute; to provide and create n ecessary inf rastructural facilities and conditions 
conducive to the developm ent of di versified jute products; to provide  financial assistance by w ay of 
subsidy or seed capital, etc. Clause 5 of the proposed Bill specifies the detailed functions of the Board; 
(v) it has been also proposed that the property and contract including the agreem ent, wor king 
arrangements, licences, perm its, quotas and exem ptions, etc., relating to or owned by the Jute 
Manufactures Developm ent Counci l and the National Council for Ju te Diversification shall be 
transferred and vest in the Board;  the proposed Board shall also be  entitled the tax exem ptions or 
benefits available to the Council or the Society under the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
(vi) the services of the officers and employees of the Council and the Society shall be transferred to the 
Board and they shall hold office on the same terms and 11 12 conditions as they would have held in the 
two institutions as if they have not merged and also the officers and employees who opt not to be in the 
employment or service of the Board in which the Council and the Society have m erged, such officers 
and employees shall be deemed to have resigned from the respective cadre; 
(vii) the proposed legislation also em powers the Ce ntral Governm ent to supersede the Board on 
account of grave em ergency or on acc ount of persisten t default by the Board in not carry ing out the 
instructions of the Government, or in public interest; 
(viii) the Board will be a body corporate and the Government, after due appropriation m ade by 
Parliament will make such grants and loans to the Board as considered necessary and a fund called Jute 
Board Fund will be cons tituted. All proceeds on account of grant and lo ans from the Government; all 
fees and levies and all sums received by the Board from other sources will be credited to this Fund; 
(ix) it is also proposed that the Board shall prepare annual report and submit a copy of the sa me to the 
Central Government, which shall be laid, before the Parliament;  
(x) it is also proposed to effect c onsequential amendments to sections 3 and 4 of the Jute Manufactures 
Cess Act, 1983 to facilitate the allocation of the cess collected unde r this Act to the proposed Jute 
Board; 
(xi) it also provides the repeal of the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
SHANKERSINH VAGHELA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th May, 2006. 
———— 
 
 37

 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
———— 
[Copy of letter No. 7/1/2005-Jute, dated th e 17th May, 2006 from Shri Shankersinh Vaghela, 
Minister of Textiles to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha] 
 
The President, having been inform ed of the subject matter of the proposed National Jute Board 
Bill, 2006, recommends under clause (1) of article 117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution 
the introduction of the Bill and under article 117(3), the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha. 
 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 1.—This clause gives the short title, extent and commencement of the Bill. 
Clause 2.—This clause contains definitions of certain words and expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 3.—This clause provides for the c onstitution and incorporation of the Board to be called as the 
National Jute Board by the Central Governm ent. This clause also lays dow n the com position of the  
National Jute Board which consists of Chairperson, ex o fficio members, and other m embers to be 
nominated by the Central Government. The Secretary in charge of the Ministry of Textiles shall be the 
Chairperson and two other of ficers of the Ministry of  Textiles sha ll be the ex officio members. The 
nominated members include representatives from farmers, jute industry and specialists or experts in the 
field of jute sector and representatives of Ministries of Agriculture and Food and Public Distribution. It 
also provides for the terms and conditions of appointment of members to be laid down by rules. 
 
It also makes provisions for removal of the members other than the ex officio members. 
 
Clause 4.—This clause empowers the Central Government to appoint the Secretary, officers and other 
employees for the efficient functioning of the Board. 
 
Clause 5.—This clause lays down the f unctions of the Board shall, inter alia , include to evolve an 
integrated approach to jute cultivation; to promote production of better quality of raw jute; to en hance 
productivity of raw jute; to prom ote or undertake arrangements for better m arketing and stabilization 
of the price of raw jute; to prom ote standardization of raw jute and jute products; to suggest norm s of 
efficiency for raw jute and m anufacture of jute products; to propagate inform ation useful to the 
growers of raw jute and manufacturers of jute products; to promote and undertake measures for quality 
control of raw jute and ju te products; to assist and encourage studies and research for im provement of 
processing, quality, technique of grading and packaging of raw jute; to promote and undertake surveys 
or studies aim ed at collection and form ultion of st atistics regarding raw jute and jute products; to 
promote standardization of jute  m anufacturers to prom ote the de velopment of production of jute 
manufacturers by increasing the efficiency and producti vity of jute industry; to sponsor, assist, etc., 
pertaining to the jute sector; to maintain and improve existing markets and develop new markets within 
and outside the country for jute m anufacturers; to sponsor , assist, etc., in th e m atters related to 
materials, equipments, etc., in thos e already used in the jute industry;  to provide and create necessary 
infrastructural facilities, etc.; to  organize workshops, conferences, l ectures, etc., for the purpose of 
production and promotion of jute products; to secure better working conditions for workers engaged in 
the jute industry. 
 
Clause 6.—This clause vests in the Board all as sets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all 
property movable and immovable, real or personal, co rporeal or incorporeal, pr esent or contingent, of 
whatever nature and wheresoev er situate, incl uding lands, buildings, m achinery, equipm ents, cash 
balances, capital, reserves, reserv e funds, investm ents, tenancies, leases and book debts and all other 
 38

rights and interests arising out of such property as were im mediately before the appointed day in the 
ownership or possession of the Jute Manufactures  Developm ent Counc il or the National Centre for  
Jute Diversification whether with in or outside India,  all books of account and docum ents relating 
thereto and shall also be deem ed to include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind 
then subsisting of the Society or the Council. 
 
Clause 7.—This clause provides for giving general e ffect of vesting of Jute Manufactures 
Development Council and the National Centre f or Jute Diversification in the National Jute Board all 
contracts, agreem ents and working arrangem ents s ubsisting immediately before the appointed day, 
affecting the Council or the Society and shall cease to have effect or be enforceable against the Council 
or the Society and shall be of as full force and eff ect against or in favo ur of the Board in which the 
Council and the Society  have vested  by virtu e of this Bill. This clause also pr ovides that all licen ses, 
etc., to be deemed to have been granted to the Board. 
 
Clause 8.—This clause provides that all licences, pe rmits, quotas and exem ptions, granted to the 
Council or the Society under any law shall be deemed to have been granted to the Board. 
 
Clause 9.— This clause provides for exem ption or benefit granted under the Incom etax Act, 1961 to 
the Council or the Society shall continue to be applicable to the National Jute Board. 
 
Clause 10.—This clause provides  that any guarantee given for or in favour of the Council or the  
Society with respect to loan or lease finance shall continue to be operative in relation to the Board. 
 
Clause 11.—This clause provides protection o f tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions of service, 
with the s ame obligations and with the s ame ri ghts and privileges as to leave ; ins urance, 
superannuation scheme, provident fund, other funds; retirement, pension, gratuity and other benefits as 
he would have held under the Counc il or the Society. This clause also provides that officers or 
employees who do not opt under sub-cl ause (2) not to be in the em ployment of the Board, shall be 
deemed to have res igned from the respective cad re. This clause further provi des that notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any other law, the transfer of the services 
of any officer or other employee of the Council or the Society to the Board shall not entitle such officer 
or other employee to any com pensation under this Act or any other law and no such claim  shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other auth ority. The trusts of the Provident Fund and Group 
Insurance and Superannuation Scheme of the Council or the Society for the welfare of the officers and 
employees shall continue to discharge their functi ons in the Board and tax exemption granted would 
continue to be applied to the Board. 
 
Clause 12.—This clause stipulates that  the Board shall discharge its functions and du ties un der th e 
relevant statute and be bound by direc tions of the Central G overnment. This clause also stipulates that 
the decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final. 
 
Clause 13.—This clause stipulates that the Centra l Governm ent m ay supersede the Board not 
exceeding six m onths, on account o f grave em ergency, when the Board  has defaulted in com plying 
with any direction issued by the Central Governm ent or in the discharge of the functions and duties 
imposed on the Board by the proposed legislation, th e financial position or th e administration of the 
Board has deteriorated. This clause  further stipu lates that on  supersession all Mem bers of the Board 
shall vacate their offices, all powers, functions and duties shall be exercised and d ischarged by such 
person as the Central Government may direct. The Central Government on the expiration of the period 
of supersession m ay re constitute the Board by fres h appointm ent of any person. This clause also 
 39

stipulates that a full report of any action and circ umstances leading to such  action, taken under this  
clause shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 14.—This clause provides for grants and loans to  the Board by the Central Governm ent after 
due appropr iation m ade by Parliament. This clause also pr ovides f or constitu tion of  the Jute Board 
Fund and there shall be credited grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government and all 
sums received by the Board from  other sources  as may be decided by the Central Governm ent. The 
Fund shall be applied for m eeting salary, allowances and other rem uneration of the Mem bers, officers 
and other employees of the Board in the discharge of its functions. 
 
Clause 15.—This clause provides for the Board to prep are its budget during each financial year, 
showing the estim ated receip ts and  expenditure of  the Bo ard and  sub mit the sam e to the Central 
Government.  
 
Clause 16.—This clause provides that the Board shall prepare each financial year its 
annual report giving full account of activities during the financial year and submit the copy 
to the Central Government. 
  
Clause 17.—This clause provides that the acco unts for the Board shall be m aintained and audited in  
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and the Board shall furnish an audited 
copy of its accounts together with the auditor's report to the Central Government. 
 
Clause 18.—This clause provides that the Central Governm ent shall lay annual report and auditor' s 
report of the Board before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to p rovide immunity to the Central Governm ent or the Board or any 
member of the Board, or any officer or other employ ee of the Central Governm ent or of the Board or 
any other person authorised by the Central Governm ent or the Board from suits, prosecution and other 
legal proceedings in respect of anything done in good faith under the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 20.—This clause provides that all officers and  employees of th e Board sh all be deemed to be 
public servants. 
 
Clause 21.—This clause empowers the Central Governm ent to make rules to car ry out the p rovisions 
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enum erates the various m atters in respect of which such 
rules m ay be m ade. These m atters, inter alia, include the term s and conditions of  service of the 
members of the Board under proposed sub-section (5) of section 3; pow ers and duties of the 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be maintained 
and audited and the date by which the audited copy shall be furnished to the Central Government. 
 
Clause 22.—This clau se em powers the Board  to m ake, with the p revious app roval of the Central 
Government, regulations not inconsistent with the pr ovisions of the proposed legislation and the rules 
made thereunder. These include the term s and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers  
and employees and the manner in which the business of the Board shall be conducted. 
 
Clause 23.—This clause provides that every rule and regulation made under the proposed legislation 
shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 24.—This clause em powers the Central Governm ent to m ake order to remove any difficulty 
which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation by order published in the 
 40

Official Gazette. Such o rder shall not be incon sistent with the provisions of th e proposed legislation. 
This power can be exercised only within two years from  the commence ment of the proposed 
legislation. Further, every such order made shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 25.—This clause provides for certain consequential amendments to the Jute Manufactures Cess 
Act, 1983. 
 
Clause 26.—This clause deals with repeal and savi ngs. On the commence ment of the proposed 
legislation, the Jute Manufactures  Developm ent Council Act, 1983 sha ll stand repealed subject to 
savings with regard to anything done or any acti on taken or purported to have been done or taken 
under the Act so repealed. 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Clause 3 of the Bill pro vides for the constitution and incorporation of  the National Jute Board  
for carrying out the functions env isaged in the propos ed Bill. Clause 4  of the Bill provides th at the 
Central Government may appoint th e Secretary and such other officer s and em ployees as it considers 
necessary for the efficient discharge of the functions of the Board. The existing infrastructure, staff and 
the o ther facilities av ailable in the National Ce ntre f or Jute Divers ification and J ute Ma nufacturers 
Development Council would be u tilised by the said Jute Board. The National Centre for Jute 
Diversification and Jute Manufact urers Developm ent Counc il would be m erged into the said Board 
along with their funds and m anpower. No fresh capital expenditure is envisaged for the tim e being to 
establish the Board. The Jute Manufacturers Cess Act, 1983 wh ich yields approxim ately Rs. 38.00 
crores would be utilised for recu rring expenditure. The grants and loans support s hall be prov ided 
through regular budget after due appropriation made by Parliament. 
  
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
  
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Gove rnment to supersede the Board if, on account  
of grave emergency, the Board is unable to disc harge the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provision s of the Bill or the Board has pe rsistently m ade default in complying with any 
direction issued by the Central Gove rnment or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on 
it and as a r esult of such default, the financial position of the Board or the adm inistration of the Board 
has deteriorated, for such period as may be specified in the Notification. 
 
2. Clause 21 of the Bill em powers the Central Govern ment to m ake rules r elating to (a ) the te rm of 
office and other conditions of service of the mem bers of the Board under subs ection (5) of section 3; 
(b) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under s ub-section (7) of section 3; (c) the powers and 
functions of the Vice-C hairperson under sub-section (8) of section 3; (d) th e form in which, an d the 
time at which, the Board shall prepare its budget under section 15; (e) the for m in which, and the time  
at which, the Board shall prepar e its annual report under section, 16 ; (f) the m anner in which the 
accounts of the Board shall be m aintained and audited, and the date before which the audited copy of 
the accounts m ay be furnished to the Central G overnment under section 17; and (g) any other m atter 
which is to be, or m ay be, prescribed or in respect  of which provision is to  be, or m ay be, made by 
rules.  
 
3. Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Board with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette , to make regulations with regard  the manner in which the bus iness 
 41

of the Board shall be conducted un der sub-section (9) of section 3;  and the term s and conditions of  
service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board under section 4.  
 
 
4. All rules and regulations made under the proposed legislation shall be required to be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
 
5. All m atters in respe ct of  which r ules and  reg ulations m ay be m ade are m atters of procedure and 
administrative detail, and it is  not p racticable to provide for them in the  Bill itself . The deleg ation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
  
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE JUTE MANUFACTURES CESS ACT, 1983 
(28 OF 1983) 
* * * * * 
3. (1) There shall be lev ied and collected by way of cess for the purposes of the Jute Manufacturers 
Development Council A ct, 1983, on every article of jute m anufacture specified  in colum n 2 of the 
Schedule and produced in India, a dut y of excis e at such rate not ex ceeding the rate specified in the 
corresponding entry in colum n 3 thereof, as the Central Govern ment m ay, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify: 
 
Provided that until such rate is specified by the Central Government, the duty of 
excise shall be levied and collected at the rate specified in the corresponding entry in 
column 4 of the Schedule. 
 
(2) The duty of excise levied under sub-section (1) shall be in addition to the duty of excise leviable on 
jute manufactures under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 or any other law for the tim e being in 
force. 
* * * * * 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and the rules m ade thereunder, including 
those relating to refunds and exemptions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy 
and collection of the duty of excise on jute manufactures under this Act. 
 
4. The proceeds of the duty of exci se levied under sub-section (1) of section 3 shall first b e credited to 
the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central Government may, if Parliament, by appropriation made 
by law in this behalf, so provides, pay to the Ju te Manufactures Development Council, f rom time to 
time, from out of such proceeds (after deducting  the cost of collection w hich shall not exceed four per 
cent. of such proceeds) such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the 
Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983. 
* * * * * 
Levy and collection of cess on jute manufactures produced in India. 
Crediting proceeds of duties to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
1 of 1944. 
27 of 1983. 
1 of 1944. 
27 of 1983. 
 
LOK SABHA 
———— 
 42

A 
 
BILL 
 
to provide for the establishment of a National Jute Board for the development of the cultivation, 
manufacture and marketing of jute and jute products and for matters connected therewith 
and incidental thereto. 
———— 
(Shri Shankersinh Vaghela, Minister of Textiles) 
MGIPMRND—705LS(S5)—18-05-2006. 
 
LOK SABHA 
------ 
 
CORRIGENDA to THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD BILL, 2006 
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha] 
 
1. Page 11, line 5 from the bottom,- 
for “Council” read “Centre” 
2. Page 12, line 1,- 
for “have not” read “have not been” 
3. Page 16, line 7,- for “Manufacturers” read “Manufactures” 
4. Page 16, line 8,- for “Manufacturers” read “Manufactures” 
5. Page 16, line 11,- for “Manufacturers” read “Manufactures” 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
May 19, 2006______ 
Vaisakha 29, 1928 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 43

ANNEXURE-III 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINET EENTH   SI TTING OF THE ST ANDING COMMITTEE O N 
LABOUR HELD ON MONDAY, 3 JULY  2006 
 
The Committee m et from  1100 hours to 1300 hours in Comm ittee Room  ` D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4.         Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
5.         Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
6.         Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
8.         Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
9. Shri Lal Mani Prasad 
10. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
11. Smt. C.S. Sujatha   
 12. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
              
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
13.       Shri Gandhi Azad 
14.       Shri Debabrata Biswas 
15. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
16. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena               -           Assistant Director 
 
 
           
 44

  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF  MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri D.P. Singh Secretary 
2. Smt. Asha Swaroop Additional Secretary & FA 
3. Shri Sudripta Roy Joint Secretary 
4. Shri S. Majumdar  
 
Jute Commissioner, Kolkata. 
 
5. Shri A. K. Bal    Secretary, Jute Manufactures 
Development Council and Executive 
Director, National Centre for Jute 
Diversification, Kolkata   
6. Shri R. C. Tiwari   
 
Chairman-cum-Managing Director, Jute 
Corporation of India Ltd., Kolkata. 
 
7. Shri C. Roul  
 
Director (Jute), Ministry of Textiles 
 
8. Shri R.C. Saini Deputy Secretary 
 
II REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri N.L. Meena  Joint Secretary &  Legislative Counsel  
2. Shri Udaya Kumar Assistant Legislative Counsel 
 
2. At the outset the Chairm an welcomed Shri D.P Singh, Secretary (Textiles) and Offic ials of the 
Ministry of Textiles, Ministry of Law and Justice and asked them  to brief the m embers about the 
National Jute Board Bill, 2006 which has been re ferred to th e Standing Comm ittee on Labour by the 
Hon’ble Speaker.  
 
3. The Secretary (Textiles) and other officials of the Ministry of Te xtiles and the Ministry of Law 
& Justice briefed the Committee on the Bill.  Then they  replied to the queries r aised by the Members.  
The Chairman directed  the Secretar y (Textiles ) to f urnish written rep lies to qu estions f or which the 
replies were not available with them during the briefing. 
   
A verbatim record of the briefing has been kept.  
  
The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
 
  
 45

  
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SI TTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
HELD ON FRIDAY, 13 OCTOBER  2006 
 
The Co mmittee met from 1130 ho urs to 1300 a nd again fro m 1430 hrs.  to 153 0 hrs. in  
Committee Room “E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
3. Shri Furkan Ansari 
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
6. Smt. Sushila Kerketta 
7. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan 
8. Shri Virendra Kumar 
8. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
9. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil 
10. Shri Devidas Pingle 
11. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
12. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
13. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
              
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
15. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
16.       Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
17. Shri  K. Chandran Pillai 
18. Shri Gandhi Azad 
19. Shri Dilip Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
3.     Shri R.S. Misra   - Director 
  
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46

 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri A.K. Singh Secretary 
 
2. Smt. Asha Swarup AS &FA 
 
4. Shri Sudripta Roy Joint Secretary 
 
5. Shri S.C. Grover MD, Cotton Corporation of India 
 
7. Shri Atri Bhattacharya Executive Director, National Centre for 
Jute Diversification  
 
8. Shri Manish Kumar Gupta Director 
 
 
 
2. At the outset the Chairm an welcomed Shri A.K Singh, Secretary (Textil es) and other Officer s 
of the Ministry of Textiles and asked them to brief the m embers about the subject “Developm ent of 
Cotton Sector vis-à-vis functioning of Cotton Corporation of India” which has been selected as a  
subject for detailed examination during the year 2006-2007.  
 
3. The Secretary (Textiles) and other o fficials of the Ministry of Textiles b riefed the Co mmittee 
on the subject.  Then th ey replied to the  queries raised by the Mem bers.  The Cha irman directed the 
Secretary (Textiles) to furnish written replies to questions for which the replies were not available with 
them during the briefing. 
 
4. After the lunch break, the Comm ittee took the oral evidence of the re presentatives of the 
Ministry of  Textiles o n the National Jute Bo ard Bill,  2006.  The Secretary  (Textiles) and 
representatives of the Ministry of  Textiles  r eplied to th e queries ra ised by th e Mem bers.  The 
Chairman directed th e Secretary (Textiles) to fu rnish written replies to the ques tions which wer e not 
available with them  during the evidence to the Secretariat at the earliest.   
   A verbatim record of the briefing and the oral evidence has been kept.  
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
   The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 47

 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD   SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
HELD ON THURSDAY, 2 NOVEMBER,   2006 
 
 
The Committee met from 1130 hours to 1300 hours in Committee Room `E’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Subrata Bose 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4.         Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
5. Shri Munawar Hasan 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi    
8.         Shri Bassangouda R. Patil  
9.         Shri Devidas Pingle 
10. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
11.       Smt. C.S. Sujatha   
 12.       Shri Parasnath Yadav 
              
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
  
13. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
14. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
15. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
16. Shri Dilip Ray 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
         1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
3.     Shri R.S. Misra  - Director 
4.  Shri N. K. Pandey - Under Secretary 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
  
 48

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.   X X    X X    X X 
  
 
3. The Committee then took up the Draft Report on “The National Jute Board, 2006” for consideration and 
adoption.  The Committee adopted the report with the following modifications: 
 
Page 17, Para 52: To delete la st three s entences, viz. “The Co mmittee have further noted th at 
heads of many  of t hese organizations would be members in the proposed 
National Jute Board.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that  the National 
Jute Board may be established for the e ffective development of the jute sector 
by merging JMDC and NCJD as proposed . Subsequently its per formance may 
be reviewed at regular intervals and suitable correct ive steps taken wherever  
necessary” and to insert in its place the recommendation,  “The reasons put 
forth by the Ministry of Textiles for not m erging various or ganizations 
engaged in the jute sector in the proposed National Jute Board is no t 
acceptable to the Committee due to the fact that the goals of the Bill i.e.  
formation of an umbrella body for  the entire jute sector, can only be 
achieved by bringing in all the c onstituents under one roof.  The 
Committee, therefore, r ecommend th at the Natio nal Jute Board may be  
established by merging various organizations engaged in the jute sector for 
the integra ted and e ffective de velopment of the jut e se ctor”.   
 
Page No.19, Para No.57: To delete “(d) to discus s with th e J CI be fore th e announce ment of MS P 
and also regarding opening of  purchase centres in different jute producing 
States”. 
Page 20, Para 58:  To delete the entire paragraph 
Page 20, Para 59:  To amend entire paragraph as follows: 
The Commit tee note that jute is a ba st natural fibre and Mesta is also a 
bast fibre which belongs to a separate breed called Kenaf.    In the Bill,  the 
term “jute”  has not been defined.   As such, this Bill may not actually 
benefit the  Mesta grow ers in  various States.  The Co mmittee, the refore, 
recommend that a definition of “jute” should be incorpo rated in the  
definitions part of the Bi ll which sho uld include Mesta (Kenaf) to benefit  
the jute farmers in th e Mesta pro ducing States, particula rly Andhra 
Pradesh. 
 
Page 20, Para 60, Line 9 To amend the fourth se ntence as, “Hence, the C ommittee r ecommend that 
sufficient num ber of procurem ent centers, includin g m obile ones, should b e 
opened by the appropriate body which would be established after the form ation 
of the National Jute Board , to procure maximum quantity of raw jute from  the 
farmers.      
 
 
 
 
 49

 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finali se the Report by  incorporating the above amend ments 
and present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
5.   X X     X X    X X 
 
6.   X X     X X    X X 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 50