 
37 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-2009) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
THE WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008  
 
 
  
  THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
      
        
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2008/Agrahayana,  1930 (Saka) 

 2
       THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-09) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
  
 THE WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
            
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2008   
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2008 
 
 
   
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  
December 2008/Agrahayana,  1930 (Saka) 

 3
CONTENTS 
PAGE(s)                
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                  (ii) 
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N          ( i v )    
                          
 
          
R E P O R T          1 - 1 3    
       
                    
                          ANNEXURES 
        
 
(i) The Workmen’s Compensation (Amendment) Bill, 2008  14-24 
 
 
  (ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Labour  25-28 
(2008-09) held on 12.11.2008 and 17.12.2008.  
                                                         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 4
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-2009) 
 
               Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy-CHAIRMAN 
 
                              MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
2. Shri Furkan Ansari  
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale  
4. Shri Subrata Bose  
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
**7. Shri Munawar Hasan  
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta  
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan  
10. Shri Virendra Kumar  
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
12. Shri Basangouda R. Patil  
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Mohan Rawale  
16. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat  
17. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat  
18. Smt. C. S. Sujatha  
19. Shri Paras Nath Yadav  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
*22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam  
23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany  
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari  
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
*26. Shri Gandhi Azad  
 27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
 28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
 29. Vacant  
30. Vacant  
31. Vacant  
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Vacancy caused due to retirement of  Shri Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam w.e.f. 
29.11.2008  and Shri Gandhi Azad w.e.f. 25.11.2008.  
** Expired on 10.12.2008. 

 5
 
                        SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Secretary 
 2.    Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
 3.    Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director 
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary 
5.    Ms. Mili George              - Senior Executive Assistant 

 6
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committ ee on Labour having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Seventh 
Report on “The Workmen’s Compensation (Amendment) Bill, 2008” of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment.   
 
2. The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 20.10.2008 and was referred to the 
Standing Committee on Labour by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E (b) 
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and 
report within three months from the date of publication of the reference of the Bill in the 
Bulletin Part- II of Lok Sabha dated 31.10.2008.    
 
3. The Bill seeks to provide (i) for substi tution of the word `workman’ with the 
word `employee’ so that the Act is applicable to all classes of employees and to make 
the expression gender-neutral (ii)  To re-name the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 
as the Employees Compensation Act, 1923, (iii) To omit restrictive clauses in Schedule II 
of the Act, so as to make it more workers friendly, (iv)  To have an enabling provision to 
revise the wage ceiling from time to time by the Central Government keeping in view 
the changing trend in the wage level of employees, (v) To enhance the funeral expenses 
of the deceased workman from Rs. 2500/- to Rs. 3000/- and also to empower the 
Central Government to enhance such e xpenses from time to time, and (vi)  To effect 
changes in the eligibility criteria of persons to become Commissioner. 
  
4. The Committee took oral evidence of th e representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment on 12.11.2008 in connect ion with the examination of the Bill. 
Further, the Committee sought written information regarding the various aspects of this 
Bill from the nodal Ministry.   
 
5. The Committee also invited the views of  Central Trade Unions through written 
replies to the List of Points circulated to th em.  In addition to that an on-the-spot study 
visit was also undertaken by the Commi ttee to Ranchi, Bangalore, Kochi and 
Thiruvananthapuram from  26 th N o v e m b e r  t o  4th December, 2008 to have first hand 
information about the problems and difficulties of the workmen engaged in various 
organizations/establishments besides holding discussions with the  representatives of 
various trade unions to know their views on  the proposed amendmen ts in the Bill in 
these places.   The officials of the variou s organizations/establishments also deposed 
before the Committee expressing their views on the proposed amendments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7
 
 
6. Taking into account the submissions made  by the representatives of the Ministry, 
workmen, trade unions and officials of the organizations/establishments and also in 
view of the replies furnished both by the Minist ry of Labour and Employment and the 
Central Trade Unions, the Committee have arrived on certain conclusions regarding the 
various aspects of the proposed amendments in the Bill.  The same are reproduced in 
the Report in the form of observations/recommendations of the Committee. 
 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report on the Bill at their 
sitting held on 17th December, .2008.  
 
 
                
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,       
                                                                         Chairman, 
 17th December, 2008                      Standing Committee on Labour  
26 Agrahayana , 1930  (Saka) 

 8
 REPORT 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
 
 The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 pr ovides for payment of compensation 
to workmen and their dependents in case of  injury and accident (including certain 
occupational disease) arising out of and in the course of employment and resulting in 
disablement or death.  The Act applies to railway servants and persons employed in 
any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II of the Act.  Schedule II includes persons 
employed in factories, mines, plantations, mechanically propelled vehicles, construction 
works and certain other hazardous occupation s.  Minimum rates of compensation for 
permanent total disablement and death ha ve been fixed at Rs.90,000/- and Rs.80,000/- 
respectively.  Maximum amount for death an d permanent total disablement can go up 
to Rs.4.56 lakh and Rs.5.48 lakh respectively depending on age and wages of workmen. 
 
2. Keeping in view the recommendation of  the Second National Commission on 
Labour and suggestions received from the related Ministries/Departments, and State 
Governments/Union Territory Administratio ns, it is proposed to carry out the 
following amendments in the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923, namely:- 
 
• The term `workman’ in Section 2 (1) (n) of the Workmen’s Compensation 
Act, 1923 may be replaced by the term `employee’.  Wherever   the term 
`workman’ occurs, the same shall be replaced with the term `employee’ 
and wherever the term workmen occurs, the same shall be replaced with 
the term `employees’ so that the Act is applicable to all classes of 
employees.  Accordingly, the name of  the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 
1923 may be renamed as `Employees’ Compensation Act, 1923’.  Similarly, 
in the long title, preamble and the short title of the Act, the word 
`workman’ will be substituted with the word `employee’. 
 
• To omit restrictive clauses in Schedule  I I ,  s o  a s  t o  m a k e  i t  m o r e  w o r k e r  
friendly.  Details of amendments of Restrictive Clauses in Schedule-II of 
the Act are enclosed at Annexure. 
 
• In order that the Central Government may revise the wage ceiling keeping 
in view the changing trend in the wage  level of employees, it is proposed 
to have an enabling provision by inserting a new sub-section in section 4 
of the Act to revise the wage ceiling from time to time. 
 
 
 
 
 

 9
 
• To enhance the amount of Rs.2500/- payable towards funeral expenses of 
the deceased workman to Rs.3000/- under sub-section (4) of section 4 of 
the Act and also to empower the Cen tral Government to enhance the 
funeral expenses from time to time. 
 
• It is proposed that only those persons who have legal background shall be 
able to become Commissioner for workers’ compensation and accordingly 
substitute the phrase ‘any person’ after the word ‘appoint…’ in clause (1) 
of section 20 of the Workmen’s Comp ensation Act, 1923 with the words 
and phrase ‘any person who has or has been judicial officer or legal 
practitioner of 5 years experience shall be qualified….”.  
 
3. Elaborating the objectives of proposed amendments, the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment  brought out in the `Object and Re asons’ to the Bill that intended objective 
of the proposed Act is to make the title gender-neutral by substituting the word 
‘workmen’ by the term ‘employees’.  When the Ministry was asked whether this meant 
that hitherto there have been gender based discrimination as far as the implementation 
of this Act is concerned, the Ministry in their written reply furnished as follows:- 
 
“The Second National Commission on Labour had recommended that in the 
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 the term `workman’ may be replaced by the 
term `employee’ so as to make the Work er’s Compensation Act applicable to all 
categories of employees; the term `emp loyee’ may be defined to mean any 
person employed in employment specified in Schedule II.  Also, the Task Force 
set up by the PMO to carry out Gender related Amendments has recommended 
that the title of the Act should be made  gender neutral, namely “The Workers’ 
Compensation Act”.  Keeping in view these suggestions, the amendments are 
proposed to be carried out in the Act to make the expression in the title gender-
neutral.”   
  
  
4. For the purpose of this Act, the term ‘employee’ has inter-alia been defined in 
the amendment Bill to be a person who is (i) a railway servant as defined in Clause 34 of 
Section 2 of the Railways Act, 1989, (ii) (a) a master seaman or other member of the crew 
of a ship, (b) a captain or other member of the crew of an aircraft, (c) recruited as driver, 
helper, mechanic, cleaner or in any other ca pacity in connection with a motor vehicle, 
(d) recruited for work abroad by a company, and who is em ployed outside India in any 
such capacity as is specified in Schedule II  and the ship, aircraft or motor vehicle or 
company, as the case may be, is registered  in India or (iii) employed in any such 
capacity as is specified in Schedule II, whether the contract of employment was made 
before or after the passing of this Act and whether such contract is expressed or 
implied, oral or in writing; but does not include any person working in the capacity of a 

 10
member of the Armed Forces of the Union;  and any reference to a employee who has 
been injured shall, where the employee is dead, include a reference to his dependants or 
any of them.   
 
5. On being asked whether the definition  of ‘employee’ is comprehensive and 
inclusive and the reasons for non-inclusion of  a person working for Indian Railways or 
its subsidiaries executing contracts abroad in sub-section (d) of (ii) of Section 6 of the 
Act, the Ministry stated in their written reply as under:-  
 
“……A person who is employed in railways as  defined in clause (31) of section 2 
and sub-section (1) of section 197 of the Railways Act, 1989 (24 of 1989), either 
directly or through a sub-contractor, by a person fulfilling a contract with the 
railway administration; or employed as an inspector, mail guard, sorter or van 
peon in the Railway Mail Service is already covered under entry (xii) and (xiii) of 
the Scheduled II of the Act.” 
 
6. The Ministry when further asked to state the reasons for not specifying self-containing 
the list of employments as given in Schedule II of the Act for the purpose of defining 
‘employee’, they furnished thus:- 
 
“Schedule II of the Act already gives an exhaustive list of nature of 
employments/establishments which are hazard ous in nature.  It also takes care 
of the new establishments/industries comi ng as a result of new technologies.  
Giving an exhaustive list would also leave room for non-coverage of new 
industries/employments.”  
 
7. It has been proposed in sub-section 1A of Section 7 of the Bill that the Central 
Government may specify such monthly wage in relation to an employee as it may 
consider necessary.   On being asked to state the criteria to be adopted for specifying the 
monthly wages of an employee, the Ministry in their written reply gave as follows:-  
 
“The enhancement in compensation ba sed on monthly wages at Rs.4000/- per 
month was made by taking into conside ration the increase in Consumer Price 
Indices (CPI) for industrial workers sinc e it was fixed last time.  The CPI for 
industrial workers is proposed to be used for enhancing the monthly wage for 
calculation of the compensation with re spect to the CPI for industrial workers 
available in December, 2000 when the limi t was last raised.  Based on this 
criteria, the monthly wage is proposed  to be increased from Rs.4000/- to 
Rs.6000/- and also the Central Government  should be empowered to enhance 
this limit from time to time taking into account the CPI for industrial workers.” 
 
 
 

 11
8. The funeral expenses of deceased employ ee have been proposed to be raised to 
Rs.3000/- from Rs.2500/-.  When the Commi ttee sought to know since when the 
Rs.2500/- was paid as funeral expenses and whet her it was sufficient to meet the entire 
expenditure, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:-  
 
“The funeral expenses was increased from Rs.1000/- to Rs.2500/- with effect 
from 8 th December, 2000.  The funeral expenses are sought to be increased to 
bring them at par with that of Employ ees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC).  
The Government is seeking power to increase it form time to time to bring it in 
tune with the changed price index.”  
 
9. On the matter of amount of compensati on, the Ministry wa s asked whether the 
compensation payable to employees in Indi a and abroad will be determined on same 
yardsticks and what will be the factors that  will be taken into account for determining 
the compensation amount for various category of injuries, the Ministry stated:-  
 
“The Compensation payable to an employee in India and abroad will not be 
determined on the same yardsticks as it  would be determined according to the 
law applicable to the workman where he is residing and working. 
 
While fixing the amount of compensation payable to a workman in respect of an 
accident occurring outside India, the Co mmissioner shall take into account the 
amount of compensation, if any, awarded  to such workman in accordance with 
the law of the country in which the a ccident occurred and shall reduce the 
amount fixed by him by the amount of compensation awarded to the workman 
in accordance with the law of that countr y as provided in section 4 (1 A) of the 
Act.”  
 
10. In the replies furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that minimum rates of 
compensation for permanent total disablement and death have been fixed at Rs.90,000/- 
and Rs.80,000/- respectively.  Maximum am ount for death and permanent total 
disablement can go upto Rs.4.56 lakh and Rs.5.48 lakh respectively subject to age and 
wages of workmen.  When the Committee sought clarification regarding the reasons for 
such a huge difference in the minimum an d maximum rate of compensation and the 
reasons for fixing lower amount of compen sation in cases of death vis-à-vis for 
permanent total disablement, the Ministry clarified as under:-  
 
“In the year 2000, the minimum amount of compensation for permanent total 
disablement and death was fixed at Rs.90,000/- and Rs.80,000/- respectively 
taking into account the recommendation s made by the Standing Committee in 
1994 and the increase in wages/prices at  the relevant time.  As regards the 
maximum, it becomes payable by the fact or specified in the second column of 
Schedule IV against the entry in the first column of that Schedule specifying the 
number of years which are the same as the completed years of the age of the 

 12
workman on his last birthday immediately preceding the date on which the 
compensation fell due.  If a worker gets compensation at a younger age, he will 
get it more on the basis of higher mult iplying factor at the young age and the 
compensation amount shall get decreased while the worker gets older. 
 
 The reasons for fixing lower amount of compensation in cases of death 
vis-à-vis for permanent total disablem ent is because one time payment of 
compensation is made to the family of th e deceased worker in the former case.  
Whereas in case of a total disablemen t, the worker has to sustain himself 
alongwith his family for a considerable period in a disadvantageous position and 
as such, more compensation is paid to him. 
 
 Following discussion held in the m eeting of the Standing Committee on 
Labour on 12 th November, 2008 and increase in Consumer Price Indices for the 
Industrial Workers, it is felt that the minimum rates of compensation payable to 
a worker fixed in December, 2000 as  Rs.80,000/- for death and Rs.90,000/- for 
permanent disability should be changed according to the present minimum rates 
of wages to Rs.1.20 lakh and Rs.1.40 lakh re spectively.  Further, the Government 
should be empowered to enhance the minimum rates of compensation from time 
to time.”  
 
11. The Committee sought to know whether the amount payable as compensation to 
employees on account of injuries is paid by insurance company or is paid from the 
budgetary allocation of the establishment and in case it is paid from budgetary grant, 
what are the liabilities of the insurance comp any to indemnify the victim of accident, 
the Ministry in their written reply clarified thus:-  
 
“If personal injury is caused to a workma n by accident arising out of and in the 
course of his employment, his employer shall be liable to pay compensation in 
accordance with the provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923. 
 
If the insurance company has agreed to discharge the liability of the employer 
under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, the liability of the insurance company 
to indemnify the insurer shall have to be determined by the Commissioner for 
Workmen’s Compensation in the very same proceedings by virtue of the 
provisions contained in section 14 of the Act.  The Compensation is not paid out 
of budgetary grant.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 13
 
12. As per the provisions contained in th e Act, for the purpose of determining 
compensation, there are more than 50 categories of injuries to assess the percentage of 
loss of earning capacity ranging from 1% to 100%.  When the Ministry was asked 
whether the categorization of injuries into these many numbers does not make the 
process of paying compensation cumbersome  and officious and why can’t the injuries 
be categorized to the bare minimum categorizi ng them as simple injury, serious injury, 
grievous injury and fatal injury bringing all kinds of injuries enumerated in Schedule I 
into these four categories, the written reply given by the Ministry is as follows:- 
 
“In Section 4 of the Act, the injuries of a workman have already been classified in 
four broad categories viz. (a) where death results from the injury; (b) where 
permanent total disablement results from the injury; (c ) where permanent partial 
disablement result from the injury;  and (d) where temporary disablement 
whether total or partial results from th e injury.  However, in the interest of 
justice and fair play, it is essential to find out the exact percentage of loss of 
earning capacity of the workman so as to claim appropriate compensation from 
the employer.  The percentage of the loss of earning capacity is determined by a 
medical expert under the orders of the Commissioner and as such, there is no 
room for any confusion in this regard.  This is a universally accepted principle.”  
 
13. The Ministry was asked whether the am ount payable as compensation to an 
employee is subject to any condition, whethe r administrative, procedural or otherwise 
and whether the compensation is also subj ect to any kind of recovery outstanding 
against the person who is being compensated for injury, the written reply went as 
follows:-  
 
“The Workmen’s Compensation Rules , 1924 provide for the procedure for 
implementation of the Act and the St ate Governments have been empowered 
to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 
1923. 
 
  As per section 9 of the Act, compen sation paid in any way is not capable 
of being assigned or charged or be liabl e to attachment or pass to any person 
other than the workman by operation of  law nor shall any claim be set off 
against the same. “ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 14
 
14. According to the proposed amendments in the Bill, a new provision has been 
introduced to specify minimum qualific ation for appointment of a person as 
Commissioner.  The Committee sought to kn ow the circumstances as to when a 
Commissioner can be appointed under the Act,  the Ministry furnished in their written 
reply as follows:-   
 
“As per section 20 of the Act, the State Go vernment may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint any person  to be Commissioner for Workmen’s 
Compensation for such area as may be spec ified in the notification.  Where more 
than one Commissioner has been appointe d for any area, the State Government, 
may, be general or special order, regula te the distribution of business between 
them.  Any Commissioner, may, for the pu rpose of deciding any matter referred 
to him for decision under this Act, choose one or more persons possessing 
special knowledge of any matter relevant to the matter under inquiry to assist 
him in holding the inquiry.  Every Commissioner shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). “ 
 
15. The Ministry when further asked to narrat e the terms and conditions of such an 
appointment and the powers and jurisdiction  of the Commissioner so appointed under 
the Act, their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“Not available at present.  Hence, a prov ision is being made so that persons who 
have a minimum qualification of not less th an five years as a member of a State 
Judicial Service or not less than five year s of experience as an advocate or a 
pleader are eligible to become the Commissioner so as to improve the quality of 
awards.”  
 
16. The Committee also asked the Ministry as to whether the Commissioner has the 
authority to determine or decrease or increase in the amount of compensation, the reply 
given by the Ministry stated as under:- 
 
“The jurisdiction of the Commissioner is given in section 19 of the Act and his 
powers and duties have been prescribed in various sections under the Act such 
as section 6, 12, 22 and 23 etc. 
 
Yes, the Commissioner has the power of  `Review’ under section 6 of the 
Act.” 
 
17. On being asked regarding the time frame laid down for the Commissioner to 
decide the issue pending before him, the Ministry submitted in their written reply as follows:-  
 
“There is no time frame laid down for the Commissioner to decide the issue pending 
before him.  However, the Commissioner has all the powers of a Civil Court under the Code of 

 15
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the purpose of taking evidence on oath and of enforcing 
the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of documents and material objects 
under section 23 of the Act.”  

 16
 
 
18.             The Committee take note th at the proposed amendments in clauses (1) to 
(5) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act are being carried out with a view to widen 
the scope of the Act besides making it gende r neutral despite the fact that there has 
been no gender bias (perceptible or otherwis e) as far as the application of the Act is 
concerned.  The substitution of term `workmen’  by `employee’ wherever it occurs in 
the Act will universalize it as far as the be neficiaries of the Act are concerned.  
However, the term employee needs a revisit for the purpose of the Act as no changes 
have been incorporated with the proposed substitution of the term which are 
essential in the present environment of  employment.  The Committee feel that 
simple substitution of the term `employee’  with `workman’ may not cover the entire 
spectrum of the workforce in the ever growing and fast changing trend of job 
scenario in the context of outsourcing, computerization and mechanization of the 
sector, defeating the very objective of the intended amendment.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the term ‘employee’ for the purpose of this Act may 
appropriately be recast in the following manner: 
 
`Employee’ is a person, including workers working on casual or contract basis, 
engaged by an individual, group of individuals, company, establishment, which may 
also be juridical in nature and who are engaged in trade, commerce or any activity 
wherein their business interests are proliferating, whether directly or indirectly with 
the employment of the services of such persons whether working within the country 

 17
or aboard and also on land, sea or air or where employers use the skills, experience 
and expertise of such persons (employee)  whether directly or indirectly, in 
furtherance of manufacturing of goods,  trade, commerce and business.  

 18
19. The Committee note that the Government  propose to insert a new sub-section 
in Section 4 of the Act to empower the Government to revise the wage ceiling from 
time to time keeping in view the changing trend in the wage slabs of the employees.  
Government also propose to enhance the funeral expenses from the current ceiling of 
Rs.2,500/- to Rs.3,000/- to the deceased employee.  The funeral expenses are sought to 
be increased to bring them at par with that of ESIC.  The Committee are of the view 
that these actions are affirmative in nature but  insufficient in application as well as 
in quantum.  The amount of funeral expenses sought to be increased  is negligible in 
view of the present cost of living.  Moreove r, the ESIC primarily caters to the section 
who are organizedly unorganized workers and hence their benefit cannot and should 
not be a benchmark for determining the amount for any welfare activities of the 
employees sought to be benefited by th is Act.  Hence, the increase in funeral 
expenses equaling it with ESIC is not accept able to the Committee.  Similarly, the 
enabling provision to revise the wage ceiling from time to time without any time 
stipulation is an open ended approach witho ut a sense of commitment to the need of 
the workforce.  It will be most unlikely that any periodical review of wage ceiling 
will be undertaken to determine the benefits  of the beneficiaries under the Act.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly emphasize that enhancement in funeral expenses 
should be revised to a minimum of Rs.5,000/- as of now and linked to periodic 
upward revision from time to time.  Simultane ously, the revision in wage ceiling of 
employees to determine their benefits unde r the Act should be done at regular 
intervals but not exceeding a gap of five years.  

 19
20. The Committee find that the Bill does no t envisage any changes in the list of 
injuries under the Act affecting the wage earning capacity of the employee.  Though 
they are quite exhaustive and enumerative, but explicitly they are external in nature 
and does not include any kind of injuries which may be of serious proportion 
contracted during course of employmen t but not palpable and external in 
appearance.  The Committee note that th ere could be a number of cases wherein 
severe internal injuries could have been caused to employees but not compensated 
under the Act.    Appropriately,   occupational hazards which workers are exposed to 
should be categorized based on the degree  of  hazards, industry-wise.  The workers 
working on such employment be not only medically evaluated, but adequate amount 
of compensation be also paid to them unde r the Act after the occurrence of certain 
physical and medical deficiencies.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that besides external injuries, the internal injuries caused during course of 
employment, which 
inter-alia should include  passage from residence to workplace 
and vice-versa, be also incorporated in the appropriate schedule of the Act to 
determine the compensation payable to the employee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 20
 
 
 
21. The Committee observe that the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 does not 
have any provision regarding reimburseme nt of the expenditure to the employee 
incurred over the treatment due to injuries which he/she received during the course 
of employment.  It defines only compensation depending upon the percentage of 
impairment of the wage earning capacity of the employee caused due to accident.  
The reimbursement of the expenditure incurred over the treatment of injuries caused 
due to accidents is natural corollary prior to  compensation.  To have a provision for a 
latter contingency and not for the treatment expenditure is beyond any rational 
approach and requires consideration.  It is imperative that provision for 
reimbursement of medical expenditure is br ought within the purview of the Act.    
The Committee, therefore, strongly emphasi ze that the provision for reimbursement 
of actual medical expenditure incurred for treatment of  injuries caused during 
course of employment be made part of the Act.   

 21
22. The Committee note that the Government proposes to lay down certain 
eligibility criteria for the appointmen t of Workmen Compensation Commissioner 
under Section 20 of the Act whereby only those persons who have legal background 
shall have the eligibility to become the commissioner under this Act.   The 
Committee are of the opinion that restric ting the eligibility cr iteria only for the 
persons of legal background will be too rest rictive.  Since there is a well defined 
principle for determining the compensation amount, the role of the Commissioner is 
more administrative than legal in nature, hence person with legal acumen may not be 
of much consequences as far as functio ning of the Commissioner under the Act is 
concerned.  This is more so when the decision of the Commissioner is not a finality 
as far as the award and amount of compensatio n is concerned.  Besides, there is also 
no provision of time limit within which the Commissioner has to take decision 
regarding compensation.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
eligibility criteria for appointment of Commissioner under the Act needs to be 
widened.  Besides, persons from legal background, other educational qualifications 
like Personnel Management, Human Resource Development, Industrial Relations, 
etc. may also be included within the ambit of eligibility criteria for appointment as 
Commissioner.  Moreover, a stipulated ti me frame may be fixed within which the 
Commissioner should take a decision rega rding compensation.  This will go a long 
way in streamlining and expediting the delivery mechanism under the Act.  
  
NEW DELHI;                    SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,       
                                                                         Chairman, 
 17th December, 2008                  Standing Committee on Labour  
26 Agrahayana , 1930  (Saka) 

 22
APPENDIX 
 
As introduced in Lok Sabha 
 
Bill No.55 of 2008 
 
 
 
 
THE WORKMENS’ COMPENSATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008 
 
 
A 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
further to amend the Workmens’ Compensation Act, 1923. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:. 
 
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Workmen.s Compensation  
(Amendment) Act, 2008. 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government  
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
2.  In the long title to the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 (hereinafter  
referred to as the principal Act), for the word .workmen. the word 
.employee. shall be substituted. 
 
3.  In the principal Act, in the preamble, for the word .workmen., the word 
.”employee” shall be substituted. 
 
4. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word  
.Workmen.s., the word .Employees.. shall be substituted. 
 
5.  Throughout the principal Act, for the words .workman. and .workmen. 
wherever they occur, the words .employee. and .employees. shall 
respectively be substituted, and such  other consequential amendments as 
the rules of grammar may require shall also be made. 
 

 23
6. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),. 
 
(i) after clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:. 
.    
(dd) .employee. means any person who is. 
 
(i) a railway servant as defined in clause ( 34) of section 2 of  
the Railways Act, 1989, not permanently employed in any administrative, 
district or sub-divisional office of a railway and not employed in any such 
capacity as is specified in Schedule II, or 
 
(ii)  (a ) a master, seaman or other member of the crew of a ship, 
 
(b) a captain or other member of the crew of an aircraft, 
 
(c) recruited as driver, helper, mechanic, cleaner or in any 
other capacity in connection with a motor vehicle, 
 
(d) recruited for work abroad by a company, and who is 
employed outside India in any such capacity as is specified 
in Schedule II and the ship, ai rcraft or motor vehicle, or 
company, as the case may be, is registered in India, or 
 
(iii)  employed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II, 
whether the contract of employment was made before or 
after the passing of this Act and whether such contract is 
expressed or implied, oral or in writing; but does not include 
any person working in the capacity of a member of the 
Armed Forces of the Union;  and any reference to an 
employees who has been injured shall, where the employee 
is dead, include a reference to his dependants or any of 
them..; 
 
(ii) clause (n) shall be omitted. 
 
7. In section 4 of the principal Act,. 
 
(i)  in sub-section ( 1), after clause (b), Explanation II  shall be omitted; 
 
(ii)  sub-section (1A) shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1B) thereof, and 
before sub-section (1B) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:. 
 
 

 24
 
.(1A)  For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such monthly wage in 
relation to an employee as it may consider necessary..; 
 
(ii) in sub-section ( 4), for the words .two thousa nd and five hundred rupees., 
the words .not less than three thousa nd rupees or such sum, as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify,. 
shall be substituted. 
 
8.  In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words .appoint 
any person., the words .who is or has been  a member of a State Judicial Service 
for a period of not less than five years or  has been for not less than five years an 
advocate or a pleader. shall be inserted. 
 
9.  In the principal Act, in Schedule II,. 
 
(i)  for the word, number, brac kets and letter .section 2 (1) (n)., wherever they 
occur the word, number, brackets and letters .section 2( 1) (dd ). shall be 
substituted; 
 
  ( ii)  In item (i ) for the words .employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity or 
on a railway., the words .employed in railways. shall be substituted; 
 
(iii)  in item (ii), the words .otherwise than in a clerical capacity. shall be 
omitted; 
 
(iv)  in item ( iii), the words .wherein or within the precincts whereof twenty 
or more persons are so employed. shall be omitted; 
 
(v)  in item (v), the words .other than cler ical work. shall be omitted; 
 
(vi)  in item ( vi),. 
 
(a)  clause ( b) shall be omitted; 
 
(b)  In clause (c ), the words, brackets and letter .or sub-clause (b). shall 
be omitted; 
(vii)  in item (x), the words .otherwise than in a clerical capacity. shall be 
omitted; 
 
(viii)  in item ( xiv), the words .otherwise than in a clerical capacity. shall be 
omitted; 
 

 25
(ix)  in item (xvi ), the words .in which on any one day of the preceding twelve 
months more than twenty-five pers ons have been employed. shall be 
omitted; 
 
(x)  for item (xviii ) the following item shall be substituted, namely:. 
 
(xviii) employed on any estate which is maintained for the purpose  
of growing cardamom, cinchona, coffee, rubber or tea; or.; 
 
(xi)  in item (xix ), the words .otherwise than in a clerical capacity. shall be 
omitted; 
  
(xii)  in item ( xxvi),. 
 
(a) in clause (a), the words .and in which on any one day of the  
preceding twelve months ten or more persons have been so  
employed. shall be omitted; 
 
(b)  In clause ( b), the words .in which on any one day of the preceding 
twelve months fifty or more pers ons have been so employed. shall 
be omitted; 
 
(xiii)  in item ( xxx), the words .otherwise than in a clerical capacity. shall be 
omitted; 
 
(xiv) in items ( xl) and (xli), the words .in which on any one day of the 
preceding twelve months more than  twenty-five persons have been 
employed occurring at both items shall be omitted; 
 
(xv)  the Explanation occurring at the end shall be omitted. 

 26
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
 
The Workmen’.s Compensation Act, 1923 provides for payment of compensation 
to the workmen and their dependants in the case of injury by industrial accidents 
including certain occupational diseases arising  out of and in the course of employment 
resulting in death or disablement. The Ac t applies to certain railway servants and 
persons employed in hazardous employments such as factories, mines, plantations 
mechanically propelled vehicles, construction work, etc., specified in Schedule II of the 
Act. However, the Act is not applicable to the employees who are covered under the 
Employees. State Insurance Act, 1948. 
 
 
2.  The Second National Commission on Labour set-up in the year 2002 has made 
recommendations relating to amendment of  the Workmen’.s Compensation Act, 1923. 
The recommendations have been examined  in consultation with the concerned 
Ministries/Departments/State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. 
 
 
3.  The salient features of the Bill are as follows:. 
 
(1)  It provides for substitution of  the word .`workman’ with the word 
`employee’ so that the Act is applicab le to all classes of employees and to 
make the expression gender-neutral. 
 
(2)  To re-name the Workmen’s  Act, 1923 as the Employees. 
Compensation Act, 1923. 
 
(3)  To omit restrictive clauses in Schedule  II of the Act, so as to make it more 
workers friendly. 
 
(4)  Keeping in view the changing trend in the wage level of employees, it is 
proposed to have an enabling provision to revise the wage ceiling from 
time to time by the Central Government. 
 
(5) To enhance the funeral expenses of the deceased workman from Rs.  
2500/- to Rs. 3000/- and also to empower the Central Government to 
enhance such expenses from time to time. 
 
 
 
 

 27
 
 
(6)  Provision is being made so that persons who have a minimum 
qualification of not less than five ye ars as a member of a State Judicial 
Service or not less than five years of experience as an advocate or a 
pleader shall be eligible to become the Commissioner. 
 
 
4.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
 
 
 
N E W  D E L H I ;         O S C A R  F E R N A N D E S .  
The 19th September, 2008. 
  

 28
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
 
Sub-clause (ii) of clasue 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to revise 
the wage ceiling from time to time for calculation of maximum amount of compensation 
where death or permanent total disablement or permanent partial disablement results 
from the injury. Sub-clause ( iii) of the Bill, provides for the enhancement of the funeral 
expenses of the deceased workman from an amount of Rs. 2500 to Rs. 3000, and also 
empowers the Central Government to enhance such sum as the funeral expenses from 
time to time. 
 
2.  The above-mentioned proposals in thei r application to the workmen employed 
by the Central Government will involve increased expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India by way of payment of compensation. However, as compensation 
becomes payable only in the event of employment injury resulting in disablement or 
death, it is not possible to estimate in ad vance the amount of additional expenditure 
involved. 
 
3.  The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether recurring or non-
recurring nature. 
  

 29
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 
Sub-clause (ii) of Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to specify such monthly wage in 
relation to an employee as the Central Government may, consider necessary for 
calculation of maximum amount of co mpensation. Similarly, sub-clause ( iii) of the Bill 
seeks to increase the funeral expenses from Rs. 2500 to Rs. 3000 or  such sum, as the 
Central Government may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette. 
 
2.  The matters in respect of which th e Central Government is empowered by 
notification to specify certain amounts are  matters of administrative details or of 
procedure and it is not possible to provide fo r them in the Bill itself. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
  

 30
 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKMEN.S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923 
(8 OF 1923) 
 
 
An Act to provide for the payment by certain classes of employers to their 
workmen of compensation for injury by accident. 
 
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the payment by certain classes of 
employers to their workmen of compensation for injury by accident; 
 
It is hereby enacted as follows:. 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Workmen.s Compensation Act, 1923. 
 
*  *  *   *  * 
2. (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,. 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
(n) . workman. means any person who is. 
 
(i)  a railway servant as defined in clause ( 34) of section 2 of the Railways 
Act, 1989 not permanently employed in any administrative, district or 
subdivisional office of a railway and not employed in any such capacity as 
is specified in Schedule II, or 
 
(ia)  (a ) a master, seaman or other member of the crew of a ship, 
(b) a captain or other member of the crew of an aircraft, 
(c) a person recruited as driver, helper, mechanic, cleaner or in any 
other capacity in connection with a motor vehicle, 
(d) a person recruited for work abroad by a company, 
and who is employed outside India in any such capacity as is specified in 
Schedule II and the ship, aircraft or motor vehicle, or company, as the case 
may be, is registered in India, or; 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 31
 
(ii)  employed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II, whether 
the contract of employment was made before or after the passing of this  
Act and whether such contract is expressed or implied, oral or in writing; 
but does not include any person working in the capacity of a member of 
the Armed Forces of the Union; and any reference to a workman who has 
been injured shall, where the workman is dead, include a reference to his 
dependants or 
any of them. 
*   *   *   *    * 
4.  (1)  Subject to the provisions of this Act,  the amount of compensation shall be  
as follows, namely:. 
 
(a)  Where death results from the in jury   an amount equal to  
fifty per cent of the 
monthly wages of 
the deceased 
wokman multiplied 
by the relevant 
factor;  
 
or  
 
an amount of eighty 
thousand rupees, 
whichever is more; 
 
(b)  where permanent total disablement    an amount equal to  
 results from the injury    sixty per cent. from  
the injury of the 
monthly wages of 
the injured wokman 
multiplied by the 
relevant factor;  
 
or 
 
an amount of ninety 
thousand rupees, 
whichever is more; 
  
  
 
 

 32
 
 
Explanation I..  For the purposes of clause (a) and clause (b) .relevant factor. in 
relation to a workman means the factor specified in the second 
column of Schedule IV against the entry in the first column of that 
Schedule specifying the number of  years which are the same as the 
completed years of the age of the workman on his last birthday 
immediately preceding the date on which the compensation fell 
due. 
 
Explanation II..  Where the monthly wages of a workman exceed four thousand 
rupees, his monthly wages for the purposes of clause (a) and clause 
(b) shall be deemed to be four thousand rupees only; 
 
*   *   *   *    * 
 
(1A)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), while fixing the amount 
of compensation payable to a workman is respect of an accident occurred outside 
India, the Commissioner shall take into a ccount the amount of compensation, if 
any, awarded to such workman in accordance with the law of the country in 
which the accident occurred and shall re duce the amount fixed by him by the 
amount of compensation awarded to the workman in accordance with the law of 
that country. 
 
(4)  If the injury of the workman results in his death, the employer shall, in addition 
to the compensation under sub-section (1), deposit with the Commissioner a sum 
of two thousand and five hundred rupees for payment of the same to the eldest 
surviving dependant of the workman tow ards the expenditure of the funeral of 
such workman or where the workman did not have a dependant or was not 
living with his dependant at the time of his death to the person who actually 
incurred such expenditure. 
*   *    *    *    * 
 
20.  (1)  The State Government may, by notifi cation in the Official Gazette, appoint 
any person to be a Commissioner for Workmen.s Compensation for such 
area as may be specified in the notification. 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 33
 
SCHEDULE II 
[See section 2(1) (n)] 
LIST OF PERSONS WHO, SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 2(1)(n), 
ARE INCLUDED IN THE DEFINITION OF WORKMEN 
 
 
The following persons are workmen within the meaning of section 2(1)(n) and 
subject to the provisions of that section, that is to say, any person who is. 
 
(i)  employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity or on a railway, in 
connection with the operation, repair or maintenance of a lift or a vehicle 
propelled by steam or other mechanic al power or by electricity or in 
connection with the loading or unloading of any such vehicle; or 
 
(ii)  employed, otherwise than in a cleric al capacity, in any premises wherein 
or within the precincts whereof a ma nufacturing process as defined in 
clause (k) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948, is being carried on, or in 
any kind of work whatsoever incidental to or connected with any such 
manufacturing process or with th e article made, whether or not 
employment in any such work is with in such premises or precincts and 
steam, water or other mechanical power or electrical power is used; or 
 
(iii)  employed for the purpose of making , altering, repairing, ornamenting, 
finishing or otherwise adapting for us e, transport or sale any article or 
part of an article in any premises wh erein or within the precincts whereof 
twenty or more persons are so employed; 
  
Explanation.. For the purposes of this clause, persons employed outside such 
premises or precincts but in any work  incidental to, or connected, with, 
the work relating to making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing or 
otherwise adapting for use, transport or sale of any article or part of an 
article shall be deemed to be employed  within such premises or precincts; 
or 
 
 *   *    *    * 
 
(v) employed, in any mine as defined in clause ( j) of section 2 of the Mines 
Act, 1952, in any mining operation or in any kind of work other than 
clerical work, incidental to or conne cted with any mining operation or 
with the mineral obtained, or in an y kind of work whatsoever below 
ground; or 
 
 

 34
 
 
(vi) employed as the master or as a seaman of. 
 
*   *   *   *    * 
 
(b)  any ship not includ ed in sub-clause (a), of twenty-five tons net 
tonnage or over; or (c) any sea-going ship not included in sub-clause (a) or 
sub-clause (b ) provided with sufficient area for navigation under sales 
alone; or 
 
*    *   *   *    * 
(x)  employed, otherwise than in a cler ical capacity, in the construction, 
working, repair or demolition of any aerial ropeway, canal, pipeline or 
sewer; or 
 
*   *   *   *    * 
(xiv)  employed, otherwise than in a cler ical capacity, in connection with 
operation for winning natural petroleum or natural gas; or 
 
*   *   *   *    * 
 
(xvi) employed in the making of any excavation in which on any one day of 
the preceding twelve months more than twenty-five persons have been 
employed or explosives have been used, or whose depth from its highest 
to its lowest point exceeds twelve feet; or 
*   *   *   *    * 
 
(xvii)  employed, otherwise than in a cleric al capacity, on any estate which is 
maintained for the purpose of gr owing cardamom, cinchona, coffee, 
rubber or tea, and on which on any one day in the preceding twelve 
months twenty-five or more persons have been so employed; or 
 
(xix)  employed, otherwise than in a cl erical capacity, in the generating, 
transforming transmitting or distri bution of electrical energy or in 
generation or supply of gas; or 
 
*   *   *   *    * 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 35
 
(xxvi)  employed in the handling or transport of goods in, or within the precincts 
of,. 
 
(a)  any warehouse or other place in  which goods are stored, and in 
which on any one day of the preceding twelve months ten or more 
persons have been so employed; or 
 
(b)  any market in which on any one day of the preceding twelve months 
fifty or more persons have been so employed; or 
  
*   *   *   *   * 
 
(xxx)  employed, otherwise than in a cler ical capacity, in the construction, 
working, repair or maintenance of a tube-well; or 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
(xl)  employed in cleaning of jungles or reclaiming land or ponds in which on 
any one day of the preceding twelve months more than twenty-five persons have 
been employed; or 
 
(xli)  employed in cultivation of land or  rearing and maintenance of live-stock 
or forest operations or fishing in which on any one day of the preceding twelve 
months more than twenty-five persons have been employed; or 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
Explanation.. In this Schedule, .the preceding twelve months. relates in 
any particular case to the twelve mo nths ending with the day on which 
the accident in such case occurred. 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
 
GMGIPMRND.3299LS.14.10.2008. 

 36
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
.... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further to amend the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.... 
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of State for Labour and Employment) 

 37
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  HELD ON  WEDNESDAY, 12TH NOVEMBER,  2008  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to   1700 hours in Committee Room `C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New  Delhi to have  briefing by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment on the Bills `The Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2008’ and 
`The Workmen’s Compensation (Amendment) Bill, 2008’.  
 
 
PRESENT  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Subrata Bose 
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
7. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
8. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
9. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
               
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
  
10.  Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
11. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
12. Shri Gandhi Azad 
13. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
14. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
  
SECRETARIAT 
         
   
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2.        Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
 3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary  
  
 
 
 

 38
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT  
  
1. Smt. Sudha Pillai, Secretary (L&E) 
2. Shri S. Krishnan, Special Secretary 
3. Shri S.K. Verma, Director 
4. Shri A.V. Singh, Director 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed   the representatives of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment to the sitting of th e Committee being held to have briefing on 
the Bills `The Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2008’ and `The Workmen’s 
Compensation (Amendment) Bill, 2008’.  
        
3. XX     XX    XX  
 
4. The major points which were discussed  on `The Workmen’s Compensation 
(Amendment) Bill, 2008’ inter-alia included:- 
 
(i) The extent to which the definition of  ‘employee’ as proposed in the Bill is 
comprehensive and inclusive. 
(ii) The reasons for not self-containing the list of employments as given in 
Schedule II of the Act. 
(iii) The reasons for not including th e contract/casual worker within the 
definition of the term ‘employee’. 
(iv) The factors that were taken into account for determining the amount of 
compensation for various category of injuries.  
(v) The parameters for deciding the am ount of compensation for employees 
working abroad.  
(vi) The qualification and jurisdiction  of the person to be appointed as 
Commissioner.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of La bour and Employment clarified some of 
the questions and queries raised by th e Chairman and other Members of the 
Committee.  The Chairman then requested the Secretary to send written replies to those 
questions whose replies were not readily available within ten days to the Committee.    
 
  The witnesses then withdrew.  
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
   
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 39
  
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  HELD ON  WEDNESDAY, THE 17TH DECEMBER,  2008  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room No.139, 
Parliament House Annexe, New  Delhi to have briefing by the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment on  `The Plantations Labour (Amendment) Bill, 
2008’   and to consider and adopt draft Thir ty-Sixth and Thirty-Seventh reports on `The 
Employees’ State Insurance (Amendme nt) Bill, 2008’ and `The Workmen’s 
Compensation (Amendment) Bill, 2008’. 
 
 
PRESENT  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
4. Shri Furkan Ansari 
5. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
6. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
8. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
9. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
               
  RAJYA SABHA  
  
10. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
  
SECRETARIAT 
         
   
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2.         Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
 3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary  
  
 
 
 
 
 

 40
  
2.   XX    XX   XX 
         
3.  XX    XX   XX 
  
4. XX    XX   XX 
 
 
5. Thereafter, the Committee  took up the fo llowing draft reports for consideration:- 
 
(i) XX    XX   XX 
 
(ii) Draft Thirty-Seventh Report on `The Workmen’ Compensation 
(Amendment) Bill, 2008’.   
 
6. After discussing the contents of the Re ports, the Committee adopted the reports 
with some verbal modifications. 
 
7. The Committee then authorized the Chai rman to finalise the above Reports and 
present the same to the Parliament. 
  
8. The Committee also placed on record th eir appreciation for the service rendered 
to them by the officers/staff attached to the Committee. 
 
9.   XX    XX    XX 
 
 
     The Committee then adjourned. 