 
 
 3 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2004-05) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
 
Action ta ken by the Governmen t on  the Recommendations/Observations  
contained in the First Report of th e Standing Committee on Labour on 
Demands for Grants - 2004-2005 of the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
 
 
 
  THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
            
  
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2005/Phalguna   1926 (Saka) 

 
 
 3 
 THIRD REPORT 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2004-05) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
contained in the First Report of th e Standing Committee on Labour on 
Demands for Gran ts -  2004-2005 of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment) 
 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.03.2005 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  22.03.2005 
 
 
 
  
            
  
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2005/Phalguna   1926 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
 
       
       
       
       
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       
 
 
INTRODUCTION           
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report…………………………………………………………  
 
 
CHAPTER II             Recommendations/Observations which have been   
 accepted by the Government……………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III           Recommendations/Observations which the Committee    
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV           Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by the  
Committee and which require reiteration……………………… 
 
CHAPTER V             Recommendations/Observations in respect of which    
replies of the Government  are interim in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDIX-I             Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on     
 17 March  2005. 
 
APPENDIX-II           Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the             
Recommendations contained in the First Report  
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (2004-05) 
 
Shri P.K. Vasudevan Nair-CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar    
10. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi   
12. Shri Ananta Nayak   
13. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
14. Shri Lal Mani Prasad   
15. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
16. Shri Mohan Rawale  
17. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
18. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh   
19. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
20. Shri Parasnath Yadav   
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  21. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  22. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
  23. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
  24. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
  25. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
  26. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  27. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
28. Shri Dilip Ray 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.    Shri P.D.T. Achary  -           Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.S. Misra   - Deputy Secretary  
 4.    Shri S.K.Saxena  - Assistant Director 
 
  
      ( i i i )  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorised  by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Third Report on the 
action taken by the Government on the recomme ndations contained in the First Report of 
the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteen th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants-
2004-2005 relating to Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also  laid in  Rajya Sabha on 
19th August, 2004.  The Ministry of Labour a nd Employment furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations  contained in that Report on  15.12.2004. 
The  report was considered and adopted  by the Standing Committee on Labour at their 
sitting held on  17 March  2005. 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following chapters:- 
 
I. Report. 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
Government. 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s reply. 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration. 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report of the St anding Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
5. For the facility of reference reco mmendations/observations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;       P.K. VASUDEVAN NAIR,  
17   March, 2005        C H A I R M A N  
26  Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
    
 
(iv)

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
       REPORT 
         
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations cont ained in the First Report (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants  -  2004-2005 of 
the Ministry  of Labour and Employment.  
 
1.2 The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 19 August 2004.  It contained 23 recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the recommendations  have  been examined and are categorised as 
under :- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 2, 3, 7, 8, 9,11,17 and 21. 
 
(Total  8 - Chapter II) 
          
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire  to  pursue  in view of the  replies  of  the Government: 
Paragraph  Sl.  Nos. 1, 5 , 6, 10, 14, 15, 20 and 22. 
 
(Total 8 - Chapter  III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have  not  been  accepted  by  the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 4 ,  16, 18 and 23.  
 
(Total 4 - Chapter  IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  replies are of 
interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Sl. Nos.  12, 13, and 19. 
  
(Total 3 -  Chapter V)  
 
 
 
    - 1 -  
 

-2- 
1.3 The Committee desire that acti on taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final ac tion taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained  in Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished  to it 
urgently, and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of this 
Report.  
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with  the action taken replies of the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para No.1.23) 
Comprehensive legislation for Agricultural Workers 
 
1.5 The Committee had expressed serious c oncern that as on date there is no 
concrete scheme for the welfare of gigant ic agricultural workforce in the country 
and therefore recommended to bring a co mprehensive legislation for agricultural 
workers to provide for minimum social security for them viz.  s e c u r i t y  o f  
employment, hours of work, payment of wa ges and machinery   for settlement of 
disputes, etc.  
 
1.6 The Ministry of Labour and Employmen t, in their reply have sated that 
due to lack of consensus and divergen t views of the State Governments, no 
headway could be made to enact a compre hensive legislation for the agricultural 
workers.  They have further stated that th ere is a proposal to en act a legislation to 
regulate the employment and conditions of service of unogranised sector’ workers 
to provide for their safety, social security, health and welfare which will also 
cover the agricultural workers.  
 
1.7 The Committee have been informed th at the Government is proposing  
to enact a legislation to regulate the employment and conditions of service of 
workers in unorganized sector which will also cover the agricultural 
workers.  In the opinion of the Committe e, although the proposed legislation 
for the unorganized sector might benefi t the agricultural workers a little, it 
would not be enough to ameliorate the condition of 11 crore agricultural 
workers.  The Committee, therefore, de sire that the Government should 
intensify its efforts and e volve a consensus among the States in the matter.   
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendations urge the  
Government to take urgent steps to br ing an umbrella legislation exclusively 
for the agriculture labourers at the earliest which could alleviate their 
sufferings. 

-3- 
Recommendation (Sl. No.16, Para No.2.95) 
 
Amendments to Employees’ Provident Funds & Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act 
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended for amendments in the Employees’ 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provi sions Act, 1952 to reduce the minimum 
number of employees required for EPF coverage from 20 to 10 in all 
establishments and removal of scheduled i ndustries restrictions in order to check 
the unfair practices indulged in by unscrupulous employers and also to enlarge the 
coverage under the Employees’ Provident  Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act.  
 
1.9 The Ministry of Labour and Employment  in their reply have stated that a 
proposal for carrying out amendments to Employees’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 was considered by the Central Board of 
Trustees (CBT) in its Meeting held  on 09.07.2002.  The employer trustees have 
vehemently opposed the proposal for reducing the number from 20 to 10.  The 
Board has agreed to the proposed amendments , in principle, and has left the final 
decision in the matter to the Governme nt.  The proposed amendments will be 
considered by the Government keeping in view the concerns expressed by certain 
members of the CBT (EPF).  
 
1.10 The Committee take a serious note of the Government’s stereo-typed 
reply that the Central Board of Tr ustees has agreed to the proposed 
amendments for reducing the minimum num ber of employees from 20 to 10 
and removal of scheduled industries restrictions in the Employees’ Provident 
Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, in  principle.  It has, however,  left 
the final decision in the matter to the Cenral Government. The Committee 
further note that this matter has been pending for consideration of the 
Central Government for almost a decade and no amendment has been 
brought forward in the said Act.  The Committee, while reiterating their 
earlier recommendations observe that in the context of globalisation and  
modern technology in particular, most of the establishments employing less 
than 20 persons remain uncovered from the purview of the Employees’ 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act.  They, therefore, 
strongly urge upon the Ministry to suitably amend the provisions of the Act 
so as to bring more establishments under its ambit.  

-4- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.18, Para No.2.97) 
 
EPF interest rate 
1.11 While expressing their deep concern on lowering the rate of interest from 
9.5% during the year 2003-04 to 8.5% for the year 2004-05, which is affecting 
nearly 4 crore EPF subscribers, the Co mmittee were of the opinion that on such 
important issues concerning workers, the decision should always be taken by 
consensus.  The Committee had, therefore, urged the Government to safeguard the 
interests of the subscribers while taking a final decision in the EPF interest rate 
and till such time the status quo in the rate of interest may be maintained.  
 
1.12 The Ministry of Labour and Employment,  in their reply have stated that 
the Central Board of Trustees in its 163 rd meeting held on 19.08.2003, had 
recommended the rate of interest @9.5%  p.a. (9% plus 0.5% bonus interest) for 
the year 2003-04.  The same is yet to be ratified by the Minist ry of Finance.  
Further, the CBT in its meeting held on 09.08.2004, recommended the rate of 
interest @8.5% p.a. for the financial year 2004-05.  The same has also not been 
notified by the Central Government ti ll date.  The Ministry of Labour and 
Employment has already requested the Mini stry of Finance to ratify the interest 
rate for the years 2003-04 and 2004-05. 
 
1.13 The Committee take a serious note of the fact that the Ministry of 
Finance had not ratified the rate of interest for the years 2003-2004 and 
2004-2005.  The reply furnished by the Ministry now is no different from the 
one furnished during examination of detailed Demands-for-Grants for the 
year 2004-05. The Committee express its deep concern over the delay on the 
part of the Government in taking a fina l decision in determining the rate of 
interest for the year 2004-05.  The Committ ee while reiterating their earlier 
recommendation desire that 
status quo in the rate of  interest i.e., 9.5% may 
be maintained in determining the EPF rate of interest and ratify the same for 
the years 2003-04 and 2004-05 without further delay. 
 

-5- 
Recommendation (S.No. 23, para 2.126) 
     INDUSTRIAL SICKNESS 
1.14 The Committee had recommended that the issue relating to statutory dues 
of the public sector employees due to  industrial sickness amounting to Rs. 1,365 
crore representing the wages, provident fund dues, employees’ state insurance 
dues, etc. should be paid im mediately to the CPSU employees in order to protect 
their interests.   
 
1.15 The Ministry in their reply have stat ed that as per the recommendations of 
the Group of Ministers, set up to devise a strategy for liquidation of outstanding 
statutory dues of the workers of CPSUs, defaulting CPSUs have been advised by 
the Government to clear outstanding due s to their employees in a time bound 
manner.  As a result of the action initi ated by the Government, the outstanding 
dues of CPSU employees, which were Rs .1,905 crore in respect of 59 CPSUs as 
on 31.12.2002 declined to Rs. 1,365 crore in 41 CPSUs as on 30.6.2004.  The 
outstanding dues have further declined  to Rs.820 crore in 33 CPSUs as on 
31.07.2004.  Hence, of the 59 CPSUs in respec t of whom dues were outstanding 
as on 31.12.2002, 26 CPSUs have so far cleared their dues. 
 
1.16 The Committee express th eir serious concern that  out of 59 CPSUs in 
respect of whom statutory dues were outstanding as on 31.12.2002, only 26 
CPSUs have so far cleared their dues.  The Committee further note that an 
amount of Rs. 820 crore is yet to be pa id as statutory dues to the public 
sector employees.  The Committee are not at all satisfied with the   snail’s 
pace at which the matter of payment of statutory dues to the public sector 
employees is being processed.  More than two years have been elapsed since 
this issue has been taken up.  While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, being the nodal Mini stry, should pursue with the  
Administrative Ministries to  clear all the outstanding dues of the employees 
of Public Sector Undertakings under their control without further delay.  
The Committee further desire that the action taken in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee.     

-6- 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para 1.16) 
 
APEX HITECH INSTITUTE, BANGALORE 
 
2.1 The Committee note that the expe nditure on Building & Equipment for 
Apex Hi-tech Institute, Bangalore is zero whereas the allocation made at BE was 
Rs.10 lakh which was reduced to Rs.0.10 lakh at RE stage. The Committee have 
been apprised that the proposal for se tting up of Apex Hitech Institute at 
Bangalore was approved by the Expenditu re Finance Committee in March 1998 
which is still functioning in a limited way with temporary accommodation 
provided by Foremen Training Institute as the Planning Commission has not 
agreed to extend  ‘in principle’ approva l to construct a separate building. The 
Committee are not happy with the situation and are of the opinion that the Apex 
Hi-Tech Institute at Bangalore should have been set up much earlier. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Planning Commission be persuaded once 
again and necessary approval might be sought  to make the Apex Hitech Institute 
at Bangalore fully functional.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.2 With regard to Building and Equipment for Apex Hitech Institute 
Bangalore it has been informed that th e proposal for seeking “in principle’ 
approval of the scheme – Building & E quipment for Apex Hi-tech Institute, 
Bangalore was forwarded to the Planning Commission on    8
th October 2003.  
This was not agreed to by the Planning Commission.   The Planning Commission   
is being requested once again to review  its earlier decision and accord ‘in 
principle’ approval on the scheme. Th e Ministry shall follow up the matter 
vigorously   so as to make Apex Hi-tech Institute fully functional. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 

-7- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para No. 1.20) 
 
Hospitals for Beedi Workers 
 
2.3 The Committee regret to note that the Sagar Hospital (Madhya Pradesh) 
and Mukkudal Hospital (Tamil Nadu) for Beedi Workers could not be made 
functional due to non-materialization of construction work which resulted in a 
saving of Rs.643.34 lakh. The Committee is not happy with the situation as the 
sanction for establishing these hospitals were issued in October 2001. It is clear 
that the Ministry’s coordination with the Central Public Works Department 
(CPWD) is not satisfactory.  The Committee,  therefore, desires that the Ministry 
should take up the matter with the CPWD at  a higher level and have the hospitals 
constructed at the ea rliest.  The Committee also desires that the posts of medical 
officers lying vacant in various hospitals  for beedi workers should be filled up 
expeditiously. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
2.4 The Ministry has taken up the matter of slow progress of  construction of 
hospitals at Sagar (Madhya Pradesh)  and Mukkudal (Tamil Nadu) under Beedi 
Workers Welfare Fund with the Director General, Works, Central Public Works 
Department (CPWD). It may be noted  that OPD Facilities in the Mukkudal 
Hospital (Tamil Nadu) has been started since 30 th July, 2004. Both the Hospitals 
are likely to be completed by April, 2005. The matter for filling up the vacant 
posts of Medical Officers has been taken up with the Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 

-8- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.32) 
 
Directorate General, Factory Advice Services and Labour Institutes 
 
2.5 The Committee note that Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & 
Labour Institutes is entrusted with an important task of improving safety, health 
and welfare of workers in the factories and ports/docks, but it has not been very 
effective in preventing fatal and nonfatal a ccidents.  As many as  24 fatal and 176 
non-fatal accidents have occurred during 2002-03 alone. The Committee also note 
that some of the National Studies on sa fety, health and wo rking conditions in 
various types of operations /processing /industries are still under process and there 
are 112 posts still lying vacant in the organization.  The Committee are of view 
that the organization should carry out more  inspections in factories and docks to 
identify the causes leading to accident s and suggest remedial measures to 
minimize the accidents.  The Committee, th erefore, desires that the Ministry 
should strengthen the organization by pr oviding sufficient manpower to enable it 
to intensify the activities on improving working conditions, health status of 
workers and other matters relating to industrial safety in the factories and ports. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.6 As a part of the enforcement activity, all the fatal and serious accidents in 
the ports are investigated by the Inspect ors of Dock Safety to find out the 
probable causes and suggest remedial m easures. On the basis of analysis and 
findings of the accidents, appropriate meas ures are taken like issuing of warning 
orders, prosecution, advising the port author ities and other port users, discussing 
and drawing up suitable action plans in th e Port Safety Committee Meetings, etc., 
depending upon the seriousness of the cont raventions of the provisions under the 
statutes to prevent their recurrence.  
 
2.7 Considering the means of transportation as the major cause for fatal 
accidents in the ports, the matter was disc ussed in the Meeting of the Advisory 
Committee constituted under Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act, 
1986.  As a follow up, DGFASLI had given directions to all the Port Trusts to 
undertake the following measures for controlling these accidents. 
 
1. Constitution of sub-committee of the Safety Committees.              
2. Imparting of training on defensiv e driving to all the drivers of 
transport equipment. 
3. Display of traffic signs and cautionary notices. 
4. Maintenance of roads and approaches, etc. 
 
Sincere attempts are being made to complete the National Studies on 
Safety, Health and working conditions by DGFASLI.   
 
 
 

-9- 
 
2.8 The Inspections in factories are carried  out by the Inspectors of Factories 
appointed under the Factor ies Act by the respective St ate Governments/ UTs.  
However, DGFASLI carries out inspection in the Docks. The Inspectorates under 
DGFASLI is making all possible efforts to  carry out as many inspections as 
possible with a view to identify the h azards, create and maintain safe working 
conditions and prevent accidents. 
 
2.9 Efforts to fill up the vacant posts for strengthening the organisation are 
being made and recently, requisition to fill up 8 posts of Assistant Director 
(Safety) was sent to UPSC. It is felt that the enforcement activities of the 
Inspectorates of Dock Safety would be gr eatly enhanced with the filling up of the 
vacant posts through UPSC, as recommended by the Committee. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 

-10- 
 
Recommendation / (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.33) 
 
 
Directorate General, Factory Advice Services and Labour Institutes 
 
 
2.10 The Committee regret to note that some  of the States have neither notified 
the Model Rules framed under Factories (Amendment) Act, 1987 nor notified the 
MAHC Rules (Major Accidents Hazards Control Rules) which is clearly 
indicative of poor monitoring done by the Ministry.  The Committee are of the 
view that there should be no compromise in so far as safety and health of the 
workers is concerned, and therefore, desire the Ministry to persuade the remaining 
State Governments to notify the Model Rules and MAHC Rules without further 
delay. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
2.11 The Model Rules framed under the Factories (Amendment) Act, 1987 
have been notified by major states. Th e newly constituted states such as 
Chhattisgarh, Uttaranchal and other states having smaller number of major 
factories, such as Himachal Prades h, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Tripura and Andaman & Nicobar Islands have not notified these Rules 
so far.   
 
2.12 The MAHC Rules have also been no tified by the major states. During the 
44th Conference of CIFs held at Pondicherry from 11–14 February, 2002, it was 
decided to circulate the Draft Mahara shtra State Factories Rules and Major 
Accident Hazard Control Rules amongst all CIFs. The Chief Inspectors of 
Factories of the states, who have not notified the Model Rules and the Major 
Accident Hazard Control Rules, have been  requested to notify these rules. The 
status is monitored during the Annual Conference of Chief Inspector of Factories 
and they are requested to impress upon their Governments to expedite the 
notification of these Rules. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-11- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.34) 
 
 
Directorate General, Factory Advice Services and Labour Institutes 
 
 
 
2.13 The Committee note with dismay that the Ennore Port, which has become 
a major port in the country, does not have any Inspectorate of Dock Safety as per 
the scale laid down in the Schedule appended to the Regulations.  The Committee 
have been informed that the proposal fo r creation of necessary  posts and setting 
up of Inspectorate at Ennore is under c onsideration of the Ministry.  The 
Committee fail to understand as to why the Inspectorate of Dock Safety at Ennore 
Port has not so far been set up as this Port started functioning as a Major Port 
during March, 1999 and, therefore, desire that there should not be any further 
delay in setting up the office of Insp ectorate at Ennore Port with full 
infrastructure.   
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 
2.14 The activities of Inspecti ons at Ennore are presen tly being looked after by 
the Inspectorate of Dock Safety, Chennai in view of the shor tage of Assistant 
Director (Safety) in the DGFASLI organisation. A requisition to fill up 8 posts of 
Assistant Director (Safety) was sent to the Union Public Service Commission 
after obtaining the clearance of Screening Committee. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 
 

-12- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.56) 
 
Directorate General of Mines Safety 
 
2.15 The Committee note with utmost concern that during the last 20 years the 
size of the mining industry has increased  many fold whereas staff strength of 
DGMS remained static at a grossly inade quate level in meeting the safety norms 
in mines. The Committee also note that the complete general inspection in coal 
mines should be done at least once in a year  whereas it is made once in 2-3 years. 
The Department has only 131 Inspecting Officers against the sanctioned strength 
of 163. The Committee are totally distress ed over the situation of inadequate 
inspecting staff which will have serious impact on safety operations in mines. The 
Committee therefore strongly feel that there should be no compromise in so far as 
safety of mine workers is  concerned, and therefore, recommend that the mine 
safety enforcement machinery should be  strengthened by filling up the posts of 
inspecting staff without further delay. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.16 All possible efforts are being made to fill up the vacant posts for 
strengthening the enforcement machinery under DGMS, so as to enable them to 
make general inspection of a ll coal mines at least once in  a year. A requisition to 
fill up 9 posts of Deputy Director of Mines Safety was sent to Union Public 
Service Commission after obtaining the clearance of Screening Committee. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 

-13- 
 
Recommendation / ( Sl. No. 17, Para No  2.96) 
 
 SOCIAL SECURITY SCHEME  
 
2.17 The Committee note that out of 400 la kh subscribers, only 12 lakh have been 
allotted National Social Security Numb er (NSSN) under the newly introduced Re-
inventing EPF India Scheme.  The Committee,  therefore, desire that NSSN number 
should be allotted to every subscriber without  further delay so that  these are utilized by 
them for their early settlement of PF claims  and pension from any of the offices  of 
Employees' Provident Fund  throughout the country. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
2.18 The National Data Centre is seized of th e matter and the data collection activity is 
under way in coordination with the various  field offices. All concerned Regional 
Offices/Sub Regional Offices/S ub Accounts Offices have adequately been impressed 
about the importance of the programme. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 

-14- 
 
Recommendation / (Sl. No. 21, Para 2.119) 
 
WAGE BOARD FOR WORKIN G JOURNALISTS AND NON-
JOURNALISTS NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES 
 
2.19 The Committee also desire that the Mini stry should also persuade the State 
Governments of Haryana, Jharkhand, Jammu and Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, 
Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab and Uttranch al and the Union territories of 
Chandigarh and Pondicherry to constitute  the Tripartite Committees for speedy 
and effective implementation of the recommendations of the Wage Boards. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.20 The State Governments of Haryana, Jharkhand, Jammu and Kashmir, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Punj ab and Uttaranchal and the Union 
territories of Chandigarh and Pondicher ry have been requested recently on 
24.09.2004 to take immediate necessary steps to implement the recommendations 
of the Wage Boards, constitution of Tripartite Committee and to intimate the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment at the earliest possible of the action taken. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 

-15- 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
 
Recommendation / (Sl. No. 1, Para 1.14) 
 
General Performance of the Ministry 
 
3.1 The Committee note that the Mini stry of Labour & Employment have 
improved their expenditure both in Plan a nd Non-Plan allocati on during the year 
2003-2004, but the expenditure on some of the schemes such as Welfare of SC/ST 
job seekers through coaching, guidance and vocational training; Strengthening of 
NVTI/RVTI for women, Management In formation System, Upgradation of 
Training Infrastructure in DGE&T In stitutes; Indo-American Child Labour 
Project with matching US Grant; Modernisation of Machine Tabulation Unit; 
Improvement and Strengthening of Enforcement and Implementation System for 
safety and Health is not upto the mark and in some of the schemes , such as 
Building  and Equipment  for Apex Hitech Institute , Bangalore  improvement and 
Strengthening of Training Wing of  Central Labour Service Officers; 
Strengthening of Occupational Safety and H ealth Strategies in Priority Hazardous 
Chemical Process, etc, the expenditure is zero.   The reasons put forth by the 
Ministry for less spending or no spending at all on some of the schemes, such as, 
non-filling up of vacant posts, non-procu rement of computer equipment, non-
settlement of bills and non-approval of two new Plan Schemes are not convincing 
to the Committee.  The Committee are, therefore, of the opinion that the 
monitoring and coordination of the Ministry with other implementing agencies are 
not very effective.  The Committee, ther efore, desire that the Ministry should 
improve their planning and coordination wi th the implementing agencies so that 
the schemes become functional and the funds  allocated are not left unspent.  The 
Committee also desire that the matter may be taken up vigorously with the 
concerned agencies (UPSC and SSC etc) for filling up the pos ts lying vacant 
under various organizations of the Ministry.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 3.2 (i)  In the scheme of Welfare of SC/ST job-seekers through coaching 
cum guidance Centre, there was a propos al for opening of new Coaching cum-
Guidance Centres in the States not cove red so far.  The Planning Commission, 
however, wanted an evaluation study of  the existing Coaching-cum-Guidance 
Centres, before they could consider new Centres under this scheme. Therefore, 
the provision made for new Coaching-cum-Guidance Centres had to be reduced.   
 
 
 

-16- 
 
 As far as modus operandi for improving Planning & Coordination 
with the implementing agencies, performance of the various training schemes 
under Training Directorate is concerned , it is informed that the performance is 
regularly monitored through monthly progress returns and through visits of senior 
officers to field institutes. Progress of sc hemes is also regularly reviewed by the 
Director General / Joint Secretary at the Headquarters. As far as proposals for new 
schemes are concerned, it is stated th at the Planning Co mmission is being 
periodically requested to expeditious clearance of the afore-mentioned new 
schemes. The Ministry of Labour and Employment is in constant touch with them. 
The reasons for shortfall or no spending in  utilization of allocated budget in the 
schemes of DGE&T are summarized below. 
 
(ii)  Strengthening of NVTI/RVTI for women: 
 
Under the Scheme, “Strengthening of NVTI/RVTI for Women”, there was no 
short fall in utilization of allocated budget during fi nancial year 2003-04 and 
marginal shortfall in 2001-02.   Duri ng the year 2002-03, out of the allocated 
budget of Rs.132 lakh, Rs.31 lakh were dive rted for another scheme, namely, 
“Establishment of additional RVTIs for women” also meant for women training 
under Plan Scheme Therefor e the expenditure under the scheme, “Strengthening 
of NVTI/RVTI for Women” was Rs.96.03 la kh (negligible shortfall) and for a 
scheme, “Establishment of additiona l RVTIs for women” against a budget 
provision of Rs.133 lakh, the expenditure was Rs.166.77 lakh. As such, there was 
no shortfall in expenditure for women training schemes. 
 
(iii)  Management Information System:     
 
Under the scheme, “Management Information System”, there was only 
marginal shortfall in expenditure during the Financial Year 2001-02 and Financial 
Year 2002-03.   However, budget estimate for the scheme, for Financial Year  
2003-04 was Rs.20 lakh.  It was for procurem ent of computer related equipment. 
Order worth Rs.19.91 lakh was placed to Directorate General of Supply & 
Disposal. Though the equipment had been  received, Directorate General of 
Supply & Disposal could not raise all the bills. Thus, technically there was also no 
shortfall in the expenditure under this scheme. 
 
(iv)  Upgradation of Training Infrastructure in DGE&T Institutes: 
 
 Budget estimate for the scheme, “Upgradation of Training Infrastructure 
in DGE&T Institutes” for 2001-02 was Rs.42.60 lakh.   Expenditure was Rs.32.63 
lakh. Shortfall of Rs.9.97 lakh is due to the fact that though equipment worth 
Rs.9.0 lakh was supplied by Directorate General of Supply & Disposal to 
different field Institutes, but the bills could not be raised by them during the 
Financial Year.   During the FY 2002-03 against an allocated budget of Rs.65.0  
 
 
 

-17- 
 
lakh, expenditure was Rs.62.81 lakh. Shortfal l of Rs.2.19 lakh was due to the fact 
that supply of equipment wo rth Rs.2.0 lakh to different fi eld Institutes, could not 
materialize and spilled over to the next Financial Year. 
 
(v) Building & Equipment for Apex Hi-tech Institute, Bangalore 
 
 With regard to Building and Equi pment for Apex Hitech Institute 
Bangalore it has been informed that th e proposal for seeking “in principle’ 
approval of the scheme – Building & E quipment for Apex Hi-tech Institute, 
Bangalore was forwarded to the Planning Commission on 8 th October 2003. The 
Planning Commission did not agree to this .  The Planning Commission   is being 
requested once again to review its earli er decision and accord ‘in principle’ 
approval on the scheme. The Ministry shall follow up the matter vigorously   so as 
to make Apex Hi-tech Institute fully functional. 
 
During the Financial year 2003-2004, against a budgetary provision of 
Rs.67.0 lakh, expenditure was Rs.48.20 lakh.   Shortfall of Rs.18.80 lakh was 
mainly due to the following reasons: - 
 
¾ Reduction of Budgetary provision at RE Stage by 22%, as per the 
instructions of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 
 
¾ Though supply order for equipment worth Rs.7.30 lakh was placed, it 
could not be received during the Financial Year, which resulted in savings. 
 
3.3 As far as improving the overall plan ning and coordination in the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment with implemen ting agencies is concerned, it may be 
stated that in order to avoid under / non-utilization of Funds under the schemes, 
instructions have been issued to all concerned to prepare Budget Estimates and 
Revised Estimates on more realistic basi s and to keep provisions only for those 
schemes which can be implemented effectiv ely during the year.  It has also been 
stressed that the implementing /related ag encies may ensure that schemes become 
functional and the funds allocated are not le ft unspent.  All the Divisional Heads 
have also been requested to ensure high degree of financial discipline and even 
flow of expenditure during the year and this is being reviewed in the monthly 
meeting of all the Divisiona l Heads under the chairmansh ip of Secretary (Labour 
& Employment). 
 
3.4 The reasons for shortfall or no e xpenditure as agai nst budget allocation 
under the various schemes other than Training Directorate are given as below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-18- 
 
(a) Indo-American Child Labour Project with matching U.S. Grant: 
The Ministry of Labour – US – DOL project is being developed as a 
follow up of the Joint Statement on “Enhanced Indo-US Cooperation on 
Eliminating Child Labour” signed between the M/o. Labour and the US, 
Department of Labour in August 2000. The Scheme of Indo-US Matching grant 
(Renamed as INDUS Project)  a new scheme approved by the Planning 
Commission in the last financial year of 9 th Plan (2001-2002) a nd the duration of 
the project is three years. The full e xpenditure under the Scheme could not be 
made in the last financial year, as it had not been cleared by CCEA. Under the 
Project, 20 districts in 4 states namely, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu and Maharashtra are to be covered.  The US Depa rtment of Labour would 
provide US $ 20 million (US $ 13 million for the labour component and US $ 7 
million for the education component) to be  matched, with equal funding from the 
Government of India. The project would be supportive of Government initiatives 
towards complete elimination of child la bour and help to achieve the targets set 
for the Tenth Plan period. The Project is  likely to be started soon. The total 
beneficiaries under the project would be  80,000 working children from identified 
hazardous sectors.   
 
(b) Modernization of Machine Tabulation Unit 
 
 The reason for low expenditure under the Modernization of Machine 
Tabulation Unit of Labour Bureau is attrib uted to the fact that expenditure under 
the head “Machine Equipment” could not  be made as the Internal Finance 
Division had asked to take stock of the Computers and other Infrastructure 
already purchased by Labour Bureau. 
 
 Due to paucity of time the evaluation of the computer machinery and 
equipment entrusted to National Inform atics Centre could not be undertaken 
during 2003-2004. 
 
(c)     Strengthening of Training Wing of Central Labour Service Officers 
   
 The Planning Commission and the competent authorities towards the end 
of the Annual Plan 2003-2004 approved th e Scheme. As a result the Approved 
Outlay could not be utilized.  
   
(d) With regard to scheme of DGFASLI, it has been reported that the new 
plan scheme of DGFASLI, viz. “Strengthening of Occupational Safety and Health 
Strategies in Priority Hazardous Chemi cal Process” has not yet been approved 
and hence the expenditure unde r this plan scheme is NI L. The efforts are being 
made to get the early approval of the Pl anning Commission so as to commence 
the activities under this plan scheme. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 

  
-19- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 1.27) 
 
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS 
 
3.5 The Committee note that there ar e more than 17.6 million building and 
other construction workers in the country and two co mprehensive legislations, 
viz.(a) The Building and Other constructi on Workers (Regulation of Employment 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996: and (b) The Building and Other 
Construction Worker’s Welfare Cess Act, 1996 have been enacted w.e.f. 20.8. 
1996 but only a few State Governments have either notified the rules or 
constituted the Welfare Boards as mandated in the Acts for the welfare of 
construction workers. The Committee are not happy with the situation and urged 
the Ministry to pursue the matter vigor ously with all State Governments for 
implementing the provisions of the Act both in letter and spirit so as to ameliorate 
the living conditions of workers engaged in the construction work.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
3.6 Concerted efforts are made and State G overnments/UTs are requested regularly to 
frame State Rules, constitute Welfare Board and implement the Act at the earliest. Of late 
the Chief Ministers of States/Union Territo ries have been requested by the Hon’ble 
Union Labour and Employment Minister to finalize the process and implement the Act 
preferably by the end of the current financial year.  
 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 

-20- 
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 1.28) 
 
 
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS 
 
3.7 The Committee also desire that a su rvey should be conducted to ascertain 
the actual number of building and othe r construction workers engaged in the 
organized and unorganized sectors in the country. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
3.8 Data on number of workers engage d in various occupations of the 
organized and unorganized sector is compiled by the office of the Registrar 
General (Census) of India and National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) as 
these agencies are having requisite infrastructure and workin g as a nodal agency 
on all India basis for survey and compilation of data on various other aspects. As 
such, it may not be advisable for the Ministry of Labour& Employment to 
conduct a separate survey to ascertain th e number of workers engaged in building 
and other construction industry as it would be a duplication of work.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 

-21- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.35) 
 
Directorate General, Factory Advice Services and Labour Institutes 
 
3.9 The Committee are constrained to note  that the Regional Labour Institute 
at Faridabad is still in the formative stage.  Although the Ministry took possession 
of land from the Haryana Government in March 2000 for construction of a 
building for RLI at Faridabad, they have not been able to construct their own 
building even after more than 4 years. Th e reasons put forth by the Ministry that 
due to procedural delays in obtaining approval for construction plan from HUDA 
and passing of tenders by CPWD, etc. are not acceptable to the Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Mi nistry should make all out efforts to 
construct their own building without further delay so as to make the Institute fully 
functional.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
3.10 The construction of the building of Regional Labour Institute at Faridabad 
has been entrusted to the CPWD. They have already completed all formalities and 
the construction of the build ing is scheduled to commence by the end of October, 
2004 and the construction agency has b een given a time period of eighteen 
months (upto March 2006) to complete the construction. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 

-22- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.93) 
 
Social Security Scheme 
 
3.11. The committee are constrained to note that out of the 39.7 crore strong workforce 
in the country, only 4.01 crore workers have so far been covered under the Employees' 
Provident Fund Scheme. The committees are not happy with this state of affairs. In the 
opinion of the Committee, a large number of labourers are still to be covered under social 
security cover. The Committee therefore st rongly recommend that the Ministry should 
intensify the coverage and make the concerned Regional Provident  Fund Commissioner 
responsible for providing social  security cover to every single eligible person both in the 
organized and unorganized sectors. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.12 The working population of the country is estimated to be about 40 crore, 
which include government employees and private sector employees, employees of 
informal agricultural sector etc. Institutio nalized social security cover is available 
to State and Central Government empl oyees, members of Employees’ Provident 
Fund sectoral special Provident Funds like Coalmine Provident Fund, Private 
Provident Fund etc.  
 
3.13 The Employees' Provident Funds & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 
applies to specified activities and ha s a membership of 4.01 crore.  The Act 
applies to every establishment engaged in  any industry specified in Schedule I or 
in a class of establishments as notified by the Government under Section 1(3)(b) 
of the Act and employing 20 or more pers ons. Apart from statutory coverage, the 
Act also facilitates voluntary coverage if the establishment is not coverable u/s. 
1(3) of the Act and the employer & the majority of employees are willing to 
comply with the provisions of the Act.  
 
3.14 The Compliance Programme of Employees' Provident Fund Organisation 
lays stress on voluntary compliance by abolishing Inspector Raj. The 
Organisation has also initiated a seri ous drive of penalizing the defaulters 
wherever and whenever detected. The idea is to promote voluntary compliance by 
increasing the cost of non-compliance by way of imposing penalty and interest. 
 
3.15 As regards workforce in Unorganised Sector, a scheme namely the  
“Unorganised Sector Workers’ Social  Security Scheme 2003” was launched 
recently. The scheme was introduced initially  on a voluntary basis.  Presently the 
scheme is under review. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 
 
 

 
-23- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No  2.94) 
  
 SOCIAL  SECURITY SCHEME  
 
3.16 The Committee regret to note that the Pr ovident Fund arrears ar e to the tune of 
Rs.1862.80 crore as on 31.03.2004 while the number of major defaulters i.e. with default 
of Rs.10 lakh and above is 1568.  The Com mittee further note that a large number of 
cases are pending under section 7A, 14 an d 14B of Employees' Provident Fund & 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and also under Sections 406/409 of the Indian Penal 
Code for a long time.  The Committee, ther efore, recommend that the Ministry should 
strengthen and gear up the machinery to  recover the outstandi ng dues by taking 
appropriate legal actions agains t the defaulting establishments and also take urgent steps 
for early disposal of pending cases under various provisions of the EPF & MP Act, 1952. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
3.17 As on 31.03.2004, the amount of Provident  Fund dues to be collected from 
the defaulting establishments was Rs.1862.80 crore. This is the cumulative arrears 
over five decades of EPFO.  Compared to cumulative contribution collections, the 
arrears work out to be 1.15% only. Of  the outstanding balance of Rs.1862.80 
crore, a sum of Rs.1321.49 crore (70.94%) belong to the locked up category.  
Recovery of this demand is not curren tly enforceable on account of following 
reasons: - 
 
1. Disputes in Courts 
2. Establishments having gone into liquidation. 
3. Establishments declared sick by BIFR 
4. Establishments in respect of which rehabilitation scheme had been 
sanctioned by the BIFR. 
 
3.18 The Employees' Provident Fund Organisation has already initiated special 
efforts to recover the outstanding unrealizable dues by moving the Courts through 
appropriate petitions to ge t the stay orders vacated and by filing timely claims 
before the official liquidator etc. The Regional Provident Fund Commissioners 
have been authorized to engage specia l counsels, if required, depending on the 
status of the case for early disposal of the cases. 
 
 
3.19 RPFCs have also been instructed th at all pending cases  under section 7A 
and 14B must be decided and total outstanding dues payable by the defaulting 
establishments be quantified in a short time frame.  The status with reference to 
above is also being monitored by the EPFO Headquarter regularly. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 

-24- 
 
Recommendation / (Sl. No. 20, Para 2.118) 
 
Wage Board for Working Journalists and Non-Journalists Newspaper  
Employees 
 
3.20 The Committee are constrained to note the fact that the implementation of 
the recommendations of the Manisana Wage Boards for fixation and revision of 
wages for Journalists and Non-Journa list Newspaper and News Agency 
employees is the responsibility of the State Governments but even after a lapse of 
three and a half years, only some of th e newspaper establishments have fully 
implemented the same. Others have e ither partially implemented or not 
implemented the recommendations of the Wage Boards which indicates nothing 
but the poor monitoring by the Centra l Government. The Committee therefore 
strongly recommend that th e State Governments be persuaded vigorously to 
implement fully the recommendations of the Wage Boards by the remaining 
newspaper establishments. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.21 In order to implement the recommenda tions of the Manisana Wage Boards 
speedily and effectively, out of 35 States / Union Terr itories, 17 States / Union 
Territories have formed the Tripartite  Committee. Besides the formation of 
Tripartite Committee, the State Governme nt of Assam and Orissa have also 
formed the implementation Cell. In the St ate of Rajasthan, out of 243 Newspaper 
Establishments, 207 establishments are one-man establishments. The 
recommendations of the Wage Boards are not applicable in Mizoram, Sikkim and 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli because they have very small Newspaper Establishments.  
Similarly, Meghalaya, Andaman and Nicobar Island and Daman and Diu are not 
concerned with the recommendations of the Wage Boards as there is no 
Newspaper Establishments in these States / Union Territories. In compliance with 
the observations of the Standing Co mmittee, all State Governments/Union 
Territories have been requested recen tly on 24.9.04 to take immediate necessary 
steps to implement the recommendations of the Wage Boards, constitution of 
Tripartite Committee and to intimate this Ministry at the earliest possible of the 
action taken. 
 
3.22 A Central Level Monitoring Committee has also been set up at the Centre 
to monitor the implementation of the recommendations of the Boards.  The 
Committee is headed by the Labour and Em ployment Adviser of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment.  Other members of the Committee are Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcas ting, Chief Labour Co mmissioner (Central) 
and Director, incharge, of Wage Board (M ember Secretary). Four meetings of the 
Committee have so far been held on 8.3.2002, 13.11.2002, 6.6.2003 and 
28.1.2004.  The Committee also visited the St ates of Assam and West Bengal to 
review the progress of implementation of the recommendations in those States. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated  
    15.12.2004) 

-25- 
 
Recommendation / (Sl. No. 22, Para 2.120) 
 
WAGE BOARD FOR WORKIN G JOURNALISTS AND NON-
JOURNALISTS NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES 
 
3.23 The Committee also note that th e Second National Commission on Labour 
has recommended that there is no need  for any Wage Board, statutory or 
otherwise, for fixing wage rate for workers in any industry, but there is a 
persistent demand from various Employ ees Unions to constitute New Wage 
Boards for them. The Committee, therefore,  desire that befo re taking any final 
decision on the recommendations of the National Commission on Labour, the 
Government should also consider the demands of the Employees Unions for 
constituting a New Wage Board 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
3.24 The second National Commission on Labour (NCL), has recommended 
that there is no need for any Wage Board, statutory or otherwise, for fixing wage 
rate for workers in any industry.  Comments of all State Governments/Union 
Territories have also been sought on the above-mentioned recommendations of 
the NCL. The Government is examining the recommendations of the NCL.  
Keeping in view the sensitivity of the issue, the matter would require further 
deliberation.  As regards, the constitution of next Wage Board, it is stated that the 
Manisana Wage Board had submitted its  recommendations in July, 2000 which 
were accepted by the Government and notified for implementation in December, 
2000 with minor modifications. Th erefore, it was felt to be too early to constitute 
a new Wage Board for the Journalists a nd non-journalists Workers in Newspaper 
Industry.  However, the observation of  the Committee has been noted and it 
would be considered at the appropriate time. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 

-26- 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para No. 1.23) 
 
Agricultural Labourers 
 
4.1 The Committee take a note of the fact that there are about 11 crore 
agricultural labourers who constitute by far the largest segment of the workers in 
the unorganised sector.  The Committee ha ve been consistently recommending to 
the Government to bring a comprehens ive legislation for the welfare of 
agricultural workers but due to certain reservations expressed by a few State 
Governments, the proposal for a comp rehensive legislation could not be 
materialized.  However, to meet the so cial security need of the agricultural 
workers, a scheme, namely the Krishi Shramik Samajik Suraksha Yojana-2001 
was launched in 50 identified district s in the country on a pilot basis.  
Unfortunately, the scheme has not been finally approved by the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee feel that as on date the 
Government has no concrete scheme for the welfare of gigantic agricultural 
workforce in the country.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Government should take urgent steps to bring in a comprehensive legislation for 
agricultural workers to provide for minimum social security for them, viz. 
security of employment, hours of wor k, payment of wages and machinery for 
settlement of disputes, etc.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
4.2 The agricultural workers are among the most vulnerable categories of the 
unorganised sector workers. Efforts were being made for more than two decades 
for enacting a comprehensive legislation for the agricultural workers. Agriculture, 
being a State subject, concurrence of the State Governments was required for 
bringing the required legisl ation.  However, due to lack of consensus and 
divergent views of the Stat e Governments, no headway could be made in this 
regard.  It is, therefore, proposed to enact a legislation to regulate the employment 
and conditions of service of  unorganised sector workers and to provide for their 
safety, social security, health and we lfare. The proposed legislation for the 
unorganized sector workers will also cover the agriculture workers, as agriculture 
has been listed as one of the scheduled employments in the proposed Bill.   
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
     (Please See Para 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
-27- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16 Para No  2.95) 
 
AMENDMENTS TO EMPLOYEES ‘PROVIDENT FUNDS & 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT.  
 
4.3 The Committee note with  deep concern that the suggestion for 
amendments in the Employees’ Provide nt Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1952 made by the Committee in Para- 2.36 of their Eleventh Report (10 Lok 
Sabha) with regard to reducing the minimum number of  employees required for 
EPF coverage from 20 to 10 in an es tablishment and removal of scheduled 
industries restrictions have  not been implemented by the Ministry which have 
been agreed to by the Central Board of Trus tees in principle but left the matter to 
the Government for a final decision. In the opinion of the Committee, the 
Government is not serious in the matter and thus unscrupulous employers 
continue to indulge in unfair practices . The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend the Ministry to take immediat e action to amend the Act in order to 
check the unfair practices indulged in  by unscrupulous employers and also to 
enlarge the coverage under the EPF & MP Act. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
4.4 A proposal for carrying out amendmen ts to Employees’ Provident Fund 
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 wa s considered by the Central Board of 
Trustees (CBT) in its Meeting held  on 09.07.2002. The employer trustees have 
vehemently opposed the proposal for reducing the number from 20 to 10. The 
Board has agreed to the proposed amendments , in principle, and has left the final 
decision on the matter to the Governme nt. The proposed amendments will be 
considered by the Government keeping in view the concerns expressed by certain 
members of the CBT(EPF).  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
     (Please See Para 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

-28- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No  2.97) 
 
   EPF INTEREST RATE 
 
4.5 The Committee note that under the EPF & MP Act, the rate of interest is 
determined by the Central Government in consultation with th e Central Board of 
Trustees which is a tripartite body consis ting of the representatives of employers, 
employees and Centre/State government.  The Committee have been apprised that 
the Central Board of Trustees in its 163 rd meeting held on 19.08.2003 had 
recommended the rate of interest @ 9.5%  to be credited in the accounts of 
provident fund members for the year 2003- 2004 but the same has not yet been 
ratified by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee also note that the Central 
Board of Trustees in its meeting he ld on 9.8.2004 has recommended the interim 
rate of interest @ 8.5% for the year 2004- 05.  This interim rate  of interest can, 
however, be enhanced depending on EPF organization’s recovery of arrears.  The 
Committee express its deep concern on the lowering of rate of interest which is 
affecting nearly 4 crore subscribers.   In the opinion of the Committee on 
important issues concerning workers, the decision should always be taken by 
consensus.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Government that while taking a 
final decision in the matter, the interest s of subscribers should be safeguarded.  
Till such time the status quo in the rate of interest may be maintained. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
                
4.6 The CBT in its 163 rd meeting held on 19.08.2003 had recommended the 
rate of interest @9.5% p.a. (9% plus 0.5% bonus interest) for the year 2003-04.  
The same is yet to be ratified by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
4.7 Further, the CBT in its meeti ng held on 09.08.2004, recommended the rate 
of interest  @ 8.5% p.a. for the financial year 2004-05. The same has also not 
been notified by the Central Government till date. 
  
4.8 The Ministry of Labour and Empl oyment has already requested the 
Ministry of Finance to ratify the interest rate for the years 2003-04 and 2004-05. 
  
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 
  
Comments of the Committee 
     (Please See Para 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 
-29- 
 
Recommendation  (Para  No. 23, 2.126) 
 
Industrial Sickness 
 
 
4.9 The Committee express their serious concern over the miserable plight of 
the public sector employees whose stat utory dues amounting to Rs.1365 crore as 
on 30.6.2004 representing the wages, provident fund dues, employees’ state 
insurance dues, etc. have not been paid as a result of industrial sickness in various 
Central Public Sector U ndertakings. Although the Mi nistry of Finance have 
prepared a plan to provide financial suppor t in phasing out the dues of workers of 
sick undertakings, in the opinion of the Co mmittee the priority should be given to 
make immediate payment of all the statutory dues of CPSU employees in order to 
protect workers’ interests. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.10 As per the recommendations of the Group of Ministers (GOM), set up to 
devise a strategy for liquidation of outsta nding statutory dues of the workers of 
CPSUs, defaulting CPSUs have been advised by the Government to clear 
outstanding dues to their employees in a time bound manner. The GOM had also 
recommended that the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) will monitor 
compliance of the time schedule as drawn up by the GOM in consultation with the 
administrative Ministries/ Departments concerned, to clear the outstanding dues 
of the workers in all the defaulting CPSUs.  The DPE is closely monitoring the 
progress in this regard.  
 
4.11 As a result of the action initiated by the Government, the outstanding dues 
of CPSU employees, which were Rs.1905 crore in respect of 59, CPSUs as on 
31.12.2002 declined to Rs.1365 crore in 41 CPSUs as on 30.06.2004. The 
outstanding dues have further declined  to Rs.820 crore in 33 CPSUs as on 
31.07.2004. Hence, of the 59 CPSUs in respect of whom dues were outstanding as 
on 31.12.2002, 26 CPSUs have so far cleared their dues. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
     (Please See Para 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

-30- 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.57) 
 
Directorate General of Mines Safety 
 
 
5.1 The Committee take further note that the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment through Ministry of Law,  Justice and Company Affairs have 
requested the Registrar Generals of various High Courts to designate one Judicial 
Magistrate/Metropolitan Magistrate in the District exclusively to deal with the 
cases under the Mines Act, 1952. Although th e High Courts of Allahabad, Patna, 
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu have agreed to the proposal, most of the States where 
pendency of cases under Mines Act are larg e in number have yet to follow suit. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that th e remaining High Courts be persuaded to 
designate the Judicial Magistrate to liquidate the pending cases. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
5.2 The Ministry of Labour and Employmen t in consultation with the Ministry 
of Law and Justice requested the Regist rar Generals of various High Courts, 
where the cases under the Mines Act, 1952 are pending, to designate one Judicial 
Magistrate / Metropolitan Magistrate exclusively to deal with such cases. Positive 
response has been received from the High Courts of Allahabad, Patna, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh so far. The remaining High Courts are also being 
persuaded to designate the Judicial Magistrate to liquidate the pending cases. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 

-31- 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.58) 
 
Directorate General of Mines Safety 
 
 
5.3 The Committee further note that pe nalties prescribed for different 
categories of offences under the Mines Ac t are very meagre which do not have 
any deterrent effect on potential offenders . The Committee, therefore, desires that 
the Ministry should bring suitable amendments in the Mines Act to provide for 
stringent punishments against the offenders. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
5.4 A comprehensive proposal for the amendment of the Mines Act, 1952 is 
under consideration of the Government. It  includes suitable amendment of the 
penal provisions as prescribed under Section 63 to 81 of the Mines Act 1952 to 
provide necessary deterrent effect on potential offenders. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para 2.110) 
 
Vocational Rehabilitation Centres for Handicapped 
 
5.5 The Committee is constrained to note that there are 18.53 million 
handicapped people in the country and onl y 17 Vocational Rehabilitation Centres 
(VRCs) are in operation for them in sixteen States.  The Committee also note that 
out of these there is only one VRC set up exclusively for ha ndicapped women.   
The Committee feel that keeping in vi ew the millions of handicapped in this 
country the number of these Rehabilitation Centres is t oo small to cater to their 
needs. The Committee also note that 7 V RCs which were to be set up during the 
Ninth Five Year Plan in Himachal Pradesh, J & K, Haryana, Goa, Pondicherry, 
Manipur and Mizoram  have not been set up even after completion of the first two 
years of Tenth Five Year Plan.   The Committee are not happy with the situation, 
particularly on a matter concerning the handicapped.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the proposals approved by the Planning Commission 
during the Ninth Five Year Plan should be implemented without further delay.  
The Committee also desire that more V RCs should be set up for the handicapped 
women.  
 
 
 
 
 

-32- 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
5.6 The Ministry is taking up the matte r with the Ministry of Finance at 
appropriate level.  The recommendati ons of Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) shall also be conveye d to the Ministry of 
Finance for further action at their end. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M.No. H-11013/4/2004-Coord. Dated 
15.12.2004) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;       P.K. VASUDEVAN NAIR,  
 17  March, 2005        CHAIRMAN  
 26  Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
    

  

  
     APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
HELD ON 17th MARCH 2005. 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 15.00 hrs. to 16.30 hrs. in Committee Room `139’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
  Shri Debabrata Biswas - Acting Chairman  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
4. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
7. Shri Ananta Nayak 
8. Shri Lal Mani Prasad 
9. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
10. Shri Mohan Rawale 
11. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh 
12. Smt. C. S. Sujatha 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
13. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
14. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri R.S. Misra -  Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri S.K. Saxena - Assistant Director 
   
 
 
 
-33-

-34- 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Members of the Committee chose Shri Debabrata 
Biswas, MP to preside over the sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
3. At the outset, the Hon’ble Acting Chairm an welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the two Draft Reports on action ta ken replies received fr om the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment and the Ministry of Textiles on the Demands for Grants for the 
year 2004-2005.  
 
4. The Committee first took up the draft Third Report on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observa tions contained in the First Report on 
Demands for Grants-2004-2005 pertaining to the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
and adopted the same with the amendm ent at page 2, para 1.7 last line, insert the word 
“at the earliest” after the words “agriculture labourers”.   
 
5. XXX    XXX   XXX  
  
6. The Committee authorized the Chairman  to finalise the Report and present the 
same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
7.  XXX    XXX   XXX 
 
8.  XXX    XXX   XXX 
 
9.  XXX    XXX   XXX 
    
10.  XXX    XXX   XXX   
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-35- 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE FIRST  REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations   23 
 
II. Recommendations/Observati ons  which have 8  34.8%  
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 2,3,7,8,9,11,17 and 21)  
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the   8  34.8% 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies 
(Sl. Nos. 1,5,6,10,14,15, 20 and 22) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of 4  17.4% 
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration 
(Sl. Nos. 4,16,18 and 23)  
 
V. Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of 3  13% 
 which final replies of Government are of interim 
 in  nature 
(Sl. Nos. 12,13 and 19)      ----------- 
           100% 
           ----------- 
  