   
  34    
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-09) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twenty-Seventh  Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on the subject 
`Sickness/Closure of Textiles Mills’] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-FOURTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                         NEW DELHI 
 
November , 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-09) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twenty-Seventh  Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on the subject 
`Sickness/Closure of Textiles Mills’] 
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2008   
 
                                           Laid in Rajya Sabha on  12.12.2008 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  
November , 2008/Kartikaa, 1930 (Saka) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
       
     PAGE(S) 
       
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N         ( i v )  
        
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………    1-9 
 
 
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observ ations which have been   10-22  
accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Obse rvations which the Committee  23 
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observat ions in respect of which   24 
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration…………… 
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observat ions in respect of   25-26   
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 3rd     27-29 
November,  2008.  
     
 
II. Analysis of the Action Take n by Government on the    30 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-2009) 
 
               Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy-CHAIRMAN 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
2. Shri Furkan Ansari  
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale  
4. Shri Subrata Bose  
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
7. Shri Munawar Hasan  
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta  
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan  
10. Shri Virendra Kumar  
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
12. Shri Basangouda R. Patil  
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Mohan Rawale  
16. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat  
17. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat  
18. Smt. C. S. Sujatha  
19. Shri Paras Nath Yadav  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
   
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam  
23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany  
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari  
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
26. Shri Gandhi Azad  
 27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
 28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
 29. Vacant  
30. Vacant  
31. Vacant  
  

SECRETARIAT 
 
         1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Secretary 
2.    Shri Brahm Dutt   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary 
 

   
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committ ee on Labour having been authorized  
by the Committee to submit the Thirty-Fourth  Report on their behalf, present this  
Report on the action taken by the Govern ment on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on  Labour (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on   the subject `Sickness/Closure of Textile Mills’. 
 
2. The Twenty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and also laid in  Rajya 
Sabha on  17 th April, 2008.   The Ministry of Textile s furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations  contained in that Report on 11 th August, 2008.  
The report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Labour at their 
sitting held on  3rd November, 2008. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by  Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Seventh  Report  of the Standing Committee on Labour 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,        
3rd November , 2008                                                             CHAIRMAN,  
 12 Kartika,  1930 (Saka)                                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.   
   

 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report on the subject 
`Sickness/Closure of Textile Mills’ relating  to the Ministry of Textiles, which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.4.2008. 
 
2 The Ministry of Textiles were requested to furnish action taken replies to the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report within three months from 
the presentation of the Report i.e. by 17 th July, 2008.  The action taken replies of the 
Government in respect of all the 9  reco mmendations contained in the Report were 
received on 11th August, 2008.  These have been categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4,5,6,7 and 8.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply --Nil. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration--Nil. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature—9.  
 
  
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the recommendation   
for which only interim replies have been  furnished by the Government may be 
furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than 3 months of the 
presentation of the Report.   
 
4.      The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government   on some 
of their recommendations which need reite ration or merit comments in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A. UNLAWFUL CLOSURE OF TEXTILE MILLS 
   
(Rec.Sr. No. 4, Para 1.34) 
 
5. The Committee had observed that a large number of textile mills are being closed 
illegally in the country which not only affects the balanced growth of the textile sector 
but the livelihood of the workers is also pu t at stake. Moreover, the Union Government 
is not maintaining any data regarding mills which have been closed illegally. The 
Committee took a serious view of the issue and recommended that a data base be 
prepared covering pockets of small, medi um and large scale garment and textile 
industries across the country and appropriat e coordination mechanism be established 
with ESIC, EPFO, Office of State Labour  Commissioner, Small Scale Industries and 
Textile Department of State Governments, Associations of Entrepreneurs and Industries 
so as to have information about the closure of mills whether legally or illegally. Based 
on this data base, the owners of illegally closed mills could be asked to go in for 
systematic closure of their mills so that th e workers of these mills are not deprived of 
their rightful benefits under TWRFS. 
 
  
6. In their action taken reply, the  Ministry  has stated that the Ministry is fully in 
agreement with the concerns of the Committee to require upon the necessity to accord rightful 
benefits to the workers of the closed mills.  Nevertheless it is submitted that the major 
bottlenecks in existing guidelines of TWRFS is  the mandate of State Governments concurrence 
under the provisions of    Industrial Disputes Act declaring legal closures.  Accordingly, the 
Ministry has proposed suitable modifications in the relevant provisions of the scheme to 
extend the benefits to workers of such clos ed mills.  For this, th e Office of Textiles 
Commissioner in liaison with various authorities in the field has done a survey of the Mills 
which have been  closed for a long period.  The number of such mills is around 200 and on that 
basis, the Ministry of Textiles is in the process of expanding the scope of TWRFS so that 
workers of any textile mills lying closed for a pe riod of five years got the benefits of TWRFS. 
This measure will benefit, in one stroke, nearly 65,000 workers of closed textile mills.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7. The Committee take note of the survey carri ed out by the Ministry/office of Textiles 
Commissioner for getting accurate data of the mills which are lying closed for a long period.  
However,  their owners did not declare them closed as per the laid down procedure.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that their concern to prepare a data base covering pockets of 
small, medium and large scale garment and textiles industries across the country by 
establishing appropriate coordination mechan ism with other Departments of Central and 
State Governments, has not been adequately addressed by the Ministry.  The Committee 
emphasize that such surveys should be conducted with regular intervals and an appropriate 
coordination mechanism be established with  ESIC, EPFO, office of State Labour 
Commissioner, State Textiles Departments, asso ciations of entrepreneurs, industries and 
recognized trade unions so as to have real data of textile mills in the country and the 
updated information of their closure.  This data base will not only help the Ministry in 
assessing the actual strength of the textile mill s but also enable them to extend the benefits 
to all the workers of closed mills under TWRFS.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
B. MODERNISATION OF NTC MILLS 
 
(Rec. Sr. No.6, Para 2.40) 
 
8. The Committee had observed that in contin uation of the closer of NTC mills, 12 
more viable mills have been closed with th e sole reason that most of their employees 
have opted for voluntary retirement sch eme.  In light of this, the Committee 
recommended that the Government should review its decision regarding these 12 mills 
which were originally in the l i s t  o f  m o d e r n i z a t i o n  b u t  h a d  t o  b e  l e f t  d u e .   T h e  
Committee further observed that the pace of  modernization of NTC mills was also far 
from satisfactory as out of 18 mills earmarked for the revival through the joint venture, 
only 5 mills had been assigned to three pr ivate partners for modernization till then. 
Regarding rest of the mills no concrete action for their revival seemed to be in the 
offing. The Committee, therefore, called up on the Government to review afresh the 
whole process of modernization of the m ills. The entire process of modernization 
should be completed in a time bound manne r and also the interests of the workers 
regarding their wages and service conditions should be protected. 
  
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry ha s stated that a review ha s been carried out in 
consultation with NTC and a detailed proposal is under consideration for submission to the 
competent authority, and once approval is available, further action will be initiated. 
 
  

 
10. The Committee take note of the review carried out regarding the modernization 
process of the NTC mills and the assurance for further action to be initiated after its 
approval by the Competent Authority.  However, they find that nothing has been said about 
reviewing the decision regarding the 12 mi lls which were originally in the list of 
modernization but were dropped for the sole r eason that most of its employees had opted 
for VRS.  The Committee take a serious view of the  12 viable units being dropped from 
modernisation list without any proper and su stainable reason.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation a nd urge the Government to take effective 
steps for deployment of requisite manpower and revival/modernization of these mills at the 
earliest.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this regard 
at the earliest. 

C. PERFORMANCE OF THE RETAIL SHOWROOMS OF N.T.C. 
 
 
(Rec. Sr. No.7, Para 2.41) 
 
11. Considering the dismal performance of th e retail shops of NTC during the year 
2006-2007 as compared to the previous year, the Committee felt that this unpredictable 
and incoherent performance in sales reflects weak marketing strategy of the 
Government. The Committee, therefore, urged upon the Government to pay utmost 
attention on the sale and marketing poli cy of the NTC by improving its image, 
performance and delivery mechanism. The Committee further found that Defence, 
Railways, Tele-communications, Para-military forces, Health, etc. of the Union 
Government and several departments of the State Governments are the bulk consumers 
of cloth on a regular basis. The Commi ttee recommended that all the Government 
organizations should be impressed upon to opt for the NTC products at competitive 
rates without compromising on quality. The Committee expected that such steps would 
definitely help to bail out the NTC from its present situation. 
  
 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry has stated that at  present, NTC is running 100 
showrooms in different parts of the country.  Due to heavy curt ailment of weaving activities, 
the availability of fabrics from NTC mills wa s not sufficient to meet the requirement of 
showrooms. Recently, N.T.C. has decided to revamp the showrooms in a phased manner. It 
may also be mentioned here that, at present, there are only two mills, viz., Tata & Coimbatore 
Murugan Mills supplying fabrics being manufa ctured by them to all the showrooms. 
However, the recommendation has been noted an d once the production increases, steps as 
recommended can be taken. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
13. The Committee find that the performance of all the 100 showrooms of NTC has come 
down due to non-availability of sufficient quan tity of fabrics from NTC mills as a result of 
heavy curtailment of weaving activities.  Th e NTC has recently decided to revamp the 
showrooms in a phased manner.  Since, production activities in the NTC mills are to be 
revived soon, the Committee desire that till al l the modernized NTC mills start production, 
steps should be taken to ensure  continuous  supply of atleast the required quantity of 
fabrics to all the 100 showrooms so that they do not close their operation for want of supply 
of fabrics.    
 

D. THE BRITISH INDIA CORPORATION LIMITED, KANPUR 
 
(Rec. Sr. No.9 Para 2.51) 
 
14. The Committee had observed that BIC Ltd.  was referred to BIFR in the year 1992 
and declared sick.  Despite a lapse of sixteen years, nothing concrete has been done to 
bail out the BIC units from the sickness. Even  the permission of Government of Uttar 
Pradesh for conversion of BIC land into freehold from leasehold could not be obtained 
due to which the rehabilitation scheme for BIC as approved by BIFR in the year 2002 
could not be implemented. Even the modified  rehabilitation scheme is in limbo due to 
procedural wranglings and objections by the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended that a time bound action plan be chalked out wherein the 
modified rehabilitation scheme be implemented in letter and spirit. The Committee also 
desired the Union Government to impress up on the State Government of Uttar Pradesh 
for conversion of leasehold land into free hold at the earliest . The Committee further 
recommended that the BIC mills be reopened at the earliest. 
 
 
15. In their action taken reply, the Ministry  has informed that a detailed review of the 
performance of BIC was done by the BIFR in its meeting held on 14.2.08. Based on the 
recommendations of BIFR, a detailed Rehabilitation Scheme has been finalized and is awaiting 
the approval of the competent authority.  It has already been circulated to the concerned 
Ministries / Departments inviting comments/ suggestions. The concern expressed by the 
Standing Committee has also been brought to th e notice of Uttar Pradesh Government, again 
requesting them to expedite permission for co nversion of the land to freehold. As regards 
revival of the Elgin Mills, a separate propos al is under consideration of Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). 
  
16. The recommendations of the Standing Co mmittee have been carefully noted and all 
possible efforts are being made to make the BIC mills operational and profitable. 
  

 
17.  The Committee take note of the effo rts being made by the Government for 
revival of BIC mills, which includes pursuing the finalization of the ‘Modified 
Rehabilitation Scheme (MDRS)’  and conversion of land by State Government of 
Uttar Pradesh from leasehold to freehold.  However, the Committee are of the 
opinion that the whole process of reviva l of BIC mills needs to be expedited by 
coordinating with all the agencies involved like, State Government of Uttar Pradesh, 
Ministry of Finance, Stakeh olders etc.  Simply writing letters to various 
departments/agencies is not going to ta ke the matter to its conclusion until and 
unless initiatives are taken at the highest level.  The Committee, therefore, expect the 
Ministry to devise a time bound action plan  wherein all the procedural formalities 
are completed viz. approval of MDRS by  the competent authority, conversion of 
land from leasehold to freehold in Kanpur followed by sale of surplus assets for 
generation of funds, etc. so that BIC m ills are finally revived from the prolonged 
sickness.  The Committee also desire th at the Government should, meanwhile, 
provide need based working capital to the company to start the production activities 
immediately.  This step will definitely help the company in rebuilding its lost 
market base and the salaries/dues of the workers/employees will also be paid in time.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcome in one month of the 
presentation of this report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
   
(Rec. Sr. No. 1, Para 1.9) 
 
 The Committee observe that the textile industry is a pioneering industry in the 
country which as a whole has been plagued by  multiple problems. Some of the causes 
attributed are excess capacity, low productivi ty of both machine and labour due to lack 
of modernization, stagnant demand and inability on the part of sick units to access 
export market, increase in the cost of inputs, etc. The Committee feel that under-
utilization of the installed capacity is the majo r hindrance in the path of production and 
sustainable growth of the sector. The Comm ittee find that as on 31 January 2007, 1,818 
textile mills are in existence in the coun try with a capacity of 35.37 million spindles, 
4,48,000 rotors and 6,900 looms. The capacity utilization in the spinning sector is 
between 80 and 93 per cent while in the weaving sector it is between 41 and 63 per cent. 
The Committee are of the opinion that the reasons for this under-utilization may be 
beyond the control of the private entr epreneurs also, nonetheless the overall 
performance of the textile sector is being affected in the country. As the large number of 
mills are closed year after year due to one or the other reason, it becomes incumbent to 
ensure that the mills which are functional and are in production, utilise their optimum 
capacity. The Government cannot shrug off it s responsibility for under-utilisation of 
textile production capacity - whether in the public or in the private sector. It is rather 
obligatory for the Government to take all po ssible steps to facilitate and encourage the 
capacity production in the textile sector and provide conducive environment for the 
growth of this sector. The Committee, th erefore, strongly recommend that the 
Government should formulate a multi-pronged strategy so that optimum production of 
textile in the public as well as private sectors could be attained. For the purpose, all the 
obstacles that hinder the production growth  and efficient functioning of the textile 
sector may be removed. The Committee would appreciate if the Government 
formulates a strategy in this  regard at the earliest and chalk out a time bound 
programme for its implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The report of the Working Group on Text iles & Jute Industry for the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan (2007-12) observes that “the Indian textile industry is  on the threshold of 
the exponential growth process.  The factors like buoyant domestic economy, conducive 
policy environment and elimination of quotas in the international market are fueling its 
growth raising expectation of an unpreceden ted growth level. The textile industry at 
this juncture needs an ‘approach’ which is based on ‘out of box thinking’ for addressing 
the issues which might hamper its growth.”   

 
 
             In view of this, after a cr itical examination and th e SWOT(Strength, Weakness, 
Opportunities and Threat) analysis of the Indian Textiles industry; after extensive 
interactions with all the major segments of the industry; after obtaining  their views and 
after taking into consideration the recommendations of the various industry specific 
Sub-Groups, the Working Group has suggested a strategy for the textile industry to 
facilitate a growth at 16 percent in value terms and reach the level of US$ 115 billion by 
the terminal year of the Eleventh Plan as follows: – 
(i)  Continuation of the schemes to conso lidate and provide competitive edge to our 
inherent strength in wide and diverse raw material base of cotton, man-made, silk, 
wool and jute.   
(ii)  Facilitate the modernization and te chnological upgradation of the different 
segments of the industry to make it internationally competitive.   
(iii)  Address the problem of infrastructure  bottlenecks by suggesting continuation of 
the textile specific infrastructure schemes.  
(iv)  To suggest schemes / policies for meeting the demand / supply gap in the critical 
inputs like textile machinery and human resources which have the capacity to hamper 
the growth of the industry.    
(v)    Labour law reforms to attract investment in large size units. 
(vi)  Liberalize procedures to attract Foreig n Direct Investment (FDI) in specific areas 
of textile industry needing FDI to bridge  the gap between domestic investment and 
required investment.   
(vii)   Brand promotion and support for quality design to increase the value addition 
of the industry.    
 
          The implementation of the strat egies proposed in this report would unleash the 
investment to the extent of Rs.1,50,600 crore and lead to speedy development of the 
textiles and jute sector resulting in achieving the desired objectives and targets; 
 
  As regards textile production in the Public Sector, revival / rehabilitation / 
modernization of the mills functioning unde r the National Textiles Corporation and 
British India Corporation are in  process, as per the recommendations of BIFR/BRPSE.  
Due  to various cases of litigation and non-re ceipt of requisite permission from some of 
the State Governments, the Ministry of Text iles is unable to implement the scheme at 
the intended pace.  However, all efforts are  being made to complete this exercise 
expeditiously so that production could be optimized  to the extent possible.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2/8/2008-Parl.,dated 11th August, 2008) 

 
 
 
(Rec. Sr. No. 2, Para 1.21) 
 
  The Committee are concerned to note th at indiscriminate dumping of clothes 
and steep appreciation in the value of Indi an Rupee against the US dollar have, of late 
been major contributory factors in the sickne ss of the textile sector in the country. The 
import of clothing from China which was to the tune of 11.54 million US dollar in the 
year 2005-2006 almost doubled at 21.03 million US dollar during the year 2006-2007. 
These multiplying imports at cheaper rates have weakened the sales of the 
manufacturers of domestic market and as a result thereof, a large number of mills are 
turning sick. The Committee are constrained to observe that the Government is not 
paying due attention to the woes of the Indust ry, as no assessment of the impact of all 
such imports has been made during the last  two years. On the other hand, the current 
rupee appreciation has resulted in the er osion of India’s competitive advantage and 
substantially dampening the exports. There has been a negative trend in the export of 
textile products by 16 per cent. Not only exports, the strengthening rupee is now hitting 
those who are mainly manufacturing the textile products for the domestic market. The 
import substitutes of textile products are becoming much cheaper and the profit margin 
of the manufacturers have reduced drastically. Besides, it is also having its cascading 
effect on intermediates and raw materials segment. The sale of domestic yarn, for 
example has also been severely impacted on account of lower demand from export 
segment for made-up and readymade garments. Thus, considering all these factors, the 
Committee are of the firm opinion that if th e corrective steps are not taken urgently, the 
textile sector is bound to be hit irreparab ly. In order to tide over the crisis, the 
Committee, strongly recommend that the shor t, medium and long term strategies be 
drawn up which may include special package for assistance to different sectors of textile 
industry particularly for its export oriented products, expanding the scope of TUFS and 
SITP, equipping the textile industry with th e state-of-the-art technology, ensuring the 
uninterrupted power supply at reasonable  and subsidized rates and a periodic 
assessment of the impact of import of clothes. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
  
As per the latest provisional data published by the DGC&IS the exports of 
textiles and clothing items (HS classifica tion No. 50-63) in 2007-08 touched US$ 21.46 
billion as against US$ 19.14 billion in 2006-07, ther eby registering a growth of over 12% 
in US$ terms.  However, in Rupee term, this was a decline of 0.34% compared to 2006-
07.  This was due to the steep and persistently  hard position of the  Indian Rupee (INR) 
vis-à-vis the US$ during 2007.  The exchange  rates variation had both good and bad 
effects on our international trade.   Certa in sectors where import content is meagre, 
found themselves in an adverse situation due to a strong INR vis-à-vis the US$.  Textiles 
is one such sector which faced adversities due to the weak position of US$, a situation 

beyond the control of the Ministr y of Textile s. Moreover, imports in the Indian textiles  
sector are still negligible compared to  domestic production and  exports.  The  
appreciation in the INR was a temporary ph ase which has reversed drastically during 
the current financial year (refer graph below). 
 
U.S. Dollar to Indian Rupee Exchange Rate  
 Range:  1d 5d 3m 1y 2y 5y  Invert Currencies  
  
 
  There are no reports of indiscriminate dumping of imported clothes in India and 
the imports of textiles and clothing is very negligible compared to the size a nd volume 
of domestic production and exports. 
  
 During 2007, the Gov ernment initiated a number of relief measures to cushion 
exporters of textiles and clothing against the ad verse effects of the strong INR, and  also 
to ensure that the productivity and the profitability of the textile sector remains 
undisturbed due to exchange rates variations. These packages included:- 
 
I.   (a)  Reduction in custom duty on Polyester filament yarns and polyester  
staple fibres from  7.5% to 5%. 
(b) Reduction in custom duty on other ma n made filament yarns namely, acrylic, 
viscose etc  (excluding nylon filament yarns) from 10% to 5%. 
(c)   Reduction in custom duty on other man made staples fibres namely, acrylic 
viscose etc     (excluding nylon staple fibres) from 10% to 5%, 
(d)   Reduction in custom duty on spun yarns of man made staple fibres and filament 
yarns  (excluding nylon fibres) from 10% to 5%. 
(e)  Reduction in custom duty on Polyester chips from 7.5% to 5%. 
(f) Fibre intermediates viz Dimethyl tereph thalate (DM T), Pure terephthalic acid 
(PTA), and Mono ethylene glycol (MEG) from 7.5% to 5%; and  
(h)  Para-xylene from 2% to zero. 

(i) Exemptions have been granted on service tax in respect of cleaning services 
(fumigation) and warehousing services. 
II Duty Entitlement Pass Book (DEPB) rates were enhanced by 3% for 9 sectors 
including  textiles (also handloom s), Readymade Garments (RMGs) and 
handicrafts.  For other  items, DE PB rates were enhanced by 2%.  
III. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) premium reduced by 10%. 
IV. Immediate refund of terminal Excise Duty has been ordered; 
V. Concessional export credit with extend ed periodical coverage has been effected; 
VI. Refund of Service Tax in various sectors related to exports of goods, have been 
notified. 
VII. Amount of Rs.600 crore released for clearing arrears of Central Sales Tax (CST) 
reimbursement and terminal excise duty. 
VIII. Duty drawback rates enhanced by 10-40% of the existing rates. 
IX. Subvention on credit rate allowed upto 2%. 
 
  Apart from these short term measures, a number of proactive steps as part of 
medium term strategy and long term strat egy had already been initiated by the 
Government for enhancing the performance and global market share of the textiles 
exports segment during the 11th Five Year Plan.  These include following measures: 
(i) The Technology Upgradation Fund Sche me (TUFS) has been made operational 
from 1-4-1999 to facilitate the modernisatio n and upgradation of the sector.   TUFS 
has been extended to cover the XI Fi ve Year Plan period.  For the speedy 
modernisation of the textiles processing sector, Government introduced, w.e.f 
20.4.2005, a credit linked capital subsidy scheme @10% under TUFS, in addition to 
the existing 5% interest reimbursement.    
(ii) The fiscal duty structure has been gene rally rationalised to achieve growth and 
maximum value addition within the country.  Except for mandatory excise duty on 
man-made filament yarns and man-made staple fibres, the whole value addition 
chain has been given the option of excise exemption.  
(iii) The import of specified textiles and garment machinery has been allowed at a 
concessional rate of customs duty to encourage investment and to make our 
textiles product competitive in the global market. The cost of machinery has also 
been reduced through fiscal policy measures. 
(iv) The duty-free import of 21 items of tr immings and embellishment items is allowed 
to garment exporters. This can be upto 3% of their actual export performance 
during the previous year. 
(v) The entire textiles sector, except fo r man-made fibre and filament yarn, was 
provided optional exemption from excise duty in 2004-05.  In 2005-06, Central 
Value-aided Tax (CENVAT) on Polyester Filament Yarn has been reduced from 
24% to 16%.  These modifications in fiscal levies aim at attracting more investments 
for modernization of textile sector. 

(vi) To facilitate import of state of th e art textiles machinery for manufacturing 
internationally competitive product in post quota regime, the customs duty on 
textile machinery has been brought down  to 10% in 2005-06 except 23 machinery 
appearing in List 49 which attract Basic Customs Duty (BCD) of 15%.   
(vii) Government has launched the Debt Re structuring Scheme w.e.f. Sept., 2003 with 
the principal objective to permit banks to lend to the textile sector at concessional 
rates of interest. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2/8/2008-Parl.,dated 11th August, 2008) 

(Rec. Sr. No. 3, Para 1.29) 
 
  
 The Committee observe that th e entire process involved in the identification of 
sickness of textile mills is intrinsically defici ent. It has been stated by the Government 
that with a view to timely detect sick and potentially sick companies which may or may 
not be closed and also for the speedy dete rmination of preventive, ameliorative and 
remedial measures which need to be take n in respect of such companies and the 
expeditious enforcement of the measures so determined, Board for Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) has been set up. Thereafter, BIFR appoints operating 
agencies for preparation of rehabilitation proposals in respect of potentially viable units. 
Simultaneously, it has also been stated that  the Government does not have any specific 
monitoring mechanism to detect sickness at incipient stage. The reason advanced for 
absence of monitoring mechanism that, “these days in free economy, mills are not 
required to submit the financial performance data, so it may not be possible to have any 
monitoring mechanism”. The contention of the Government, being factually incorrect 
and misleading is not plausible. The Commi ttee are not able to understand as to how 
BIFR has been taking decisions regarding re vival/closure or other options about a mill 
in the absence of vital data about the financial performance of the company.  
 The Committee are of the op inion that BIFR has miserably failed in its duties in 
so far as the revival of sick mills in the co untry is concerned. It has been an agonizing 
experience that any matter referred to BIFR is never attended to with the priority and 
speed it warrants. The Committee feel that th is body is not only oblivious of the 
sufferings of the workers and their families but is totally callous about them. The 
figures of the cases referred to BIFR substantiate the inference of the Committee. Out of 
848 cases referred to BIFR upto October 2006, only 60 cases were declared `no longer 
sick’ while 156 cases were declared `sick’, 159 `non-maintainable’ and 220 cases 
recommended for `winding up’. The Commi ttee are also distressed to find that 
Government has not been able to put in place any mechanism which may 21 detect and 
determine the root causes leading to sick ness in the textile sector beforehand. The 
process involved in the BIFR is unintelligib le, cumbersome and negative. It comes into 
operation only after the sickness in the unit becomes all pervasive. In such a situation, it 
is not possible to stem the rot. The engage ment of NITRA, ATIRA, BTRA, SITRA- all 
research bodies- for studying the reasons for sickness of NTC mills and suggest viability 
or otherwise of the mills have done least good  to the cause of textile sector as these are 
the exercises undertaken by them either in the aftermath of the closure of the mills or 
which are on the verge of closure. These are all futile exercises and thus do not help the 
healthy growth of the sector. The Committee,  therefore, strongly recommend that the 
functioning of BIFR be closel y scrutinized by the Government. They also call upon for 
bringing in needed changes for expeditiousl y achieving the desired results in a time 
bound manner and also making the officials of BIFR individually accountable for any 
delay beyond the stipulated time in arrivi ng at a decision about the future of a 
company. Besides, sickness in the entire text ile sector should be viewed holistically. Its 
root causes are analyzed threadbare and an effective mechanism is put in place to assess 
the possible reasons for sickness before it spreads its pang and quick remedial measures 

are taken so that textile sector remains unscathed from the uncertainties and vagaries 
associated with the Industry. For the purpose, the possibility of participation of workers 
or their representatives from the Central Trade Unions may be explored as their 
expertise in the field can be best utilized by inducting them in the 
Management/Governing body. Th e Committee are of the firm view that the advice of 
workers representatives, who have first ha nd knowledge of men, machine, materials 
and the industrial environment, would go a long way in minimizing the risk of sickness 
in the mills. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
 Regarding viewing holistically the sickness in  the entire sector, it may be mentioned 
that the Government seeks to foster a policy regime, which is industry friendly.  Government 
has not only framed innovative schemes such  as Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme and 
Scheme for Integrated Textiles Parks but also has taken fiscal and monetary measures duty 
concessions and incentives.  However, today the Indian textiles trade stands integrated with 
global trade.  In such a milieu, the industry ha s got vast opportunities at its disposal.  At the 
same time, there are challenges and threats.  In  such a competitive envi ronment, an industry 
can survive if it utilizes its inherent strength in  a judicious manner.  Since textiles is the oldest 
and the largest industry segment of the country, at any point of time, there will be incidents of 
sickness and closure in the country despite the be st efforts of the Government.     Fashion 
changes, modes of trade change, technology changes, conditions of trade changes, competition 
becomes tough.  However, the mill which adapts itself to such changes survives, otherwise 
sickness and closure follows.  Government is aware of its responsibilities and takes steps 
accordingly.   
 
 As regards exploring the possibility of participation of workers in the 
Management/Government, it may be mentioned that it is for management to decide who will 
represent in their various bodies.  A large number of mills are in the private sector.  
Accordingly, it is not possible  and advisable for Government to this end.  However, Trade 
Union leaders are being represented in v arious organizations under control of the 
Government.  
 
 As far as public sector is concerned,  the  recommendation has been noted. 
Workers representatives will be continued to be increasingly involved in various 
production activities of the company 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2/8/2008-Parl.,dated 11th August, 2008) 

(Rec. Sr. No. 4, Para 1.34) 
 
 The Committee note with concern that a large number of textile mills are being 
closed illegally in the country. This not only affects the balanced growth of the textile 
sector but the livelihood of the workers is  also put at stake. Moreover, the Union 
Government is not maintaining any data regarding mills which have been closed 
illegally. The plea of the Government that since `the subject matter pertains to State 
Governments, the role of the Union Government is negligible in this regard’, is not 
acceptable to the Committee. Considering th e national importance of the subject and 
greater role of the State Government, the Union Government cannot and should not shy 
away from its responsibility of having the data of such illegal closure of mills. The 
Committee are but inclined to infer that the Government is not at all serious on this 
issue otherwise with a little effort and co ordination with the Departments like ESIC, 
State Labour Commissioner and Textiles Department of State Governments, 
information regarding such mills could have  been easily gather ed. The Committee take 
a serious view of the casual approach of th e Government regarding such an important 
sector providing employment to a large number of workers. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that a data base be pr epared covering pockets of small, medium 
and large scale garment and textile indust ries across the country and appropriate 
coordination mechanism be established wi th ESIC, EPFO, Office of State Labour 
Commissioner, Small Scale Industries and Te xtile Department of State Governments, 
Associations of Entrepreneurs and Industri es so as to have information about the 
closure of mills whether legally or illegally. Based on this data base, the owners of 
illegally closed mills can be aske d to go in for systematic cl osure of their mills so that 
the workers of these mills are not deprived of their rightful benefits under TWRFS. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 This Ministry is fully in agreement with  the concerns of the Hon’ble Committee to 
require upon the necessity to accord rightful be nefits to the workers of the closed mills.  
Nevertheless it is submitted that the major bottlen ecks in existing guidelines of TWRFS is the 
mandate of State Governments conc urrence under the provisions of    Industrial Disputes Act 
declaring legal closures.  Accordingly, the Minist ry has proposed suitable modifications in the 
relevant provisions of the scheme to extend the benefits to workers of such closed mills.  For 
this, the Office of Textiles Commissioner in liais on with various authorities in the field has 
done a survey of the Mills which have been  cl osed for a long period.  The number of such 
mills is around 200 and on that basis, the Ministry of Textiles is in the process of expanding the 
scope of TWRFS so that workers of any textile m ills lying closed for a period of five years got 
the benefits of TWRFS. This measure will be nefit, in one stroke, nearly 65,000 workers of 
closed textile mills.  
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2/8/2008-Parl.,dated 11th August, 2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

(Rec. Sr. No.5, Para 1.35) 
  
 The Committee further observe that the Government has formulated a welfare 
scheme for the workers of NTC mills under which the employees/workers opting for 
voluntary retirement are issued Green Cards. The willing employees/workers are 
provided old looms at reasonable rates at  book value to run their own business on 
forming or joining a co-operative society. Th e Committee find that  this is a welcome 
step for the welfare of workers. However, presently only the workers of the public 
sector mills are eligible for availing of the benefits under the scheme. The Committee 
feel that willing workers of the private sector mills should also be extended access to the 
looms and other reusable machinery of NTC. Of  course, priority should be given to the 
workers of public sector mills over the private sector workers. The charges for 
providing the reusable machinery to the private sector workers may however, be 
different than the public sector workers besides putting a bar on resale of this 
machinery for a specified period to prevent its misuse. The Committee, therefore, urge 
upon the Government that the workers of private sector mills should also be considered 
for availing the benefit of getting looms of NT C mills if they are so willing on the same 
terms and conditions as are applicable to  workers of NTC mills. This gesture will 
promote the skill of entrepreneurship among the workers in the private sector, who are 
equally well versed with the nuances of the textile industry.  
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
 Presently in most of the closed mills, the old machinery including looms etc. have been 
sold and there is no old loom available in thes e closed mills for further disbursal.  However, 
the recommendation has been noted for future. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2/8/2008-Parl.,dated 11th August, 2008) 

(Rec. Sr. No.6, Para 2.40) 
 
 The Committee note that NTC was incorp orated in 1968 with the main objective 
of managing the affairs of 16 sick textiles mills taken over by the Government. Further, 
more sick mills were taken over by NTC under 3 Nationalization Acts and their number 
soared to 119 in 1995. As the mills brought un der the NTC umbrella perhaps could not 
perform to the expected levels, it was deci ded that only viable mills may continue 
functioning while the unviable units may be closed. Accordingly, in the year 2002, 
BIFR/Government of India approved reviva l of 53 viable mills and closure of 66 
unviable mills. However, 65 mills were closed and 2 mills (one unviable and one viable) 
were transferred to the State Government of Pondicherry (now Puducherry). 12 mills 
were further closed since “most of the em ployees of these mills have opted for 
Voluntary Retirement Scheme.” The Committee are distressed to note that 12 mills have 
been left out of the modernization process for the sole reason that most of its employees 
had opted for VRS. The Committee do not a pprove of the manner in which 12 mills 
have been left out of the modernization process because for assessing the viability of 
mills for their revival, only one factor has been taken into consideration. This kind of act 
on the part of Government reinforces the apprehension that NTC mills are being shut 
down in a sustained and planned manner desp ite the fact that such mills were having 
the better and greater scope for their refurbi shment. In the light of this, the Committee 
strongly recommend the Government to re view its decision regarding the 12 mills 
which were originally in the l i s t  o f  m o d e r n i z a t i o n  b u t  h a d  t o  b e  l e f t  d u e .   T h e  
Committee further obseve that the pace of modernization for the remaining 40 mills (22 
by NTC and 18 in Joint venture) is far from satisfactory. Out of 18 mills earmarked for 
the revival through the joint ve nture, only 5 mills have been assigned to three private 
partners for modernization till date. Regarding rest of the mills no concrete action for 
their revival seems to be in the offing. The Committee, therefore, call upon the 
Government to review afresh the whole pr ocess of modernization of the mills. The 
entire process of modernization should be completed in a time bound manner and also 
the interests of the workers regarding thei r wages and service conditions should be 
protected. The progress made in this regard may be reported to the Committee within 
three months of presentation of this Report.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 A review has been carried out in consulta tion with NTC and a detailed proposal is 
under consideration for submission to the competent authority, and once approval is available, 
further action will be initiated. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2/8/2008-Parl.,dated 11th August, 2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)

(Rec. Sr. No.7, Para 2.41) 
 
 The Committee find that at present ther e are 113 retail shops of NTC running in 
different part of the country to promote retail marketing. The Committee further 
observe with concern the dismal performa nce of the retail shops during the year 2006-
2007 as compared to the previous year. The Co mmittee feel that this unpredictable and 
incoherent performance in sales reflects weak marketing strategy of the Government. 
Initiatives for providing incentives like be tter wages, regular employment, encouraging 
and satisfying working atmosphere, etc. to the employees promoting sales and 
maintaining cordial relations with customers,  must be ushered in to herald an era of 
complete transformation of marketing in the organization. The Committee, therefore, 
urge upon the Government to pay utmost attention on the sale and marketing policy of 
the NTC by improving its image, performance and delivery mechanism. The 
Committee further find that Defence, Railw ays, Tele-communications, Para-military 
forces, Health, etc. of the Union Government and several departments of the State 
Governments are the bulk consumers of cloth on a regular basis. The Committee 
suggest that all the Government organizations  should be impressed upon to opt for the 
NTC products at competitive rates withou t compromising on quality. The Committee 
hope that such steps would definitely he lp to bail out the NTC from its present 
situation. 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
 At present, NTC is running 100 showrooms in  different parts of the country.  Due to 
heavy curtailment of weaving activities, the av ailability of fabrics from NTC mills was not 
sufficient to meet the requirement of showrooms.  Recently, N.T.C. has decided to revamp the 
showrooms in a phased manner. It may also be me ntioned here that, at present, there are only 
two mills, viz., Tata & Coimbatore Murugan Mills  supplying fabrics being manufactured by 
them to all the showrooms. However, the re commendation has been noted and once the 
production increases, steps as recommended can be taken. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2/8/2008-Parl.,dated 11th August, 2008) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.  13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

(Rec. Sr. No.8,  Para 2.42) 
 
 The Committee observe that Government  h a s  p r o p o s e d  t o  s e t  u p  a n  I n d i a  
International Trade Tower in Mumbai on the land of one of the textile mills which has 
since been recommended for closure. This tower will show-case the series of high 
quality textile products under one roof. The Committee welcome the concept of Trade 
Tower as it will facilitate the marketing of all kinds of textile, handloom and handicraft 
products including gems and jewellery. Wh ile working as a nodal agency, the trade 
tower will also generate considerable employment among the artisans, handloom 
weavers, and other workers associated with  the textile sector. However, necessary 
permission is still awaited from the Govern ment of Maharashtra in this regard. The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Union Government that all steps be taken to 
expedite the approval from the Government  of Maharashtra for the construction of 
trade tower in Mumbai so that the benefits  that may accrue fr om these efforts are 
actually percolated down to the most deserving people, viz. artisans, handloom 
weavers, textile workers, etc. at the earlie st. Based on the performance of this tower, 
opening of new towers elsewhere in the co untry may also be considered keeping in 
view the high density zones of artisans and weavers.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
 The recommendation has been noted. The proposal for construction of India 
International Trade Tower at Mumbai is being vigorously pursued with the concerned 
Govt./agencies. 
  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.2/8/2008-Parl.,dated 11th August, 2008) 

CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES FO THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Rec. Sr. No.9, Para 2.51) 
 
 The Committee observe that British India Corporation Limited (BIC) was taken 
over by the Government of India in the year 1981. The BIC Limited has two woollen 
mills, viz. Cawnpore Woollen Mills in Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh) and New Egerton 
Woollen Mills in Dhariwal (Punjab) under its direct control. Besides, BIC limited also 
has two cotton subsidiary companies, viz. Elgin Mills Co. Ltd. and Cawnpore Textiles 
Ltd. at Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh. BIC ha d its brand value as Dhariwal and Lalimli, 
before becoming a sick organisation. The Co mpany was referred to BIFR in the year 
1992 and declared sick. Despite a lapse of sixteen  years, nothing concrete has been done 
to bail out the BIC units from the sickness. Ev en the permission of Government of Uttar 
Pradesh for conversion of BIC land into freehold from leasehold could not be obtained 
due to which the rehabilitation scheme for BIC as approved by BIFR in the year 2002 
could not be implemented. Even the modified  rehabilitation scheme is in limbo due to 
procedural wranglings and objections by  the stakeholders. The Committee further 
observe that, like NTC, the surplus assets of BIC including its land will be sold to 
generate resources to modernize its units. Till date, a total amount of Rs. 68.33 crore has 
been realized from the sale/advance on sale of surplus properties but no tangible action 
is yet in sight as far as re vival of BIC is concerned. Th e Committee are of the opinion 
that the revival scheme can not be put on ho ld perpetually merely on the ground that 
permission of the Government of Uttar Pr adesh is not coming forth. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that a time bound action plan be chalked out wherein 
the modified rehabilitation scheme as su bmitted by the Operating Agency, i.e. the 
Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI)  is implemented in letter and spirit. The 
Committee also desire the Union Government to impress upon the State Government of 
Uttar Pradesh for conversion of leasehold land into freehold at the earliest. The 
Committee further recommend that the BIC mills be reopened at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
 A detailed review of the performance of BIC was done by the BIFR in its meeting held 
on 14.2.08. Based on the recommenda tions of BIFR, a detailed Reha bilitation Scheme has been 
finalized and is awaiting the approval of th e competent authority.  It has already been 
circulated to the concerned Ministries / De partments inviting comments/suggestions. The 
concern expressed by the Standing Committee has also been brought to the notice of Uttar 
Pradesh Government, again requesting them to expedite permission for conversion of the land 

to freehold. As regards revival of the Elgin Mills , a separate proposal is under consideration of 
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). 
  
 
The recommendations of the Standing Commi ttee have been carefully noted and all 
possible efforts are being made to make the BIC mills operational and profitable. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. NO.2/8/2008-Parl.,dated 11th August, 2008) 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 17  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,        
3rd November, 2008                                                               CHAIRMAN,  
12 Kartika , 1930 (Saka)                               STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR .   
    

APPENDIX-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF TH E STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
HELD ON MONDAY, 3RD NOVEMBER,  2008  
 
The Committee met from 1130 hours to 1300 ho urs in Committee Room `C’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt draft Thirty-Fourth and Thirty-Fifth  
Reports. 
 
 
PRESENT  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
4. Shri Subrata Bose 
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta 
8. Shri Virendra Kumar 
9. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
10. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
11. Shri Mohan Rawale 
12. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
13. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
               
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
  
14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
15. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
16.       Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
SECRETARIAT 
         
   
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2.         Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
 3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary  
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman wel comed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them about the thr ee referred Bills i.e., (i) The Workmen’s 
Compensation (Amendment) Bill, 2008, ( ii) The Employees’ State Insurance 
(Amendment) Bill, 2008 and (iii) The Planta tions Labour (Amendment) Bill, 2008 as 
introduced in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha an d referred to the Standing Committee on 
Labour for examination and Report within a period of three months and about draft 
Thirty-Fourth and Thirty-Fifth Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Labour on the subject `Sickness/Closure of Textile Mills’ and 
the “General Conditions of Weavers in the country- A case study of Sircilla 
concentration zone of weavers” respectively.  
  
3. Thereafter, the Committee  took up the fo llowing draft reports for consideration:- 
 
(i) Draft Thirty-Fourth Report on th e action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations containe d in the Twenty-Seventh Report 
on the subject `Sickness/Closure of Textile Mills’   
 
(ii) Draft Thirty-Fifth on `General conditions of weavers in the country-
A case study of Sircilla concentration zone of weavers’. 
 
 
4. The Committee adopted the above reports with some verbal modifications. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chai rman to finalise the above Reports and 
present the Thirty-Fifth Report to Hon’ble Speaker. 
6. The Committee also placed on records th eir appreciation for the service rendered 
to the Committee by the officers/staff attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7. *  *   *   *  * 
 *  *   *   *  * 
 
8.  *  *   *   *  * 
 *  *   *   *  * 
 
    
 The Committee then adjourned. 

 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SEVENTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
        T o t a l   P e r c e n t a g e  
 
I. Total number of Recommendations     08 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have        88.88%   
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 and 8)   
     
III. Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies - Nil  
        
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration - Nil 
  
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which             11.12% 
final replies of Government are of interim in  nature 
(9) 
            
                  ---------- 
           100% 
                              ------------ 
  
 
 
 
 
 