  23  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for the 
year 2007-2008] 
 
 
 
   TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
                    
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 

 2
 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2007-08) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on Demands for Grants for the 
year 2007-2008] 
 
 
 
  
 
            Presented to Lok Sabha on  5.9.2007 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 5.9.2007 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August,  2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 3
  
CONTENTS 
 
       
     
 P A G E ( S )      
     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N          ( i v )  
        
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………    1 
  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Obser vations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration…………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDICES 
   
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held 
on  30 August 2007  
   
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4
 COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 .  S h r i  F u r k a n  A n s a r i         
3. Shri Subrata Bose    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hasan   
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta   
8. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar     
10. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
11. Shri Basangouda R. Patil   
12. Shri Devidas Pingle  
13. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
14. Shri Mohan Rawale  
15. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
    16. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
17. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
18. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
*19. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
25.       Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
26.       Shri Gandhi Azad 
27.       Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
28.       Shri Dilip Ray 
29.       Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant  
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
          1.    Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
5.    Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Under Secretary 
    6.    Ms. Mili George  - Senior Executive Assistant 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*  Changed the nomination from Committee on Railways to Committee on Labour w.e.f. 
21 August 2007. 

 5
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been authorised by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this  Twenty-Third Report 
on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth  Report of the Standing Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on  
Demands for Grants for the year 2007-2008. 
 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to  the Hon’ble Speaker on 20 April 2007 
and was also laid in both the Houses, viz., the Lok Sabha  and the Rajya Sabha on 26 
April 2007.  The Ministry of Labour and Empl oyment furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contai ned in that Report on 20 June 2007.   The  
report was considered and adopted  by the Standing Committee on Labour at their 
sitting held on 30 August 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Re port of the Standing Commi ttee on Labour (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For the facility of re ference and convenience, 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type 
in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,    
30 August, 2007                           CHAIRMAN, 
8 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR.                            
    
 

 6
 CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the T wentieth Report on Demands for Grants 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) for the year 2 007-2008 of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment which was presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 20 April 2007. 
 
1.2 The Twentieth Report was also laid in both the Houses, viz., the Lok Sabha and 
the Rajya Sabha on 26.4.2007.  It contained 20 recommendations.  Replies of the 
Government have been received in respect of all the recommendations.  They have been 
examined and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 10, 13, 15, 17, 18 and 20.  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s  reply --Paragraph Sl. Nos.  1, 3, 5, 9 
and 11. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration--Paragraph Sl. Nos.  8, 16 and 19. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature--Paragraph Sl. Nos. 4, 7, 12 and 14.  
 
  
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of recommendations 
contained in Chapter I and final action ta ken notes in respect of recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V for which only in terim replies have been given by the 
Government may be furnished to them at th e earliest and in any case not later than 3 
months of the presentation of the Report.   
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the ac tion taken replies of the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
 
 
 

 7
 
A. Social Security – Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No.3.34) 
 
1.5 The Committee were constrained to note that out of more than 40 crore 
workforce in the country, the total memb ership of the Employees’ Provident Fund 
Organisation as on 31.03.2006 is only 4.6 cror e both in the exempted and unexempted 
sectors which is just 10.74 per cent of the total work force.  The Committee were least 
satisfied with this sorry state of affairs.  The Committee noted that with a view to bring 
many establishments under the purview of the Act, various steps like Compliance 2001 
programme, special drives, creation of intelligence circles, etc. have been taken, but the 
fruitful results could not be achieved.    The Compliance 2001 programme had not come 
up to expectations and for the purpos e of enhancing compliance a proposal 
incorporating some strategic adjustments in the said programme is under consideration 
of the appropriate authorities.  This is a welcome move keeping in view the fate of 
various initiatives in the past, the Committee were sceptic whether this step alone will 
help in proper coverage of all coverable establishments.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended that the Ministry sh ould intensify its coverage programme and 
for this purpose a multi-pronged strategy be devised which may 
inter alia include 
voluntary compliance, special drives for co verage, earmarking of areas to enforcement 
officers and all such other steps which are deemed proper for enhancing the coverage. 
  
 
1.6  In their action taken reply furnished to  the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows : 
  
”The wide gap between the workforce in the country and that covered under the 
Employees’ Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 pointed out by 
the Committee is attributable mainly to the restrictive a pplication of the Act.  An 
establishment can be brought under purview of the Act if it fulfils the criteria 
prescribed for the purpose.  A large nu mber of workers are from unorganized 
sector etc.  Thus entire workforce of the country is not coverable under the Act as 
they may be employed in establishments , which are not specified under the Act, 
or employs less than 20 employees or which has protection of Section 16 of the 
Act. 
 
However, it is submitted that the proposal seeking structural adjustments 
and changes in the Compliance 2001 progra mme aims basically to bring more 
and more establishments under purview of the Act and extend the reach of 
benefits to all eligible workforce of the country.  The proposal was placed before 
the Central Board for Trust ees (CBT), EPF in its 179 th meeting wherein the Board 
authorized the Chairman to constitute a Sub-Committee to look into the issue 
and formulate a comprehensive proposal for being placed before the Board”. 
 
 

 8
 
1.7 The Committee are informed that the wide gap between the total workforce in 
the country and those covered under EPF & MP Act, 1952 is due to the restrictive 
application of the Act.   Citing the near failure of the Compliance 2001 programme, 
the Committee had recommended several measures for enhancing the coverage.   The 
Ministry had replied that certain strategi c adjustments in the said programme were 
under consideration of the Central Board of Trustees.  But what exactly are the 
proposals for structural adjustments are not explained.  Considering the need for 
coverage of more establishments under the purview of the Act, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendations and call upon the Ministry to intensify its 
coverage programme expeditiously.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
conclusive action taken in the matter at the earliest. 

 9
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No.3.38) 
  
 1.8 The Committee had noted with concern that an amount of Rs.1351.38 crore has 
been lying with the Employees ’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) in the Unclaimed 
Deposit Account as on 31.03.2006.  The Commi ttee had been informed that as per 
provisions of the existing scheme, the am ount lying under Unclaimed Deposit Account 
cannot be utilized for any other purpose except for paying to the rightful claimants.  
The Committee found that the total amount  disbursed out of the Unclaimed Deposit 
Account during the last three years has been quite meagre i.e., Rs.56.31 crore in 2003-
2004, Rs.86.60 crore in 2004-2005 and Rs.71.08 crore in  2005-06.  The Committee were 
not satisfied with this state of affairs.  The Committee felt that since not large number of 
claimants are coming forward to settle thei r claims, a large amount of fund has been 
blocked which could be used elsewher e for better purposes.  The Committee  
recommended that the provisions of the sch eme should be suitably amended for better 
utilization of money.  The Committee also de sired that the number of cases settled out 
of the Unclaimed Deposit Account should al so be maintained along with the amount 
disbursed. 
 
1.9 In their action taken reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated as 
follows:  
 
“The nomenclature of “Unclaimed Depo sit Account”(UCD) has been changed as 
Inoperative Account” vide Government of India notification dated 22.03.2007.  
 
Para 72(6) of the Employees’ Provid ent Fund Scheme, 1952 provides for 
classifying certain Provident Fund Acco unts as Inoperative Accounts where 
accumulation in respect of any member wh o has either ceased to be employed or 
died but no claim has been preferred within a period of three years from the date 
it becomes payable.   
 
In regard to the recommendation made by the Committee that provision 
of the scheme should be suitable amende d for better utilization of money, it is 
submitted that all these Inoperative Acco unts have a definite claimants who can 
file their claims at any time and on receipt of such claims, the Employees’ 
Provident Fund Organisation has to make  the full payments to them along with 
interest.  The interest at the declared rate is regularly credited to such accounts in 
the same way as is given in the case of live account. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 10
Since Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation has no legal right / power 
to utilize this fund for any other purpose other than for making payment to the 
rightful claimant/their legal heirs, such amount can not be diverted for any other 
purpose.  Nonetheless, regular efforts are being made by the Organisation to 
trace the whereabouts of the beneficiaries through advertisements in 
Newspapers, Trade Unions and the Employer s etc.It is also reported that the 
number of cases settled out of UCD A ccount (now Inoperative Accounts) are 
maintained separately in the respective field offices and reflected in the UCD 
Return submitted by the field offices in the respective years”. 
 
 
1.10 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply given by the Government.  
They were given to understand that the EPFO  has no legal right/power to utilize the 
funds in the “Inoperative Account”.    Th e Committee observe that a huge amount of 
funds in this account has been lying idle fo r an inordinately long period of time for 
want of claim by the beneficiaries.  The Committee note that  meagre amounts, i.e. 
Rs.56.31 crore, Rs.86.60 crore and Rs.71.08 crore have been disbursed out of the 
Inoperative Account during the years 2003-2004, 2004-2005, 2005-2006 respectively.   
The Committee are of the opinion that for better utilization of money, a certain 
percentage may be retained in this account, while the remaining amount can be 
judiciously invested in avenues which in turn would earn more money into the fund.  
As far as the legality of such a move is concerned, the Committee strongly 
recommend that in the larger interest of th e beneficiaries, the legal provisions in the 
EPF Act may be suitably amended to provide more flexibility to the organisation.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their ear lier recommendation and desire that the 
effective steps be taken urgently in this regard.  The Committee may be apprised of 
the action taken within three months of presentation of this report.  
 
 
 

 11
 
B. Unorganised Sector  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16,  Para No. 3.82) 
 
 1.11 The Committee had observed that an a llocation of Rs.15,000 crore had been made 
during the 11 th Plan period for the schemes pertaining to welfare of workers of 
unorganized sector.  This allocation was to be spread over in amounts of Rs.1,000/, 
Rs.2,000/-, Rs.3,000/-, Rs.4,000/- and Rs.5,000/- crore during each of the first to five 
years of the Eleventh Plan period.  The Committee were at a loss to understand the logic 
behind this uneven spreading of amount in respect of schemes formulated/being 
formulated for the welfare of workers of the unorganized sector.  Taking into account 
the huge number of unorganized workers in  the country with all uncertainties and 
insecurities, the Committee had strongly ur ged upon the Government to step up the 
budgetary provision under this head.  They had also desired that the outlay so allocated 
be evenly spread in all the years of the Eleventh Plan period, target in each year be fixed 
and sincere and genuine efforts be made to achieve it.  
   
 1.12 In response to the above recommendation, the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment in its action taken reply has furnished as under:-    
  
“On the directive of Prime Minister’s Office, a Committee of Secretaries (COS) 
was constituted .  In pursuance of 2nd meeting of COS held on 25.10.2006, a Small 
Group under the chairmanship of Fina nce Secretary was formed.  The Group 
recommended that the Welfare schemes shou ld be taken up stage-by-stage in a 
phased manner and the then Finance Secret ary had agreed to an allocation of 
Rs.1000 crore in the year 2007-2008 of social security schemes which would go 
upto Rs.5000 crore in the year 2011-2012.  Accordingly, Rs.1000 crore in the 
Annual Plan 2007-08 with an increase of  Rs.1000 in the each subsequent year in 
the Eleventh Five year i.e. total of Rs.15000 crore in the Eleventh Five Year Plan 
was proposed.  However, this allocation has not been approved”. 

 12
 
1.13 The Committee are deeply dismayed to note that the much hyped proposal for 
the allocation of Rs.15,000 crore during the Elev enth Five Year Plan  for the welfare 
schemes for the unorganized sector is yet to be approved.  The Committee are 
convinced that the Ministry has not made an y concrete efforts to pursue the proposal 
to get it approved by the concerned authorities.  The Committee being fully aware of 
plight of the unorganized sector feel that social security and other welfare measures 
must be extended to the unorganized sector, without any further delay. They, 
therefore, strongly reiterate their earlie r recommendation and urge the Government 
to take effective steps and approach the Planning Commission to get the projected 
amount  allocated at the earliest so that some assistance could be provided to this 
neglected sector till a vital legislation for the upliftment of this sector is passed by 
the Parliament. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter at the earliest. 

 13
C. Beedi  Workers Welfare Fund 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 19, Para No.3.98) 
  
 1.14 The Committee had noted that the Revi sed Integrated Housing Scheme 2005 for 
beedi workers came into being w.e.f. 25 May 2005 wherein a uniform Central subsidy of 
Rs.40,000/- was provided to construct a dwelling unit against a contribution by him of 
Rs.5,000/-.   The Committee felt that the contribution of Rs.5,000/- by a beedi worker to 
avail of the subsidy of Rs.40,000/- for constructi on of a dwelling unit was on the higher 
side as it was beyond the capacity of a poor beedi worker earning approximately 
Rs.66/- a day,  i.e. the National Minimum Floor Level Wages.  The amount of subsidy 
of Rs.40,000/- was also on the lower side as it was virtually not possible to construct a 
dwelling unit with this meagre amount particularly due to steep rise in the prices of  the 
construction material.  The Committee, theref ore, had desired that the contribution of 
beedi worker for the purpose of construction of a dwelling unit should be waived off.  
Alternatively, it may be given by the Gove rnment in the form of interest free loan 
stretched over a longer duration, say 5 years, so that they would be able to pay the 
instalments without much burden.  Th e subsidy of Rs.40,000/- should also be 
appropriately hiked keeping in view the escalating prices of construction materials. 
  
 1.15 The Ministry its action taken reply has stated:-    
 
“The issue to do away with the requirement of worker contribution was 
examined along with other issues, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. It 
has been decided that instead of deposi t of Rs.5,000/- by the worker along with 
the application form, the worker contri bution of Rs.5,000/- be obtained after 
grant of administrative approval and before advance release of 1st installment. As 
regards issues like enhancement of subsidy of Rs.40,000/-, due to steep rise in 
the price of the construction material, it may be mentioned that the new scheme 
has been implemented from 25 th May, 2005. None of the Unions/Associations of 
Beedi workers or concerned State Govern ments have requested for enhancement 
of subsidy.  As regards the suggestion of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
regarding arrangement of interest free loan of worker contribution, it may be 
mentioned that in terms of the Scheme, concerned State Governments have been 
requested for assistance in the form of  loan from financial institutions like 
HUDCO etc. or Contribution from the State Governments in the form of 
subsidy/loan.  
 
However, the State Government of Tamil Nadu is already providing 
Rs.5,000/- as State Subsidy towards worker’s contribution. The State 
Government of Bihar is likely to provide worker’s contribution as State subsidy 
to the Beedi workers for construction of their houses”.  

 14
 
 
 1.16 The Committee are least satisfied with the reply of the Government as the 
Government has not cared to pay any heed to their suggestions with respect to the 
welfare of Beedi Workers.  The housing sch eme for the Beedi Workers is not taking 
off.  The price of building materials like ce ment, bricks, iron, sand etc. has increased 
and the amount of money (i.e. Rs.40,000) for construction of each house is no more 
enough.  The Government should have initiated steps on their own to raise this 
amount suitably without awaiting the request from Unions/Associations of Beedi 
Workers or concerned State Governments on this score.  As regard arrangement of 
interest free-loan of a worker’s contributio n, the Committee note that only one State 
Government of Tamil Nadu is providing Rs.5,000/- as State subsidy towards workers’ 
contribution.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should pursue vigorously with 
other State Governments in this regard a nd ensure that all the State Governments 
follow suit of State Government of Tamil Nadu.  This will go a long way in 
providing a shelter to one of the most economically backward sections of the society.  
The Committee may be apprised of the developments made in this regard within 
three months of the presentation of this Report to Parliament. 

 15
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Para No.3.15) 
 
 2.1 The Committee note that as per the Go vernment’s directive, 10% of the Plan 
allocation are to be earmarked for specific projects/schemes in North-Eastern States and 
Sikkim. In pursuance of the directive of the Government, the Ministry made a lump 
sum provision of Rs.3,368.00 lakh at BE level for the year 2006-07 for all the schemes of 
North Eastern States.  The allocation wa s reduced to Rs.2,350.00 lakh at RE stage. 
However, the actual expenditure upto February 2007 was only Rs.1,371.26 lakh, which 
is only 40% of the BE and 58% of the RE .  The Committee note that the major scheme 
being run in the North Eastern region pertai ns to establishment of new ITIs in the 
North-Eastern States and Sikkim.  The Co mmittee are distressed to find that the 
shortfall in utilization of allocated funds is due to non-achievement of targets set for the 
aforesaid scheme.  Out of 22 new ITIs to be opened and 35 of the existing ITIs upgraded 
during 2006-07, only 16 new ITIs have been co mpleted and 30 existing ITIs upgraded.  
The Committee feel that lack of concerted efforts on the part of the Ministry has 
contributed significantly to such a performa nce which can only be termed as ‘below 
average’.   The Committee are of the view that since ITIs are meant for producing multi-
skilled the human resource assets of the nation  who will in turn contribute significantly 
towards economic development, delay for comp letion of assigned projects should not 
be taken lightly and responsibility for the la pse may be fixed in future.  The Committee, 
therefore, stress that the reasons for such low performance may be analysed in detail 
and improvements brought in.  The Committee also desires that they be apprised of the 
steps taken in this direction.   
 
Reply of the  Government 
 
2.2 The allocation earmarked for specific projects/schemes in North-Eastern States 
and Sikkim was reduced from Rs.33.68 crore to Rs.23.50 crore during Annual Plan 2006-
07 R. E.  Against this, the total expendit ure during 2006-07 was Rs.19.05 crore which is 
56.56% of the B.E. and 81.06% of the R.E.  All efforts will be made by the Ministry to 
step up productive expenditure in future. 
 
2.3 As regards Scheme pertaining to ‘Estab lishment of new ITIs in the North Eastern 
States and Sikkim’, a budget provision (BE)  of Rs.20 Crore was made in FY 2006-07.  
Out of the above budget provision, an am ount of Rs.16.80 Crore (84% of the BE) was 
released to various North Eastern States for completing the activities on civil 
construction, equipment procurement and recu rring expenditure.  As on date, 17 new 
ITIs have been completed and 31 existing ITIs have been upgraded.  All-out efforts are 
being made to complete the civil construction and equipment procurement in these ITIs, 
at the earliest. The Scheme is being regularly reviewed through periodic Review 
Meetings to assess the progress made by each of the North-Eastern States.   
 

 16
2.4 During 2006-07, three review meetings were held under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary(Labour& Employment)  wherein  special emphasis was on completion of civil 
construction and equipment procurement,  so  as to enable the NE State  to commence 
training activities in the remaining  ITIs.   
 
2.5 It may however, be added here that, the NE Project was to continue during the 
Xth  Plan period i.e. upto 31.3.2007.  Cabine t Committee on Economic Affairs(CCEA) is 
being requested to extend the project duration of the said scheme by another three years 
so as to enable this Ministry to  set up three more new ITIs – 2 in Sikkim and 1 in the 
State of Assam. The Planning  Commission with an outlay of Rs. 13.7 Crore within the 
existing scheme has recently approved thes e additional ITIs. The extension of the 
project duration will also facilitate release of  central funds to NE States for completing 
the residual activities in the respective ITIs.   
 
2.6 So far as Central Government Industrial  Tribunal cum Labour Courts  (CGITs) 
are concerned, there is only one CGIT Gu wahati situated in North-Eastern Region. 
Funds for the CGIT Guwahati till 2006-07 used to be provided from common allocations 
received for the CGITs(Plan) and not from th e separate NE component of the funds .  
For the financial year 2007-08 an amount of Rs.23.60 lakh has been provided as BE 2007-
08 for CGIT Guwahati from the funds allocated for the North Eastern States. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para No.3.36) 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the rate of intere st payable to subscribers of EPFO is an 
issue of perennial dispute and discord.  Due to  acute difference of op inion, the rates of 
interest for years 2006-07 and 2007-08 are yet to be recommended by the Central Board 
of Trustees (CBT, EPF).  It has been stated that the rate of interest is determined keeping 
in view the projected income and projected interest payment liabilities during a 
particular year.  The Committee are heartened to  note that with a view to earn better 
returns from investment of EPFO corpus , the CBT, EPF has agreed to certain 
recommendations regarding changing the inve stment pattern such as investments in 
NSCs and POTDRs, investments in TDRs of private sector banks subject to a limit of 5% 
of the deposit base, TDRs of public  sector banks upto 3 years and merger of two 
categories of 25% and 15% of Central and St ate Government securities, respectively to 
make a single category of 40% of govern ment securities; treat the category-wise 
percentage norms as indicative and not mand atory and to do away  with any floor in 
any single category (Percentage of approved  investment  in any single category by 
EPFO is not mandatory. It can vary and interc hange of category can also take place) .  
The Committee hopes and trusts that with the  proposed changes in the investment 
pattern, earnings of the EPFO will be augmente d, thus enabling it to give an enhanced 
rate of interest to subscribers.  The Committ ee, therefore, urge upon the Government to 
take appropriate initiatives for implemen tation of the recommendations regarding 
changing the investment pattern of EPF suggested at its 178th and 179th meetings of CBT 
at the earliest.  The Committee may be apprised  of the developments in this regard at 
periodic intervals. 

 17
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 The Central Board of Trustees, Employees  Provident Fund, has already approved 
the proposed changes and recommendations have  also been sent to the Government for 
consideration. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para No.3.50) 
 
2.9 The Committee notes that under provisio ns of ESI Act prosecution cases can be 
filed against the insured persons and empl oyers for giving wrong declaration. On 
demand of the employers and employees the third Amnesty Scheme for withdrawal of 
the prosecution cases filed against employers and insured persons on making the 
payment of contribution, interest and damages for the period involved under the 
prosecution by the employers and excess cash benefit availed of by insured persons was 
introduced with effect from 01.08.2006 to 31.01.2007 which was later extended upto 
31.03.2007 has since been extended further.  The Committee observe that out of 2,600 
applications received from the employers’  upto February 2007 under the Scheme, only 
511 have been processed for payment while th e remaining 2,089 applications have been 
kept pending for want of payment of dues by the employers to the Corporation. The 
Corporation realized Rs.5.18 crore from the defaulting employers under the Amnesty 
Scheme.  The Committee notes that though the goal of the scheme is to reduce the 
number of pending cases, a large number  of employers are not coming forward, 
reportedly because the employers are still f iling the cases even after payment of arrears 
by the employer..  The Committee, therefore,  recommends that Ministry should evolve 
some mechanism to ensure that genuine people are not harassed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 2.10 The Amnesty Scheme for withdrawal of criminal cases against the insured 
persons and employer under Section 84 & 85 was initially introduced for 6 months 
w.e.f. 01.08.2006 to 31.01.2007. The Scheme was therea fter, extended for a further period 
upto 31.03.2007 and lastly extended upto 31.05.2007. 
 
2.11 According to information received from different regions, against a total number 
of 3209 applications received from the employers, 846 applications have been processed 
for withdrawal of prosecutions under the Amnesty Scheme. A total of Rs.5.75 crore 
have also been realized during the period from the defaulting employers involved in 
these litigations. 
 
 
 
 

 18
2.12 The instructions regarding introduction  of the Amnesty Scheme were issued on 
06.07.2006 and a clarification was also issued  on 21.08.2006 to the effect that no 
prosecution, be filed during amnesty period. In such cases, the RDs/ JDs were advised 
that the defaulting employers, could be allowed to avail of the Amnesty Scheme and 
action against them, if any, could be considered on expiry of the Amnesty period, if 
default persisted. During the period of Amnesty no case was to be filed by any of the 
regions. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para No.3.69) 
 
 
 2.13 The Committee take further note that  the Directorate General Mines Safety 
conducts seven statutory examinations ea ch under Coal Mines Regulations, 1957 and 
Metalliferrous Mines Regulations, 1961 besides conducting some medical examinations.  
The syllabus for statutory examinations co nducted by DGMS for managers, surveyors 
and other supervisors workin g in coal and metal mines is under revision. The new 
techniques/methods that may be included in the new syllabus are longwall mining, 
gallery blasting method, pillar extraction by  continuous miner, mechanized depillaring 
using SDL, LHD, introduction of surface miners, introduction of in pit crushers, heavy 
earth moving machineries, new survey technique like EDM etc.  The Committee 
observe that the techniques/methods which are  to be included in  the new syllabus are 
essential ingredients for improving the effici ency of mining activities.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the proc ess of the revision of the syllabus should 
be taken up on a top priority basis and completed within a definite time frame. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14 In accordance with the recommendation s made by the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour for revision of Syllabus, two committees, one under Coal Mines 
Regulations, 1957 and another under Metallife rrous Mines Regulations, 1961 have been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of tw o Deputy Director-Generals of Mines Safety 
respectively for process of the revision of syllabus. The committees have been directed 
to submit a draft revised syllabus and after de liberations, the process of revision of the 
syllabus will be completed within a period of six months. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para No.3.81) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that of late, some  new segments of working class, i.e. 
personnel working with the private securi ty agencies, employees of call centres and 
workers engaged in private sanitation agenci es, etc., also form sizeable number of 
unorganized workers and no welfare schemes of the Government have been extended 
to them for the purpose of coverage. Their position is no better than those of other 

 19
categories of workers in the unorganized se ctor.  The Committee, therefore, call upon 
the Government that these categories of work ers may also be provided the benefits of 
social security by bringing them within the definition of unorganized labour and 
covering them in the proposed Bill to be brought before the Parliament shortly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 2.16 After enactment of legislation, the schemes would be formulated.  The 
modalities of the schemes and coverage of workers are under examination.   
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
   Recommendation (Sl.No.17, Para No.3.88) 
 
2.17 The Committee note with concern that  there are about 2.57 crore-construction 
workers in the country.  These workers are on e of the most vulnerable segments of the 
unorganized sector in India.  Their position is no better than any other category of 
workers in the unorganized sector.  The bu ilding and other construction workers are 
characterized by an inherent risk to their life  and limb.  The construction work is also 
characterized by its casual nature, temporary  relationship between the employer and 
the employees, uncertain working hours, lack  of basic amenities and inadequacy of 
welfare facilities. Only two enactments i.e., The Building and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Co nditions of Service) Act, 1996 and the 
Building and Other Construction Workers’ We lfare Cess, Act, 1996 are in operation for 
the construction workers.  However, no monitoring is being done with regard to their 
implementation.  The Apex Court has b een approached seeking directions for 
implementation of the  Building and Other Constructi on Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996.  The Government also does not have 
any information regarding cons titution of the State Welf are Boards for construction 
workers. No proper infrastructure regarding training and skill  development of  
construction workers is currently available as well.  The Committee feel deeply 
distressed at the prevailing scenario in this sector and, therefore, strongly recommend 
the implementation of the Acts in letter an d spirit, creating infrastructure for skill 
development and training of the construction workers, impressing upon the State 
Governments to constitute welfare boards without any further delay and take up 
special and specific measures for the betterment of the women workers who constitute a 
major segment in this sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.18 The Building and Other Construction Workers’ (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 was enacted in 1996  and the Rules were framed in 
1998. As for the matter of implementation of this Act is concerned,  only States viz., 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi, Puducherry, Gujarat, Orissa West Bengal have started 
its implementation. In fact Kerala was the first State to adopt and implement the Act 
and by now they have enrolled more than  one million workers. The Government of 

 20
Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal ha ve already started collection of cess and 
disbursement of various benefits to the beneficiaries in these States. 
 
2.19 In order to impress upon the State Gove rnments for early implementation of the 
Acts, under the direction of the Prime Minister’s Office, a Special Group constituted 
under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (L&E) has been monitoring the implementation 
of the Building and Other Construction Wo rkers’ (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 and the Building and other Construction Workers 
Welfare Cess Act, 1996 by holding freque ntly region-wise meetings. The Central 
Government has completed the procedure requirements under the Act, i.e., framed 
rules, notified cess, constituted the Central Advisory Co mmittee and appointed 
authorities to implement the Act in Central sphere. The actual implementation of the 
Act lies with the State Governments. The State Governments are required to frame 
rules, constitute Welfare Board, notify implementing authorities and constitute State 
Advisory Committee. Though more than 10 ye ars have passed, the implementation of 
the Act has been tardy. Only Kerala started implementing the Act and in the State of 
Tamil Nadu the welfare of construction workers are looked into by an Act framed by 
the Government of Tamil Nadu, most of th e State have not completed the procedural 
requirements. 
 
2.20 During the meetings of the Special Grou p, the Union labour Secretary also met 
State Labour Minister / Chief Secretary of  the States requesting them for speedy 
implementation of the Act. It may be ment ioned that in the meet ings of the Special 
Group the representatives of the State Governments / Union Territories were requested 
to implement the  Building and Other Construction Workers’ (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Ac t, 1996  and constitute the State :Labour 
Welfare Boards for the benefit of construction workers. For convenience of the North 
Eastern region states, a Workshop was also organised at Guwahati for familiarizing the 
officers of the State Governments with vari ous procedures/ rules for implementing the 
Act expeditiously. 
 
2.21 In the aforementioned context, it is also  be mentioned that several letters at the 
level of Hon’ble Labour & Employment Mini ster and the Labour Secretary (L&E) have 
been sent to State Chief Ministers and Ch ief Secretaries respectively. After making 
concerted efforts by the Ministry the St ates like Kerala, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttaranchal, Puducherry, Gujarat, Orissa an d West Bengal have implemented the Act 
and other States are in the process of fram ing/finalizing the Rules, notifying authorities 
and constituting State Welfare Boards etc. 
 
2.22 The above efforts have resulted in the implementation of the Act in the States 
mentioned above and other States are also in  the process of completing the procedural 
requirements. It is the endeavour of the Government to make the State Governments 
realize the importance of the Act and implement the Act during the current year. 
 
  [Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 

 21
Recommendation (Sl.No. 18, Para No.3.97) 
  
2.23 The Committee note that several welfare schemes viz., health, housing, 
education, social security, maternity benefits etc.  are extended to beedi workers only 
after establishing their identity as beedi wo rker for which due identity cards are issued 
to them from time to time.  For the purpos e of issuing identity cards, periodic surveys 
are conducted.  During the last three years on ly in the State of Rajasthan a fresh survey 
has been conducted to identify the beedi workers.  The Govern ments of Bihar and 
Jharkhand have intimated to start fresh survey  of beedi workers in the months of April 
2007and May 2007 respectively.  The Committee are dismayed to note that more than 7 
lakh identified and eligible beedi workers are yet to be issued identity cards.  The 
Committee are of the view that the identity card to a beedi worker is extremely 
important, since it is a pre-requisite for him to claim benefits of various welfare schemes 
statutorily granted to him.  The Committee,  therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Union Government should impress upon the State Governments to take all necessary 
steps to ensure that a periodic and timely survey to identify beedi workers including 
`Ghar Khata Workers’ is conducted so that all eligible and identified  beedi workers are 
no longer deprived of the benefit of welfa re schemes being run by the Government.  
The Committee also desires that the Ministry  should do effective monitoring in this 
regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
2.24 The concerned State Governments have been requested to conduct survey in 
order to identify and issue Identity Cards to  the genuine beedi workers in their States 
vide letters No.S-24025/19/05-W.II da ted 31.10.2005, 26.07.2006 and 31.01.2007.  In this 
connection, Welfare Commissioners of the Labour Welfare Organization have also been 
instructed to tender assistance to the extent  possible as per the resources available with 
them, while conducting survey by the resp ective State Governments.  The Welfare 
Commissioners are being directed to pursue the matter with the State Governments for 
conducting the survey at the earliest possible. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.20, Para No.3.99) 
 
2.25 The Committee recall they had, in thei r Thirteenth Report on Demands for 
Grants (2006-2007), recommended for setting up a 50-bedded hospital in Sambalpur 
(Orissa), a highly concentrated zone of beedi workers, to provide better medical 
facilities to beedi workers.    The Ministry  in its reply furnished on action taken has 
stated that despite serious efforts to expl ore possibilities for providing grant under the 
‘pilot scheme’ to the State Government /ESIC/reputed and recognized private 
hospitals; no proposal has been received from the State of Orissa.   However, a 
Committee has been set up in the Ministry to review the ‘pilot scheme’ and recommend 
the attractive scheme in place of the existing  scheme.  As soon as the recommendations 
of the Committee are received, action will be taken accordingly.    In this regard, the 

 22
Committee desires the Ministry to expedite the process of setting up of a 50-bedded 
hospital at Sambalpur, Orissa.  Till then , the Committee feel, some wards in nearby 
General Hospitals of the State Government may be reserved exclusively for the beedi 
workers and sufficient annual grant may be provided for such wards reserved for beedi 
workers to ensure that best medical treatment is given to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.28 Despite serious efforts to explore possi bilities for providing grant to State 
Government  / Employees State Insurance Corporation  / Reputed and Recognized 
Private hospitals etc. under the pilot scheme no proposal has been received from any 
sector so far.  In view of this fact, a Committee has been set up in the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment to review and recommend an attractive scheme in place of the 
existing scheme.  As soon as recommendat ions of the Committee are received, action 
will be taken accordingly.  However, in pursuance of the recommendation of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labou r, Ministry has taken up the matter with 
the State Government of Orissa requesting them to reserve some beds in District Central 
Hospital, Sambalpur for Beedi Workers.  
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 

 23
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS REPLY 
 
   Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para No.3.14) 
 
3.1 The scrutiny of Demands for Grants (DFGs) 2007-08 of the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment reveals that the total ou tlay of Rs.1,897.27 crore (Plan Rs.325.48 crore 
and non-Plan Rs.1,517.79 crore) for the year 2007-08 shows an overall increase of 
Rs.199.69 crore over the BE of the previous year. However, a glance at the scheme-
wise/programme-wise financial outlays shows that the percentage of expenditure 
incurred over RE on the execution of some  of the important schemes during 2006-2007 
is far less than what is stip ulated under plan items viz., Holding of Lok Adalat, 
Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour, DGMS, Skill Development through PPP, Information 
Technology, etc.  Furthermore, in some other schemes such as Construction of Houses 
for Beedi Workers and low-income occupation  clusters, Social Security for Unorganised 
Sector Workers Scheme – Central Government’s share and Training – Grants-in-aid to 
State, the expenditure is nil.   The reasons put forth by the Ministry for less spending or 
no spending at all on some of the schemes su ch as non-filling up of vacant post of 
presiding officers of some of CGITs, non-approval of schemes for construction of 
Houses for Beedi workers and low-income o ccupation clusters, non-approval of the 
Skill Development through Public Private Partnership (PPP) Scheme by CCEA and non-
receipt of complete proposals from the St ate Governments for rehabilitation of the 
Bonded Labour are least convincing.  The Co mmittee is therefore, of the opinion that 
this clearly reflects that the planning of the Ministry with regard to various Central 
Schemes is done without proper spadework.  Moreover, monitoring and coordination 
of the Ministry with other implementing agencies are not very effective.  The 
Committee, therefore, desires that the Mini stry should take concrete measures for 
improvement in their planning process besi des further strengthen ing their monitoring 
mechanism for better utilization of funds, which would ultimately benefit the intended 
beneficiaries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The Settlement of industrial disputes th rough Lok Adalat depends on the mutual 
willingness of the litigant parties to get thei r cases settled through Lok Adalats with the 
CGITs playing the role of facilitator only .  However, efforts are being made for the 
maximum utilization of funds provided for the holding of Lok Adalats. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 24
3.3 The Grants under the Centrally Sponso red Plan Scheme for rehabilitation of 
Bonded labour etc. are released to the States/UTs. On receipt of complete proposals and 
clearance of utilization certificates fro the g rants released to the State concerned during 
the previous years. The State Government s are periodically reminded to send 
Utilization Certificates in respect of gran ts released earlier under the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme for rehabilitation of Bond ed labour and also send proposals for 
release of grants for rehabilitation bonded labour and other components of the Scheme 
viz., survey, awareness generation etc.  
 
3.4 In pursuance of the Supreme Court order dated 11.11.1997, National Human 
Rights Commission (NHRC) has been invo lved in the overseeing/reviewing the 
implementation of Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 and the Centrally 
sponsored Scheme for rehabilitation of bonded labour etc. Further NHRC has 
appointed Special Reporters to make periodic visits to district and interact with local 
people. NGOs. and Government functionaries to ascertain the position at the ground 
level. Their reports are studied by the NHRC and follow up action initiated. 
Sensitization workshops are also being he l d  a t  v a r i o u s  p l a c e s  b y  t h e  N H R C  i n  
collaboration with the Ministry of Labour & Employment for the frontline staff and 
district functionaries. This shows the deep commitment both of the political system and 
bureaucracy towards eliminating the menace of bonded labour system. 
 
3.5 Moreover, under the direction of the Pr ime Minister’s Office , a Special Group 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Un ion labour and Employment Secretary has 
been monitoring the implementation of the Bonded labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976  
and the Centrally sponsored Scheme for rehabilitation of bonded labo ur etc. by holding 
frequently region wise meetings. So far eight such meetings have been held . The 
Ministry of Labour & Employment has taken concrete measures for improvement in the 
planning process and strengthened the moni toring mechanism for better utilization of 
funds. 
 
3.6 The pace of plan expenditure  of DGMS is being monitored regularly by the 
DGMS  and efforts are being made to incur the plan expenditure as much as possible 
during the financial year 2007-08.  
 
3.7 With regard to Scheme of Skill Development Initiative through PPP, it is stated 
that the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) had accorded its approval to the scheme 
in the meeting held on 19.02.2007 and also reco mmended that the approval of CCEA be 
obtained. The Hon’ble Finance Minister has approved the Cabinet Note for CCEA. Note 
for seeking approval of CCEA has been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat.  
 
3.8 A token allocation of Rs.5 Crore under Plan Fund 2006-07 for housing subsidy to 
Beedi workers and low-income occupation workers was provided for the proposed 
scheme for the construction of 1 Lakh houses for Beedi workers.  Considering that there 
may not be any sharp increase in the demand for housing subsidy and normal demand 
would be met within the allocated resources, it was felt that the allocated funds for Plan 
Scheme may not be required, hence the funds of Rs.5 Crore were surrendered.  A 

 25
provision of Rs.80 Crore (Non-Plan) has be en made during 2007-08 under the Revised 
Integrated Housing Scheme (RIHS), 2005.  The Ministry may sanction around 25,000 to 
30,000 houses, after fulfillment of committed liabilities, under the (RIHS). 
 
3.9 As against plan & non-plan outlay of Rs.235.00 crore and Rs.1332.22 crore for the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment duri ng 2006-07 RE, the actual expenditure was 
Rs.227.43 crore and Rs.1810.46 crore, respectively.  Accordingly, the percentage of actual 
expenditure to plan and non-plan      R. E. outlay is 96.78 and 135.90 respectively. 
 
3.10 This could be possible because the prog ress (financial & physical) of the Plan 
Schemes of the Ministry of Labour & Employment is reviewed regularly in the Planning 
Commission on half yearly basis.  Secretary (L&E) also reviews the pace of expenditure, 
both plan and non-plan, regularly with the Joint Secretaries and Financial Adviser to 
identify the main hurdles and steps to overcome them. 
 
  [Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No.3.16) 
 
3.11 The Committee notes that the financial ru les of the Government clearly stipulate 
spreading of expenditure evenly over the four quarters and bars the undue utilization 
of funds in the last quarter of the year.  However, on close scrutiny of the progressive 
quarterly figures, the Committee find that  the actual quarterly expenditure under 
various Plan schemes have been 19.37% in  first quarter, 26.72% in second quarter, 
21.33% in third quarter and only 7.82% (upto Feb 2007) in fourth quarter.  The 
Committee had, in their earlier reports, been  repeatedly impressing upon the need to 
spread the expenditure evenly during the year but it seems that recommendations of 
the Committee have not been taken seriou sly.  The Committee further note that 
considering the pace of expenditure and ce iling of expenditure upto 33% in the last 
quarter, the Ministry of Finance restricted the RE in the Plan schemes to Rs.235.00 crore 
for the year 2006-07, thereby reducing the allocation by 76.36 crore at RE stage. The 
Committee recommends that the nature and me chanism of monitoring of expenditure 
in the Ministry needs a thorough review to ensure that the pace of expenditure is evenly 
distributed among different quarters to av oid drastic reduction in the budgetary 
allocations at RE stage and thereby affecting any schemes substantially, in future. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
3.12 The plan expenditure during the last quarter of 2006-07 was 29.36% of the total 
plan expenditure for the entire year. The progress (financial & physical) of the Plan 
Schemes of the Ministry of Labour & Employment is reviewed regularly in the Planning 
Commission on half yearly basis.  Secretary (L&E) also reviews the pace of expenditure, 
both plan and non-plan, regularly with the Joint Secretaries and Financial Adviser to 
identify the main hurdles and steps to overcome them. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 

 26
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para No.3.35) 
 
3.13 The Committee note with concern th at the arrears due for recovery are 
continuously mounting year after year against the defaulting establishments.  The 
recovery position for the last thr ee years has been Rs.1,832.70 crore in 2003-04, 
Rs.1,901.03 crore in 2004-05 and Rs.1,958.55 in 2005-06.   Thus, it may be seen that there 
is marginal increase in recovery of arrears during the aforesaid period.  However, the 
arrears due for recovery during the corresponding period are far greater in percentage 
vis-à-vis the recovery made.  They are Rs.1,862.70 crore in the year 2003-04, Rs.2,144.82 
crore in 2004-2005 and Rs.2,530.07 in 2005-06 re spectively.  The reasons for non-
realization of arrears have been attributed to the stays granted by courts/tribunals, 
establishments having gone into liquidation/closure/lock-outs, sanction of installments 
by courts/higher authorities and establishments in respect of which Rehabilitation 
Scheme had been sanctioned by BIFR.  The Committee are of the opinion that the 
reasons given for non-realisation of arrears prima facie appear to be plausible, yet the 
arrears due for recovery cannot be left un recovered notwithstanding any impediments 
whatsoever. The Committee, therefore urge upon the Government to gear up its 
machinery to recover the outstanding dues by taking appropriate action including filing 
of caveat in the court, convincing BIFR to  make provisions for payment of arrears of 
EPFO, realization of dues during the process of liquidation of the establishments, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.14 All necessary actions as provided under the Act are taken for effecting recovery 
from the defaulting establishments.  Nonethel ess to reinforce it, all Regional Provident 
Fund Commissioner (RPFCs), In-charge of th e regions has been instructed to monitor 
the recovery of arrears under their ch arge.  Addl. Central Provident Fund 
Commissioners of the Zones are monitoring  the recovery of major defaulting 
establishments exceeding Rs.10 lakh.  Necessary instructions have already been issued 
to the RPFCs to:- 
  
o attend all the court cases including BIFR cases with urgency ensuring 
timely action 
o file appeal within the admissible appeal time 
o ensure proper coordination with  t h e  S t a n d i n g  C o u n s e l s  o f  t h e  
organization 
o closely follow all the proceedings in the Courts. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para No.3.49) 
 
3.15 The Committee are constrained to note that  the ESI facilities are not available in 
all the States/Union Territories even after ab out 60 years of its coming into force. The 
Committee observes that the Employees’ State Insurance Scheme is mainly financed by  

 27
employers’ and employees’ contribution.  Th e current ratio of contribution @ 1.75% for 
employees’ and @ 4.75% for employers’ has been in operation since 1 January 1997.  The 
employees’ earning wages upto Rs.50 per day (w.e.f. 1 January 2004) are exempted from 
payment of their share of contribution.  Th e Committee find that with the enhancement 
of wages of the employees’ from time to ti me the rate of contri bution for both the 
employers’ and employees’ has also been rai sed.  Recently, the wage ceiling has been 
raised from Rs.7,500/- to Rs.10,000/- w. e.f. 01.10.2006, however, the rates of 
contribution for both the employers an d employees continued as 4.75% and 1.75% 
respectively.  The Committee is of the view th at ESIC plays a very vital role in the 
medical care of workers.  Moreover, this is a self-financing social security programme 
for the workers in the organized sector, si nce the Corporation does not receive any 
financial assistance from the Central Govern ment.  As per the existing arrangements, 
ESI hospitals/dispensaries are mainly fi nanced by the employers’ and employees’ 
contribution.  The Co mmittee feel that the Corporation should have sufficient funds at 
its disposal for opening new dispensaries/hospitals, strengthening its existing medical 
network by modernizing its hospitals/disp ensaries, upgrading existing diagnostic 
facilities and clinical services, providin g latest equipments for super specialty 
treatments and making available state of  the art technology for treatment. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends each St ate/Union Territory should be provided 
with facilities for ESI beneficiaries.  The Committee also recommends that the rate of 
contribution should be reviewed so as to  generate adequate funds for opening new 
dispensaries/hospitals and for upgrading th e medical facilities being provided to the 
beneficiaries.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this matter. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.16 With regard to non-availability of ESI fa cilities to all States / Union Territories 
even after 60 years, it is submitted that th e ESI Scheme is implemented area-wise in a 
phased manner. As per the provisions of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 the 
administration of medical care rests wi th the concerned State Governments. The 
implementation mainly depends upon creating infrastructure by providing medical 
care by the State Governments in the areas proposed to be implemented, which is a pre-
requisite.  
 
3.17 The State Governments have their own constraints in creating additional 
infrastructure. However, measures such as be aring the entire cost of medical care for 
the initial period of three ye ars in case of new implementation have been taken by the 
Corporation. 
 
3.18 The Committee has also recommended that  the rate of contribution should be 
reviewed so as to generate adequate funds for opening new dispensaries/ hospitals and 
for upgrading the medical facilities being provided  to the beneficiaries. In this regard, it 
is submitted that as per Sec-37 of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, “the 
Corporation shall, at interval of five years, have a valuation of its assets and liabilities 
made by the valuer appointed with the appr oval of Central Government ”. The rate of 
contribution is fixed based on recommendation of the valuer. The last such valuation of 

 28
assets and liabilities of the Corporation as at 31.03.2003 was carried out by Sh. Nalin 
Kapadia, Consulting Actuary and he has submitted his report on 26.05.2006. In his 
recommendation with regard to adequacy of contribution rate he has recommended 
that there is adequate margin in the contribution rate and over next five years 2005-06 to 
2009-10, contribution will be adequate to meet the cost of benefits. Adequate funds are 
available with the Corporation for open ing of new dispensaries/hospitals and 
upgrading the medical facilities being provided to the beneficiaries under the scheme. 
  
  [Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No.3.67) 
 
3.19 The Committee note that the role of DGMS is to act as a watchdog to see that the 
mine management complies with the statutory provisions relating to occupational 
safety and health in mines.  DGMS officers make periodic inspections to make sample 
checks.  The Committee is constrained to note that there has been st eady decline in the 
number of inspections and enquiries conducte d during the last three years.  As against 
8,385 inspections in 2004-05, only 5,001 inspecti ons have been carried out in the year 
2006-07.   Likewise, only 1039 enquiries were conducted in the year 2006-07 as against 
1,261 during 2004-05.  The prime reason for dec line in the number of inspections and 
enquiries has been reportedly due to the shortage of frontline inspecting officers. The 
Department has only 125 Inspecting Officers against the sanctioned strength of 164.  
The Committee notes with dismay the casual approach of the Government in filling up 
the post of inspecting staff, which can ha ve serious repercussions with regard, the 
safety operation of mines.  The Committee desires the Government to wake up from the 
deep slumber and not wait till a tragedy of serious nature takes place.  The Committee, 
therefore, calls upon the Government to fill up the posts of inspecting staff immediately 
so that efficiency of such an important or ganization does not suffe r.  A progress report 
in this regard may be submitted to the Committee in three months. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
3.20 Selection of the 9 posts of Deputy Dire ctor of Mines Safety (Mining) has been 
completed by the UPSC and pre-appointm ent formalities have been initiated. 
Advertisement of 11 posts of DDMS(Mining) has been made by the UPSC on 24.04.2007 
for recruitment. With the increased strength  of officers, the frequency of inspection 
would further improve. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 

 29
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No.3.38) 
 
 
 4.1 The Committee note with concern th at an amount of Rs.1351.38 crore has 
been lying with the Employees  Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) in the unclaimed 
Deposit Account as on 31.03.2006.  The Commi ttee has been informed that as per 
provisions of the existing scheme, the amount lying under unclaimed Deposit Account 
cannot be utilized for any other purpose except for paying to the rightful claimants.  
The Committee find that the total amount disbursed out of the Unclaimed Deposit 
Account during the last three years has been quite meager i.e., Rs.56.31 crore in 2003-
2004, Rs.86.60 crore in 2004-2005 and Rs.71.08 crore in 2005-06.  The Committee are not 
satisfied with this state of affairs.  The Committee feel that since not large number of 
claimants are coming forward to settle thei r claims, a large amount of fund has been 
blocked which could be used elsewhere for better purposes.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the provisions of the scheme should be suitably amended for better 
utilization of money.  The Committee also desires that the number of cases settled out of 
the Unclaimed Deposit Account should also be maintained along with the amount 
disbursed. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The nomenclature of “Unclaimed Depo sit Account”(UCD) has been changed 
as “Inoperative Account” vide Government of India notification dated 22.03.2007. 
 
4.3 Para 72(6) of the Employees’ Provid ent Fund  Scheme, 1952 provides for 
classifying certain Provident Fund Acco unts as Inoperative Accounts where 
accumulation in respect of any member who ha s either ceased to be employed or died 
but no claim has been preferred within a peri od of three years from the date it becomes 
payable. 
 
4.4 In regard to the recommendation made  by the Committee that provision of 
the scheme should be suitable amended for be tter utilization of money, it is submitted 
that all these Inoperative Accounts have a defi nite claimants who can file their claims at 
any time and on receipt of such claims, the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation 
has to make the full payments to them along with interest.  The interest at the declared 
rate is regularly credited to such accounts in the same way as is given in the case of live 
account. 
 
    
 

 30
 
4.5 Since Employees’ Provident Fund Organisa tion has no legal right / power to 
utilize this fund for any other purpose other than for making paym ent to the rightful 
claimant/their legal heirs, such amount ca n not be diverted for any other purpose.  
Nonetheless, regular efforts are being ma de by the Organisation to trace the 
whereabouts of the beneficiaries through ad vertisements in Newspapers, Trade Unions 
and the Employers etc.It is also reported th at the number of cases settled out of UCD 
Account (now Inoperative Accounts) are main tained separately in the respective field 
offices and reflected in the UCD Return submi tted by the field offices in the respective 
years. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para No.3.82) 
 
 4.6 The Committee observe that an allocation of Rs.15,000 crore has been made 
during the 11 th Plan period for the schemes pertaining to welfare of workers of 
unorganized sector.  This allocation has been spread over in amounts of Rs.1,000/, 
Rs.2,000/-, Rs.3,000/-, Rs.4,000/- and Rs.5,000/- crore during each of the first to five 
years of the Eleventh Plan period.  The Co mmittee is at a loss to understand the logic 
behind this uneven spreading of amount in respect of schemes formulated/being 
formulated for the welfare of workers of the unorganized sector.  Taking into account 
the huge number of unorganized workers in  the country with all uncertainties and 
insecurities, the Committee strongly urge upon the Government to step up the 
budgetary provision under this head.  They al so desire that the ou tlay so allocated be 
evenly spread in all the years of the Eleventh Plan period, target in each year be fixed 
and sincere and genuine efforts be made to achieve it. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
4.7 On the directive of Prime Minister’s O ffice, a Committee of Secretaries (COS) was 
constituted. In pursuance of 2 nd meeting of COS held on 25.10.2006, a Small Group 
under the chairmanship of Finance Secret ary was formed.  The Group recommended 
that the Welfare schemes should be taken up stage-by stage in a phased manner and the 
then Finance Secretary had agreed to an allocation of Rs.1000 crore in the year 2007-2008 
of social security schemes which would go  upto Rs.5000 Crore in the year 2011-2012.   
Accordingly, Rs.1000 crore in the Annual Plan 2007-08 with an increase of Rs.1000 in the 
each subsequent year in the Eleventh Five year i.e total of Rs.15000 crore in the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan was proposed.  However, this allocation has not been approved. 
   
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
 

 31
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para No.3.98) 
 
 
4.8 The Committee note that the Revised In tegrated Housing Scheme 2005 for beedi 
workers came into being w.e.f. 25 May 20 05 wherein a uniform Central subsidy of 
Rs.40,000/- is provided to construct a dwelling unit against a contribution by him of 
Rs.5,000/-.   The Committee feel that the contribution of Rs.5,000/- by a beedi worker to 
avail of the subsidy of Rs.40,000/- for constructi on of a dwelling unit  is on the higher 
side as it is beyond the capacity of a poor beedi worker earning approximately Rs.66/- a 
day,  i.e. the National Minimum Floor Level Wages.  The amount of subsidy of 
Rs.40,000/- is also on the lower side as it is virtually not possible to construct a dwelling 
unit with this meagre amount particularly due to steep rise in the prices of  the 
construction material.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the contribution of beedi 
worker for the purpose of construction of a dwelling unit should be waived off.  
Alternatively, it may be given by the Gove rnment in the form of interest free loan 
stretched over a longer duration, say 5 years, so that they are able to pay the instalments 
without much burden.  The subsidy of Rs. 40,000/- should also be appropriately hiked 
keeping in view the escalating prices of construction materials. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issue to do away with the requirement of worker contribution was examined 
along with other issues, in consultation wi th the Ministry of Finance. It has been 
decided that instead of deposit of Rs.5,000/- by the worker along with the application 
form, the worker contribution of Rs.5,000/- be obtained after grant of administrative 
approval and before advance release of 1 st installment. As regards issues like 
enhancement of subsidy of Rs.40,000/-, due to steep rise in the price of the construction 
material, it may be mentioned that the new scheme has been implemented from 25 th 
May, 2005. None of the Unions/Associations of Beedi workers or concerned State 
Governments have requested for enhancement of subsidy.  As regards the suggestion of 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee regardin g arrangement of interest free loan of 
worker contribution, it may be mentioned that in terms of the Scheme, concerned State 
Governments have been requested for assistan ce in the form of loan from financial 
institutions like HUDCO etc. or Contribution from the State Governments in the form of 
subsidy/loan.  
 
 
 
 
 

 32
 
 
However, the State Government of Tamilnadu is already providing Rs.5,000/- as 
State Subsidy towards worker’s contribution. The State Government of Bihar is likely to 
provide worker’s contribution as State subsid y to the Beedi workers for construction of 
their houses.  
 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 33
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No.3.34) 
 
5.1 The Committee are constrained to note th at out of more than 40 crore workforce 
in the country, the total membership of the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation as 
on 31.03.2006 is only 4.6 crore bo th in the exempted and un exempted sectors which is 
just 10.74 per cent of the total work force.  The Committee is least satisfied with this 
sorry state of affairs.  The Committee note that with a view to bring many 
establishments under the purview of th e Act, various steps like Compliance 2001 
programme, special drives, creation of intelligence circles, etc. have been taken, but the 
fruitful results could not be achieved.    The Compliance 2001 programme has not come 
up to expectations and for the purpos e of enhancing compliance a proposal 
incorporating some strategic adjustments in the said programme is under consideration 
of the appropriate authorities.  This is a welcome move keeping in view the fate of 
various initiatives in the past, the Committee are septic whether this step alone will help 
in proper coverage of all coverable establishm ents.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should intensify its coverage programme and for this 
purpose a multi-pronged strat egy be devised which may 
inter alia include voluntary 
compliance, special drives for coverage, earmarking of areas to enforcement officers and 
all such other steps which are deemed proper for enhancing the coverage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 The wide gap between the workforce in the country and that covered under the 
Employees’ Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Pr ovisions Act, 1952 pointed out by the 
Committee is attributable mainly to the restrictive application of the Act.  An 
establishment can be brought under purview of the Act if it fulfils the criteria prescribed 
for the purpose.  A large number of workers are from unorganized sector etc.  Thus 
entire workforce of the country is not coverable under the Act as they may be employed 
in establishments, which are not specified under the Act, or employs less than 20 
employees or which has protection of Section 16 of the Act. 
 
5.3 However, it is submitted that the proposal seeking structural adjustments and 
changes in the Compliance 2001 programme ai ms basically to bring more and more 
establishments under purview of the Act and ex tend the reach of benefits to all eligible 
workforce of the country.  The proposal was placed before the Central Board for 
Trustees (CBT), EPF in its 179 th meeting wherein the Board authorized the Chairman to 
constitute a Sub-Committee to look into the issue and formulate a comprehensive 
proposal for being placed before the Board. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
 

 34
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.7, Para No.3.37) 
 
5.4 The Committee note that the declaration of EPFO interest rate has been lingering 
on due to difference of opinion in CBT which is against the interest of subscribers.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation made in 
Thirteenth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) that EPF rate of interest for the year 2006-2007 and 
2007-2008 be declared at least @ 9.5%, if not more, in view of overall price rise and 
substantial increase in rates of loans by the banks/financial institutions recently. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.5 The rate of interest for a particular year is  based on the estimated earning of the 
fund and estimated liability towards members at  the declared rate.  The rate of interest 
for the year 2006-07 and 2007-08 is yet to be  recommended by the Central Board of 
Trustees, Employees’ Provident Fund. 
  
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para No.3.68) 
 
5.6 The Committee further note that the pena lties prescribed for different categories 
of offences under the Mines Act 1952 are very  meager.  To enhance the penalties, a 
proposal for amendment of the Mines Act,  1952 was initiated in the year 1997 and the 
draft amendment was circulated to all the stakeholders in the year 2002.   The responses 
received from the different stakeholders have been under examination. The Committee 
expresses their anguish over inordinate de lay to bring suitable amendments in the 
Mines Act to provide for stringent punishme nt against the offenders and desire that 
urgent steps be initiated to clear the proposal without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
5.7 The amendment of the Mines Act, 1952 is under process and penalties have 
suitably been proposed in the amended proposal. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
(Recommendation (Sl.No.14, Para No.3.80) 
 
5.8 The Committee note that as per survey  carried out by the National Sample 
Survey Organisation in the year 1999-2000, out of the total 39.7 crore persons employed 
in both the organized and the unorganized sectors, 36.9 crore are in the unorganized 
sector.  The workers in unorganized sector fall in various categories but a large number 

 35
of them are home based workers which are engaged in occupations like beedi rolling, 
agarbatti making, papad making, tailoring, j ari work and embroidery work, etc.  The 
Committee note that though th e Government has enacted several laws and schemes for 
the welfare of workers in the organized secto r, much is needed to be done by them for 
the workers in the unorganized sector who co nstitute around 92% of strong work force 
in the country.  The Committee also notes that over the years, various 
Committees/Groups have studied the status of unorganized labour in the country has 
been studied by various Committees/Groups.  All these studies have projected the 
plight of workers in the unorganized sector and called for substantial measures for 
improvement of their lot and providing them  some sort of protection. But not much 
progress has been made in the matter.  Th e Committee, therefore, recommends that 
urgent steps should be taken by the Government to bring in a comprehensive 
legislation for unorganized workers without any loss of time. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
5.9 Government is considering formulation of social security schemes and enactment 
of central legislation for workers in unorganized sector, including agricultural workers, 
in consultation with various stakeholders, concerned Ministries/ Departments and 
National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector (NCEUS). A Group of 
Ministers (GoM) has been constituted to cons ider the proposal.  Further, in his Budget 
Speech, the Finance Minister has announce d ‘Aam Admi Bima Yojana’ covering death 
and disability cover for the rural landless hous eholds.  The head of the family or one 
earning member in the family will be insure d.  To begin with, the scheme would cover 
landless rural households but subsequently other segments of the unorganized sector 
workers would also be covered. 
 
[Ministry of Labour and Employment O.M. No.H-11013/9/2007-Coord dated 20.7.2007] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                       SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,          
30 August 2007                                                      Chairman, 
   8 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Labour. 
    

  
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON THURSDAY, 30 AUGUST  2007 
 
The Committee met from 1000 hours to 1055 hours in Committee Room 
“C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Shri Mohan Rawale 
7. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
8. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
9. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
   
10. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam  
11. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
12. Shri Gandhi Azad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.  Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
3. Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 37
  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting 
particularly a new Member, Shri Ramdas At hawale who has been nominated by the 
Hon’ble Speaker w.ef. 21.8.2007 to the Committee for the term 2007-08.  He then 
apprised the Members about the two draft reports on the action taken replies received 
from the Ministry of Labour and Employme nt and the Ministry of Textiles on the 
Twentieth and Twenty-First Reports on the Demands for Grants for the year 2007-2008 
respectively. 
   
3. Thereafter, the Committee first took up  the draft Twenty-Third Report  on the 
Action taken by the Government on the Re commendations/Observations contained in 
the Twentieth Report of the Standing Commi ttee on Labour on Demands for Grants for 
the year 2007-2008 of the Ministry of Labour and Employment for consideration and 
adoption.  The Committee adopted the same without any modifications. 
  
4 .   X X      X X     X X  
 
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the above Reports 
and present the same to the Parliament on their behalf. 
 
  
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 

 38
 
APPENDIX-II 
[vide Para 3 of the Introduction] 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
        Total  Percentage 
          o f  T o t a l   
 
I. Total number of Recommendations   20  
 
II. Recommendations/Observations  which have 8  40%   
been accepted by Government 
(Sl. Nos. 2,6,10,13,15,17,18 and 20)         
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the   5   25%  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
Government’s  replies 
(Sl. Nos. 1,3,5,9 and 11)        
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of 3  15%  
which  Government’s replies have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which requires 
reiteration 
(Sl. Nos. 8,16 and 19)    
  
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  4  20%  
which final replies of Government are of interim 
 in  nature 
(Sl. Nos. 4,7,12 and 14)           
                           -----------  
           100%  
                              -----------  
  
 
 
 
 