 
12 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2005-06) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 
 
         THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FASHION TECHNOLOGY BILL, 2005  
 
 
 
  TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
      
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 February 2006/Phalguna  1927 (Saka) 

 
12 
TWELFTH REPORT 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2005-06) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES  
 
 
 
 
         THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FASHION TECHNOLOGY BILL, 2005  
 
 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 27 February 2006 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  27 February 2006 
 
 
 
  
      
  
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 February 2006/Phalguna 1927 (Saka) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
           P A G E   
          
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N          ( i v )  
 
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE         ……………………    1- 
 
 
ANNEXURE – I          The National Institute of Fashion Technology Bill, 2005  
 
     
 
ANNEXURE - II Minutes of the  sittings of the Standing Committee on Labour  
 held  on  27.1.2006 and 24.2.2006 
  
 
  
 

COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
      (2005-2006) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar    
10. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi   
12. Shri Ananta Nayak   
13. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
14. Shri Lal Mani Prasad   
15. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
16. Shri Mohan Rawale  
17. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
18. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
19.       Shri Parasnath Yadav   
20. Vacant 
21.       Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA  
  22. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  23. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
  24. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
  25. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
  26. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
  27. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  28. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
29. Shri Dilip Ray 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
  SECRETARIAT 
         1.    Shri John Joseph  -           Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.S. Misra   - Deputy Secretary  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
5.    Shri C. Kalyanasundaram- Committee Officer  
 

  
     INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour   having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the report on their beha lf present this Twelfth Report on  The National 
Institute of Fashion Technology Bill, 2005 of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 23 December 2005 and was referred to the 
Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under  Rule 331E (b) of the Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examin ation and report within three months from the 
date of publication of the reference of the Bill in Bulletin Part-II of Lok Sabha dated 9 January 
2006.  
 
3. The Committee at their sitting held on 27 January  2006 heard the views of the  
representatives  of the Ministry of  Textiles and  The National Institute of Fashion Technology on 
the provisions of the Bill.  The Committee considered and adopted the Bill on 24 February 2006.  
 
4. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Textiles and the National Institute of Fashi on Technology for placing before them detailed 
written notes on the subject and for furnishing the desired information  in connection with the 
examination of the Bill. 
 
          
        Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy  
N E W  D E L H I ;        C h a i r m a n  
24 February, 2006           Standing Committee on Labour 
5 Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)  
 
 

REPORT 
 
 
1. The National Institute of Tec hnology (NIFT) was set up by the Ministry of Textiles in the 
year 1986 as a society under the Societies Registration Act 1860.  NIFT is fully funded and 
supported by the Government as a national level institute for design, management and 
technology to prepare and train professionals to  meet the challenges of the dynamic global 
market and to promote India’s exports in textiles , garments, lifestyle prod ucts and other fashion 
goods. 
 
2. NIFT has been running full time Diplom a programmes in “Fashion Design, Garment 
Manufacturing Technology, Apparel Marketing and Merchandising, Accessory Design, Leather 
Garment Design and Technology, Knitwear Design and Technology, Textile Design and 
Development and Fashion Communication”.  The Mi nistry of Textiles has stated in a written 
note that NIFT has been instrumental in bringi ng about a paradigm shift in the perception of 
‘fashion’ in India, with its connotation exte nding beyond the conventiona l apparel industry, to 
integrate with every aspect of the lifestyle indu stry.  Fashion today encompasses the business of 
studying, creating and promoting popular styles currently in vogue and the production and 
marketing of new styles of clothing and acces sories, thus adding tremendous value to diverse 
industry and businesses. 
 
3. The Committee were informed that NIFT trains about 1,500 students every year, through 
regular and industry sponsored pr ogrammes, who are readily absorbed by the industry.  So far, 
5,487 students have graduated from NIFT, all of  whom have found employment in the Industry 
or have started their own enterprises.  Many students of NIFT have pioneered major changes in 
the industry in strategy, appro ach, technology upgradation, design intervention and management 
practices, in the face of liberalization and globalization of the economy.  
 
4. In the year 2003, NIFT in its quest for bus iness competency in the global context, 
evolved the vision to emerge as  a Centre of excellence and i nnovation proactively catalyzing 
growth of fashion business throug h leadership in professional e ducation, research and training 
with concern for social and human values. The academic programmes and course curriculum 
were restructured to bring them at par with  technical education pr ogrammes offered by other 
professional institutions with international benchmarking.   
 
5. The Committee has been further informed  that over the years, NIFT has provided 
technical support and guidance to institutions catering to the industry at the managerial, 
supervisory, and shop floor levels as well as to institutions in the sub-continent.  Over 75 Fashion 
Institutes, Schools, Education Boards and organisations have benefitted from NIFT’s expertise in 
developing fashion education programmes, in the areas of training, curriculum and infrastructure 
development, and systems management. It has been  further informed that fashion has become a 
serious career option for students across the country with 75% of the students being drawn from 
non-metros and a near equal distribution between boys and girls.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6. The Ministry further apprised the Committee that NIFT has made concerted efforts to 
mainstream the craft tradition of the country as an  integral component of the curriculum of all 
programmes. It focuses on training, design inte rvention, technology  up-gradation, establishing 
market linkages and promotion.  To facilitate th is Initiative, Rural Development Enterprise 
Centres at the cluster hubs and Shared Res ource Technology and Suppor t Centres at the sub-
cluster level, have been established across th e country. In all 10,000 artisans living below the 
poverty line in the States of Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Kerala and West Bengal will 
be benefited by this initiative. NIFT has translated its vision of concern for social and human 
values’ into a workable proposition by impar ting knowledge to many NGOs to strengthen their 
capabilities through classroom and other projects.  
 
7. Annually, around 200 deserving students are sup ported by NIFT with scholarships, grants 
etc. on need cum merit basis, apart from the State Government Scholarships. In the year 2004-
2005, approximately Rs.58 lakh were released from th e  General Fund of NIFT for this purpose.  
NIFT has also designed a Stud ent Employment Programme to ai d such students by engaging 
them in Resource Centre, Laboratories, Industry Programmes and workshops on part-time basis.  
NIFT also facilitates provision of education loans to students by nationalized banks.  
 
8. The Ministry of Textiles has set up ambitious targets for the industry to achieve an 8 per 
cent volume growth and a 9 per cent value growth and the exports  to touch US$ 50 billion by 
2010. It is expected that 12 million new jobs will be  generated if the targ ets set by the Ministry 
and the industry are achieved.  A well-defined st rategy will enable the Te xtile industry to shift 
focus to value-added products. The greatest value addition in the te xtile value chain is generated 
in the apparel segment. Apparel will, therefore, n eed to be the main thrust segment for enabling 
achievement of the vision and the role of high quality and innovative professional manpower and 
applied research infrastructure would be key to  the strategy.  Design and Technology would be 
the driving forces to promote Indian products in the global market in this era of liberalization and 
globalisation. 
 
9. In regard to Intellectual Property Rights, the Committee were informed that NIFT has 
pioneered the introduction of In tellectual Property Rights (IPR)  education, mandatory for all 
streams.  Seminars and workshops have b een conducted with Worl d Intellectual Property 
Organisation (WIPO) to familiarize and train in-house faculty on the aspects of intellectual 
Property Rights.  To protect the traditional handic rafts of the country NIFT has initiated nation 
wide registration of crafts under geographical indications act in collaboration with Development 
Commissioner (Handicrafts).  The coverage incl udes 28 States of the country including 8 North-
Eastern States. 
 
National Institute of Fashion Technology Bill, 2005 
 
10. The National Institute of Fashion Technol ogy Bill, 2005 was introduced in Rajya Sabha 
on 23 December 2005.  Hon’ble Speaker has refe rred the Bill to the Standing Committee on 
Labour for examination and report within the three months from the date of publication of 
information regarding reference of the Bill in Bulletin Part-II of Lok Sabha dated 9 January 
2006.  The Bill seeks to establish and incorporat e the National Institute of Fashion Technology 
for the promotion and development of educati onal and research in fashion technology and for 
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
 

 
 
11. The Ministry of Textiles has stated in a written note furnished to the Committee that 
India will be able to pave the way for creating a truly global le ader in fashion education by 
recognizing the prominent role of NIFT in usheri ng in the global best practices in the industry 
and sustaining and strengthening the traditional knowledge, skills and capabilities of our weavers 
and craftspeople.  It will also signify the im portance that Government attaches to fashion 
technology as a branch of rigorous  professional education as a cr itical component of our policy 
strategy for value addition.  The statutory status would enable NIFT to:- 
 
• Make fashion technology education as  an alternative career option for 
talented students and faculty. 
• Enable NIFT to play a catalytic role in the growth of fashion and lifestyle 
related industry and businesses integrating desi gn – technology- 
Management, Craft – Industry, National – Global and Class room – hands 
on entrepreneurial experience in a holistic manner. 
• Be responsive to the needs of the indus try and crafts Sector in a dynamic, 
ongoing, qualitative and timely manner, through flexible and evolving 
pedagogy and approach. 
• Provide thought leadership to HRD Inst itutions at managerial, supervisory 
and shop floor level in a formal and structured manner. 
• Create world class professionals needed  to meet the challenges of global 
competition. 
• Build strategies and implement them for promotion of Indian handlooms 
and handicrafts in the global ma rket, through Government – Non-
Government, Public – Private Partnership. 
• Undertake State of Art research at doctoral and post-doctoral level. 
• Promote best practices in various fiel ds and processes related to fashion 
business. 
• Establish strategic alliances with institutions of eminence globally for joint 
projects, craft and research initiatives. 
• Enable students to pursue higher e ducation in specialized fields in 
prestigious institutions in India and aboard. 
 
12. During the audio-visual presentation to the Committee, the NIFT had made the following 
submissions:- 
 
• Enable NIFT to award degrees, with formal recognition of its pre-eminent 
position and thought leadership. 
• Promote state of art research at  doctoral and post- doctoral level on 
industrial and policy issues. 
• Facilitate forging partnerships with global leaders in fashion education. 
• Endorse Fashion Technology as an emer ging area of rigorous professional 
education and to transcend to higher levels. 
• Recognize Fashion Technology as a critic al component of the strategy for 
value addition. 
• Enable fashion technologists to access financial capital for entrepreneurial 
initiatives.  

 
13. Further the Secretary, Textiles briefe d the Committee about the importance of the 
statutory status to the Committee as follows:- 
 
“Sir, there are two basic issues to which I want to draw the kind attention of the 
Hon’ble Members.  One is the handicap which the students once they pass out 
from these institutions face.  At the moment, although the NIFT runs four-year 
courses and two-year courses, we only award diplomas; we do not award degrees.  
The entire matter was deliberated upon in various forums and also due 
deliberations took place in the Cabinet at length.  Various inter-ministerial 
consultations were held, various discussions  with the stakeholders were held and 
it was felt that this is an institution of a unique character in this country which is 
internationally recognized and, therefor e, the handicap which the students face 
after this rigorous training should be removed.  I may mention for your kind 
information that in the absence of a degree, if it is only a diploma, it poses 
problems in their future academic excel lence and degrees, in admissions to 
foreign universities, post- doctoral and post-graduation academic works.  Then, 
being diploma holders, they also face troubles in the sense that in the eyes of the 
financial institutions and others, they are treated like as if they are students from 
polytechnics or ITIs, which is not a fact .  They enjoy a much higher status of 
learning and much higher quali ty of training which is imparted to them in these 
institutions.  They also face avoidable difficulties in their aspirations to go abroad 
and excel…….The major provision in the Bill which is before you for your kind 
consideration pertains to the award of de grees to the students at the end of their 
training course, that is, Section-31”. 
 
Definition of the word “Fashion” 
 
14. Clause 2(e) of Chapter-I of the Bill prov ides for definition of certain terms and 
expressions appearing in the Bill.  Sub-Clause (e) of the Bill gives the definition of the term 
“fashion” as follows:- 
 
(e) “fashion” includes a popular trend, specially in styles of dress and ornament or 
manners of behaviour or the business of creating, promoting or studying styles in 
vogue or the production and ma rketing of new styles of  clothing and cosmetics; 
and the words “fashion technology” with their grammatical variations and cognate 
expression, shall be construed accordingly”. 
 
15. During briefing when it was pointed out th at the definition does not include “textile 
sector”, and “Craft Sector”, the Director General of the NIFT replied as follows:- 
 
“As per our view, it includes both the life style and craft.  But we ha ve discussed it with 
the legal department, cosmetics is not so much important to us as the life style and crafts. 
We have mentioned about the craft sector  everywhere in the functions of NIFT 
mentioned in the Act.  We will talk to the Legal Department for inclusion of life style and 
craft in its definition.” 
 
 
 

 
16. The Secretary, textiles had also clarified to another question that the NIFT will be dealing 
with imparting education in design and research pertaining to the textile sector. 
 
Board of Governors 
 
17. As per Clause 3(3) of Chapte r-II of the Bill, the Institute shall be governed by a Board of 
Governors.  The composition of the Board of Governors is as follows:- 
 
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent ac ademician, scientist or technologist or 
professional, to be nominated by the Visitor; 
(b) the Director-General of  the Institute, ex-officio; 
(c) the Financial Adviser of the Ministry or  Department in the Government of India 
dealing with the National Institute of Fashion Technology, ex-officio; 
(d) the Joint Secretary, in the Ministry or  department in the Government of India 
dealing with the National Institute of Fashion Technology, ex-officio; 
(e) the representatives of the Ministry or  Department in the Government of India 
dealing with higher education to be nominated by the Secretary of that Ministry or 
department, ex-officio; 
(f) five persons to be nominated by the Ce ntral Government, representing the States 
in which the campus of the Institute is  located, from amongst persons who are 
academicians or industrialists of repute engaged in area of fashion technology; 
and 
(g) two eminent experts in fashion technol ogy, one of whom shall be an educationist, 
to be nominated by the Visitor on the recommenda tions of the Central 
Government. 
 
18. During the course of discussion with the repr esentatives of the Ministry of Textiles after 
their audio visual presentation on the Bill,   the Committee observed that in order to ensure NIFT 
functions in consonance with the ethos and also  to ensure protection of traditional arts, 
handicrafts, etc. with referen ce to Intellectual Pr operty Rights (IPRs), its Governing Board 
should also have three Members of Parliament – two from Lok Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha. 
 
Functions of the Institute 
 
19. As per Clause 6 of the Chapter-II of th e Bill, the following are the functions of the 
Institute:- 
 
(i) to nurture and promote quality and excellence in education and research in 
area of fashion technology; 
(ii) to lay down courses leading to graduate and post-graduate degrees, 
doctoral and post-doctoral  courses and research in area of fashion 
technology; 
(iii) to hold examinations and grant degr ees in the area of fashion technology; 
(iv) to confer honorary degrees, awards or other distinctions in area of fashion 
technology; 
 
 

 
(v) to cooperate with educat ional or other institutions in any part of the world 
having objects wholly or partly sim ilar to those of the Institute by 
exchange of faculty members and scholars and generally in such manner 
as may be conducive to their common objective; 
 
(vi) to conduct courses for teachers,  fashion technologists and other 
professionals; 
(vii) to undertake research and studies in the area of fashion technology and 
application thereof, particularly concerning the integration of locally 
produced materials, the requirem ents of mass production, improved 
quality and design and international marketing; 
(viii) to collect and maintain literature and materials available in area of fashion 
technology so as to develop a modern  information centre within the 
country; 
(ix) to create a central faculty of fa shion technology resource and analysis for 
use by the researchers; 
(x) to have a centre to experiment and innovate and to train persons in the area 
of fashion  technology; 
(xi) to develop an international cen tre for creation and transmission of 
information in the area of fashion technology, with focus on educational, 
professional and industrial commitments; 
(xii) to develop a multi-disciplinary ap proach in carrying out research and 
training in area of fashi on technology so that the larger interests of the 
profession, academia and fashion industry are better served; 
(xiii) to organize national or interna tional symposia, semina rs, conferences and 
exhibitions in selected area of fashion technology, from time to time; 
(xiv) to arrange courses catering to the special needs of the developing 
countries; 
(xv) to act as a nucleus for intera ction between academia and industry by 
encouraging exchange of fashion t echnologist and other technical staff 
between the Institute and the Industr y and by undertaki ng sponsored and 
funded research as well as consultancy projects by the Institute. 
(xvi) To provide technical assistance to artisans, crafts men, manufacturers, 
designers and exporters of fashion productions; and 
(xvii)  To carry out any other activity  in the area of fashion technology not 
specifically listed above.  
 
Opening of more centres of the Institute 
 
20. The first centre of the Institute was opened in New Delhi in the year 1986. The Ministry 
of Textiles has informed the Committee that the upsurge in the demand for trained professionals 
necessitated the Institute to open Centres acros s the Country in Chennai, Hyderabad, Mumbai, 
Gandhinagar, Kolkata and Bangalore during 19 95-97.   When it was asked during evidence 
whether there is any proposal to open new centres in the North-East or in the States like Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar, the Secretary, Textiles replied as follows:- 
 
 
 

 
 
“There is some kind of a demand raised from the States.  Some of the proposals 
are under consideration like the one for UP.  You will appreciate that UP is one of 
the strong contenders in this category of textile sector.  The final decision is yet to 
be taken”. 
 
21. In this regard, the Secretary, Textiles furt her informed the Committee during evidence as 
under:- 
 
“If resources are given to us and if we get the suppor t from the various sectors 
including the required support from the State Governments then we will not let 
any laxity to come into its expansion and we will not back out”. 

 
22. The Committee note that the Bill seek s to grant statutory status to the 
National Institute of  Fashion Techno logy for the promotion and development 
of education and research in fashion t echnology, for granting degrees in the 
area of fashion technology and for acting as a nucleus for interaction between 
academia and fashion industr y.  Every year the Nation al Institute of Fashion 
Technology trains about 1,500 students who are readily absorbed by the 
industry.  So far, 5,487 students have  graduated from NIFT and all of them 
have found employment in the industry or have started their own enterprises.  
Fashion has become a serious career option for students across the country 
with 75% of the students being drawn from non-metros and a near equal 
distribution between the boys and the girls.  However, NIFT only awards 
diplomas to its students and is unable to award degrees as at present it is only 
a society registered under the Registration of Societies Act, 1860.   Being only 
diploma holders, the students of the Inst itute face difficulties in their further 
academic pursuits particularly in getting  admissions for higher studies in   
foreign universities.  In this regar d, the Committee were informed that 
statutory status would enable NIFT to award degrees to its students.  
 
 
 
 

 
23. The definition of “Fashion” in the Bill does not include Textile and 
Craft Sectors.  The main objective of NIFT is to proactively catalyze the 
growth of fashion business,  particularly  in the Textile and Craft Sectors.  
Moreover, the Craft Sector has a very  high potential for innovation and 
development. Hence, the Committee cons ider it essential and appropriate to 
include Textile and Craft Sectors in the  definition of “Fashion” and as an 
integral component of the curriculum of  all programmes of NIFT.  Hence, the 
Committee recommend that Sub-Clause (e) of Clause 2 of Chapter-I of the 
Bill may be amended as follows:- 
(e) “fashion” includes a popular trend or a life style, 
specially in styles of dress and ornament or manners of 
behaviour or the business of creating, promoting or 
studying styles in vogue or the desiging, production and 
marketing of new styles of clothing in Textile Sector, 
interior decoration, innovati ons in crafts, accessories and 
cosmetics and the word “fashion technology” with their 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions, shall be 
construed accordingly”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
24. To ensure that the functioning of the Institute  is carried out in 
consonance with the customs and ethos of our society and to also ensure 
protection of/innovation in  traditional arts, handi crafts, etc., the Committee 
feel that it should be overseen by peop le’s representatives.  They, therefore, 
recommend that three representatives from  the Parliament, i.e. two Members 
of Lok Sabha and one Member of Rajya Sabha should be nominated on the 
Board of Governors of the Institute”.  
    
25. In order to benefit maximum num ber of students who seek to pursue 
higher education in the filed of fashion technology and to boost the export of 
textiles from different parts of the country, the Committee are of the view that 
efforts should be made to open more ce ntres of the Institute in different parts 
of the country by opening at least one centre in every State.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY  
           CHAIRMAN, 
24 February, 2006                             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
5 Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)                                     

 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (2005-2006) HELD ON FRIDAY, 27 JANUARY 2006. 
 
The Committee met from 1200 hours to 1400 hours in Committee Room No. 53, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Joachim Baxla        
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
6. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
8. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
9. Shri Ananta Nayak 
10. Shri Lal Mani Prasad  
11.       Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
12.       Shri Mohan Rawale  
13. Smt. C.S. Sujatha   
 
              RAJYA SABHA  
 
14. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
15. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
16. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
17. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
18. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena               -           Assistant Director 
  
 
          
 

 
 
(I) REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
  
Sl.No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri D.P. Singh Secretary 
2. Smt. Asha Swaroop Additional Secretary & FA 
3. Shri Sudripta Roy Joint Secretary 
4. Smt. B.V. Uma Devi Director 
5. Shri Oma Nand Under Secretary 
 
II REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF    FASHION 
TECHNOLOGY 
 
1. Smt. Gauri Kumar  Director General  
2. Smt. Tripti Ghosh Director 
3. Shri Somasekhar Director 
4. Shri Shantamanu Director 
5. Smt. Kalpana Swamy Registrar (Estt.) 
6. Shri S.K. Bhardwaj Head AA 
7. Sr. Prof. Asha Baxi Dean (A) 
8. Shri Anupam Jain Head (IIA) 
9. Shri Rajesh Bheda Chairperson (Fashion Technology) 
10. Ms. Archana Gandhi Associate Prof. 
11. Shri Vinish Mehra Associate Prof. 
12. Ms. Anavila  Designer Studio Manager 
13. Ms. Nitasha Gaurav Associate Prof. 
  
 
III REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
 
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh  Joint Secretary &  Legal Counsel  
2. Smt. Sarata Jain Deputy Legal Counsel 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed Shri  D.P Singh, Secretary and Officials of the 
Ministry of Textiles and asked them to brief the members about the National Institute of Fashion 
Technology Bill, 2005 which has been referred to the Standing Committee on  
Labour by the Hon’ble Speaker.  
 
3. The Secretary and officials of the Ministry briefed the Committee on the Bill.  Then they 
replied to the queries raised by the Members.  
 
4. The witnesses then withdrew. A verbatim record of the briefing has been kept.  
 
 
 

 
 
5. In view of the commencing of the Budget Se ssion of Parliament on 16 February 2006, the 
Committee decided to curtail their Study Tour to  Varanasi, Mumbai, Pune and Ahmedabad from 
11 to 16 February 2006, upto 15 February 2006. The programme of the Committee at 
Ahmedabad on 16 February 2006 has been cancelle d.  The Committee, now, decided to visit 
Varanasi, Mumbai and Pune fr om 11 to 15 February 2006 with  the dispersal at Pune on 15 
February 2006. The Committee also deci ded to visit Mumbai High on 13.02.2006.  The 
Committee further decided to visi t India United Mills No.1 of NTC instead of New City Mill on 
13.02.2006. A Revised tour programme is placed below.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned.   

 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEEN TH SITTING OF THE ST ANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON 24 FEBRUARY 2006. 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 1000 hrs. to  1100hrs. in Committee Room `D’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Joachim Baxla        
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
8. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
9. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
10. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
  1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
  3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -  Assistant Director 
        
 
 
 

 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised 
them about the two Draft Reports on “The  Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 
2005” and “The National Institute of Fashion Technology Bill, 2005”. 
 
3. The Committee first took up the dr aft Eleventh Report on “The Central 
Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005” and adopted the same with the following 
modification: 
 
Para 72, Line No. 5: Insert the words “ and continuous” after the 
word  “regular” 
 
4. The Committee then considered the draft Twelfth Report on “The National 
Institute of Fashion Technology Bill, 2005” and adopted the same with the 
following modifications: 
 
Para 23, Line 5 of definition: Insert the words “Interior Decoration”, 
before “innovations” 
 
 Para 24 amended as follows: 
  
“To ensure that the function ing of the Institute is 
carried out in consonance with the customs and ethos of our society 
and to also ensure protection of/innovation in traditional arts, 
handicrafts, etc., the Committee feel that it should be overseen by 
people’s representatives.  They , therefore, recommend that three 
representatives from the Parliament, i.e. two Members of Lok Sabha 
and one Member of Rajya Sabha should be nominated on the Board 
of Governors of the Institute”.  
 
    
5. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Reports and 
present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
  
6. XX   XX   XX 
 
7. XX   XX   XX  
 
  8. XX   XX   XX 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 

 
 
 