 
40 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-2009) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
   MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
  
     
 
 
 PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY WORKERS DUE TO SICKNESS OF HMT UNITS   
 
 
  
  
  FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
      
        
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February  2009/Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 

 2
  FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-09) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
   MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
  
  
 
 
  PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY WORKERS DUE TO SICKNESS OF HMT UNITS   
 
 
 
            
Presented to Lok Sabha on  25.02.2009 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.02.2009   
 
 
   
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February 2009/Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 

 3
 
 
 
 
 
 CONTENTS 
PAGE(s)                
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                   
 
INTRODUCTION                              
     
R E P O R T            
  
  
                        
                     ANNEXURES 
 
  
(i) Minutes of the  sitting of the Standing Committee on Labour     
(2008-09) held on  5.1.2009.       . 
(ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Labour  
(2008-09) held on 24.2.2009. 
  
  
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2008-2009) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy-CHAIRMAN 
 
  MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
   
2. Shri Furkan Ansari  
3. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale  
4. Shri Subrata Bose  
5. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
*7. Shri Munawar Hasan  
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta  
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan  
10. Shri Virendra Kumar  
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
12. Shri Basangouda R. Patil  
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Mohan Rawale  
16. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat  
17. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat  
18. Smt. C. S. Sujatha  
19. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
 RAJYA SABHA  
**22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam  
23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany  
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari  
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
***26. Shri Gandhi Azad  
 27. Smt. Renubala Pradhan  
 28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
     **** 29. Shri Rajaram  
    ****30. Shri Mohammed Adeeb  
        31. Vacant  
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
*    Expired on 10.12.2008. 
**    Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his   
       retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 29.11.2008. 
***   Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his   
       retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008. 
    ****  Nominated w.e.f. 27.1.2009

 5
 
                                                  SECRETARIAT 
 
 
  1.    Shri Devender Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
         2.    Shri R.K. Bajaj   - Director 
 3.    Shri N.K. Pandey   - Deputy Secretary 
  

 6
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour (2008-09), having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Fortieth Report on the ‘Problems being faced by workers due to 
sickness of HMT units.’ 
     
2. The Committee during their study tour to Bangalore on 1 st December 
2008 held extensive deliberations with the various trade unions of employees, 
officers and all the other stakeholders of the HMT units regarding the 
numerous problems plaguing the organization which has ultimately led to its 
sickness and worsened the miseries of the workers.  Subsequently, the 
Committee also held discussions with the management of HMT enquiring about 
the exact reasons which drove the company to its current state of affairs.  A 
large number of trade unions also submitted written memoranda stating the 
difficulties being faced by the workers engaged in the different units of HMT. 
 
3. The Committee took further evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministries of Labour and Employment, Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises, Finance and Chairman of HMT Limited on 5.1.2009 to get 
clarifications on the various points which remained unanswered during the 
study tour.                  
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held 
on 24.2.2009.  
 
5. The Committee also wish to convey their gratitude to the officers of the 
Ministries of Labour and Employment, Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises, Finance and Chairman, HMT for placing before them the detailed 
written notes on the subject and furnishing other desired information in 
connection with the examination of the subject and tendering evidence before 
the Committee. 
 
6.    The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation of the commitment, dedication and valuable assistance rendered 
to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body 
of the Report.                   
                               
 
  NEW DELHI;                     SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,      
                                                                          Chairman , 
 24th  February, 2009               Standing Committee on Labour  
 5 Phalguna, 1930  (Saka) 

 7
 
REPORT 
 
Background 
 
 
HMT was incorporated in 1953 at Bangalore for the manufacture of 
Machine Tools in collaboration with Oerlikon of Switzerland.  Over the years, 
the Company diversified various kinds of Machine Tools, Watches, Printing 
Machinery, Presses, Tractors, Bearings and Food Processing Machinery.  
Presently, the Company has subsidiaries of Machine Tools, Watches, Chinar 
Watches, Bearings, HMT (International) and Praga Tools, Hyderabad under the 
ambit of the Holding Company-HMT Limited which includes the Tractor 
Business. 
 
2. HMT Machine Tools Ltd., fulfilling the needs of so many 
Organisations/Industries like Defence, Automobile, Railways, Power Sector 
Atonics and Agriculture Industries since 40 years and it is having lot of 
infrastructure, technically qualified persons to meet the challenge tasks and 
developments required. 
 
   
HMT Limited Holding Company including Tractor Business Group 
 
3. HMT Tractor Business commenced operations in the year 1971 in 
collaboration with Zetor of Czech Republic.  The product range includes 
Tractors for Agriculture, Haulage and Earth Moving, Engines, engines for 
gensets, high speed tractors called Trantors (in collaboration with Trantor 
Vehicles Limited, (TVL  UK).  The Installed capacity is 18000 tractors with 
marketing network comprising 17 marketing offices, 9 stock yards and 326 
dealers.  The total manpower of the Holding Company including Tractor 
Business Group is 2243 comprising 1827 Workmen and 416 Executives. 
 
HMT Machine Tools Limited 
 
4. The Machine Tools Business Group was incorporated as a wholly owned 
subsidiary in April 2000.  The Machine Tool Subsidiary has manufacturing 
units in Bangalore, Kalamassery (Kerala), Hyderabad, Ajmer and Pinjore.  HMT 
Machine Tools manufactures widest range of  machine tools comprising CNC 
and Non-CNC machines, Horizontal and Vertical Machining Centres, Grinding 
Machines, Gear Cutting Machines, Die Casting and Plastic Processing 
Machinery and Metal Forming Presses.  The Subsidiary also undertakes 
development of special jigs, fixtures and robot units for various applications in 
aerospace industry and BARC.  The Subsidiary has manpower strength of 3975 
employees comprising 2640 Workmen and 1335 Executives including that of 
Praga Tools Limited which was recently merged with HMT Machine Tools 
Limited. 

 8
 
HMT Watches Limited 
 
5. HMT started manufacturing watches in the year 1962 in Bangalore in 
collaboration with Citizen of Japan.  The Watch Business Group was 
incorporated as a wholly owned subsidiary in April 2000.  The Watch 
subsidiary has manufacturing units at Bangalore, Tumkur and Ranibagh 
(Uttaranchal).  The product portfolio of the Subsidiary comprises design, 
development and manufacture of Mechanical, Automatic, Quartz and Quartz 
Analog Watches, movement and components.  The Subsidiary has manpower 
strength of 2088 Employees comprising 1652 Workmen and 436 Executives. 
 
HMT Chinar Watches Limited 
 
6. HMT started manufacturing watches at Srinagar (J&K) in the year 1974.  
The unit was incorporated as a wholly owned subsidiary in April 2000.  Apart 
from manufacturing unit in Srinagar, the Subsidiary has established Watch 
Assembly facility at Jammu.  The product portfolio of the Subsidiary comprises 
design, development and manufacture of Mechanical Watches.  The Subsidiary 
has manpower strength of 229 employees comprising 197 Workmen and 32 
Executives. 
 
 
HMT Bearings Limited 
 
7. The Bearing Unit was started in the year 1970 in collaboration with 
KOYO-SEIKO of Japan.  HMT took over the Unit in 1981.  The Subsidiary 
manufactures Ball Bearings, Cylindrical Ball Bearings and Taper Roller 
Bearings.  The Subsidiary has manpower strength of 277 Employees 
comprising 210 Workmen and 67 Executives. 
 
 
HMT (International) Limited 
 
8. HMT (International) Limited was set up in 1974 as a wholly owned 
subsidiary of HMT to undertake export of goods manufactured by HMT and 
other Indian manufacturers.  HMT (I) has been accorded the status of Mini-
Ratna and has exported over 12,500 machines to more than 70 countries.  
HMT (I) also undertakes setting up of overseas projects on turnkey basis and 
extends technical/engineering consultancy services.  Projects have been 
established in Nigeria, Indonesia, Kenya, Malaysia, Mauritius, Tanzania, UAE, 
Maldives and other countries.  The Subsidiary has manpower strength of 61 
Employees comprising 53 Executives and 8 supporting staff. 
 
 

 9
 
 
 
Revival Plans formulated by the Company 
 
9. In order to address the constraints facing the Subsidiaries/business, the 
Company has formulated comprehensive Revival Plans that inter-alia include 
issues relating to high cost of borrowings and consequential outgo on account 
of interest, up-gradation of plant and machinery, manpower rationalization and 
acquisition of appropriate product technology to meet increased levels of 
competition in the market. 
 
10. The Government has approved the Revival Plans formulated by the 
Company in respect of HMT Bearings Limited, Praga Tools Limited and HMT 
Machine Tools Limited.  The Revival Plans in respect of HMT Limited (Holding 
Company including tractor business) and HMT Watches Limited are under 
consideration by the Government.  The Company has also submitted a Five-
year funding proposal in respect of HMT Chinar Watches Limited. 
 
Guidelines regarding Industrial Relations Machinery 
 
 
11. The Committee have been informed that the guidelines laid down in 
respect of the working of the industrial Relations Machinery are being followed 
in letter and spirit.  It was further informed that consequent to formation of 
Subsidiary Companies, the IR Machinery got reviewed and reorganized in the 
Company.  Day to day issues are sorted out at Unit level.  Issues specific to 
Subsidiary Company come to its head quarter.  All policy issues at the 
Company Level are discussed at the Corporate Head Office by the 
representatives of Workers’ Federation. 
 
12. On the question regarding the issue of Industrial Relations being 
discussed in the Board meetings or at the Ministerial level meetings during the 
last three years, the organization in its written reply stated that no such 
discussion took place in any of the meetings of the Board or the Ministerial 
level meetings. 
 
13. During the recent study tour of the Committee to Bangalore, the Committee 
were apprised by the representatives of trade unions that the attitude of management 
is unfriendly and uncooperative to workers. Trade unions were not consulted on the 
issues of company in general and workers in particular.  Rather, most of the time, 
management remains inaccessible to workers.    
 
 
 
 
 

 10
14. Regarding composition of IRM, it has been stated that generally, all the 
Units/Factories has an Industrial Relations Section attached to the HR 
Department. All grievances of workmen are initially addressed at the Shop 
Floor Level by the concerned Supervisor.  The unresolved issues are discussed 
at the HOD Level for a solution.  The unresolved issues at the Head of the 
Department Level are taken up at the Unit IR Section, generally by the 
Workers’ Union and to the extent possible the matters are settled at the Unit 
level with the concurrence of HR, Finance Chiefs and with the approval of Unit 
Chief. 
 
15. Apart from the above, effective Mach inery in line with the true spirit of 
Participative Management, bipartite Committees to resolve the respective issues 
comprising both Management, Workers Union’s and Officers’ Association is in place at 
Unit level 
 
16. On being asked about the number of cases pending for settlement in 
various Labour courts/tribunals, it was replied that 29 cases are pending in 
this regard and efforts are made for out of court settlement of the cases 
depending on their merits. 
 
17. Regarding engagement of casual/contract workers in the various units of 
the organisation, it has been replied that the Company has not engaged any 
Casual/Contract Labour for a specific project.  However, the Company has 
engaged Contract Labour as Helpers, Attenders and in the area of Gardening, 
Security, House Keeping and other peripheral works through contractors.  
Number of Contract Labour in the Holding and Subsidiary Companies is as 
under: 
 
     Casual Labour Contract Labour 
 
Holding Company   -  Nil     435 
HMT Machine Tools Limited -  1   1164 
HMT Watches Limited  -  Nil     104 
HMT (International) Limited -  Nil       07 
      --------------------------------------------- 
TOTAL     -  1   1710 
      --------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 11
18. On the question of social security and welfare measures for 
casual/contract workers, it has been stated that the Social Security and 
Welfare measures for regular employees are also extended to Contract 
employees.  Wages are paid in accordance with the Minimum Wages Act 
notified by the Appropriate Government.  Facility of leave with wage, including 
National Holidays, Festival Holidays and Weekly Holidays are also extended.  
Further, the Company has extended the facility of canteen, health, safety 
measures and transport to the contract workers on par with the regular 
workers. 
 
Wage Revision 
 
19. The representatives of the Trade Union, who appeared before the 
Committee, expressed their views regarding wage revision as under: 
 
“After 1992 Wage revision, despite a lapse of seventeen years, the wages 
of HMT workers are not revised.  Due to price rise and high inflation, the 
educated and skilled workmen are forced to work under humiliation and 
embarrassment with bare minimum salaries.  Due to non 
implementation of wage revision, the existing professionals, skilled and 
talented employees are leaving the organisation in search of better 
prospects, while the fresh talent is not getting attracted.” 
 
20. The replies of the Government on the issue of the wage revision, stated 
that : 
 
“The issue of Wage/Pay Revision is pending from 01.01.1997.  However, 
various proposals have been made from time to tome and submitted to 
the DHI/Ministry for consideration.  But till date this issue has not been 
resolved, due to non-fulfillment of DPE Guidelines for Wage/Pay 
Revision. 
 
However, the Revival Plan of HMT Machine Tools Ltd., has a component 
for Wage/Pay Revision which has since been approved by the Union 
Cabinet Committee and now awaiting for directions from the Ministry. 
 
In respect of HMT Bearings Ltd., the Government has approved the 
Revival Plans in the year 2005.  The plan envisaged infusion of around 
Rs. 25 crore towards enhancement of operations in terms of plant 
modernization and working capital.  Of this, cash infusion was Rs. 7.40 
crore, while the rest was by means of funds to be raised against GOI 
Guarantee.  As Banks were not forthcoming to make funds available 
against GOI Guarantee, the revival floundered, and the Company is 
under reference to BIFR again.  Therefore, the Wage/Pay Revision could 
not take place. 
 

 12
In respect of HMT Watches Ltd., the Ministry sought revalidation of the 
Revival Plan proposals which were submitted by the Company to the 
Government for consideration, by a Consultant.  In line with the 
direction, M/s ICRA have been appointed Consultants to review the 
proposal, advise any changes and further assist in implementation and 
scouting to JV partner.  On submission of revalidation of the Revival 
Plans, the Wage/Pay Revision component is also proposed to be added in 
the Revival Plans. 
 
In respect of Holding Company, the revised Revival Plan has been 
submitted and is under consideration of the GOI, which has a 
component for Wage/Pay Revision to the employees. 
 
Currently, the employees are under 1992 Wage/Pay scales.” 
 
 
Workers and Management: 
 
 
21. On the question of participation of workers in the decision making 
process of the organization as envisaged, the Government replied  that they are 
provided opportunities through  Unit Board Meetings held at Units periodically. 
 
22. The Government was asked to submit a brief resume of the financial and 
physical performance of the company, working results of the HMT for the last 
three years, exercise undertaken, if any to ascertain and analyse the causes for 
the present ailing condition of the HMT units alongwith the remedial measures 
taken in this regard.  The Government was also asked about its responsibility 
towards the employees of sick industrial unit of the Union Government with 
regard to their wages and other dues particularly when the unit has not been 
declared closed and is viable for revival and becoming a competitive unit.  The 
information on all the above issues are yet to be received from the Government.  
 
23. The Committee was apprised during the study tour that it would be appropriate 
that if few units of HMT are merged with some  production units of Defence Ministry  
not only to make them viable  but to st rengthen the defence production also.  The 
Ministry was requested to offer their comments  in this regard in writing and the same 
are still awaited.  
 
24. On the crucial issue of revival plan for the units of the HMT to make them 
viable, any written response is yet to come from the Government.  Issues regarding 
wage revision of the workers, Voluntary Re tirement Scheme for the workers has also 
not been responded to. 
 
25. On the question of problems plaguing the HMT and 
necessary steps for their solution, the representative of the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and Public Enterprises while deposing before the Committee stated:  

 13
 
“HMT was conceived in 1949 as a unit aimed at ushering in the area of 
industrial development and supporting the basic industrial edifice of the 
country.  Incorporated in 1953, HMT has been in the area of machine 
tools, watches, bearings-basically ingredients for the development of the 
industries in the country.  But with the setting in of liberalization in early 
1990s, HMT units faced a lot of problems, problems of marketing their 
products, problems due to the lack of upgradation of plant and 
machinery problems due to excess manpower.  Considering that, a turn 
around plan was prepared in 2000 and approved in August, 2000 which 
was basically aimed at the manpower restructuring and financial debt 
restructuring of the unit and subsidization of the unit with a view to joint 
venture formation of each of the units and selling of the non-performing 
assets to generate resources for development, modernization, etc. of the 
different units.  But unfortunately, the sale of the non-performing assets, 
formation of the JV could not take up as expected as a result of which 
the turn around plan 2000 was not fully successful.  As a part of the 
turn around plan, based on the Ernst & Young Report, these 
subsidiaries were formed.  Each of the individual subsidiaries went 
through their individual revival plans and the plans were actually 
formulated in 2002-03, a period when HMT faced recessionary trends in 
the economy; its products were not selling as a result of which and with 
the liberalization, the machine tool sector, for example, faced the problem 
arising out of a lot of imports of second-hand machine tools from abroad.  
As a result, the HMT could not actually market its products as desired.  
Secondly, the technology upgradation of the machine tool sector did not 
take place and they could not get the technology of their choice from 
abroad as a result of which marketing of its products became very 
difficult. 
 
26. With regard to watches manufacturing units of HMT, the representative 
deposed: 
 
“As far as watches were concerned, in the watch sector, new technology, 
digital watches came in and HMT found it difficult to modernize it 
because it had got all the vertically integrated units producing each 
component of the watch, whereas there were a lot of assemblers came in 
importing modules at throw away process from abroad and assembling 
and selling directly at much lower cost than what the HMT could afford 
to.  So, that resulted in HMT watches going into debts as a result of 
which the current thinking is that to have revival plans for each of the 
units.  For example, for HMT Machine Tools Ltd., a revival plan has been 
sanctioned and it does include the revision of wages as per 1997 scales.  
But unfortunately, HMT Machine Tools Ltd. is not able to give those 
wages because it is not able to generate its own internal resources to 
support payment of such wages. 
 

 14
At present, the Revival Plans of the two units of HMT, which is 
essentially looking after the tractor unit at Pinjore and the HMT watches, 
are under consideration of the Government.  Actually, what we are 
thinking is, the revival plans should incorporate a pucca business plan 
which will project over a period of five to 10 years the fiscal and financial 
projections in order to logically enable the Government to support the 
revival plan to see that HMT stands on its own legs.  This business plan 
is under consideration; we will go to the Cabinet as soon as possible with 
the details after the business plan is formulated. 
 
27. Asked about the revival plan of HMT bearing, the witness stated: 
 
 
“As far as HMT Bearings is concerned, already revival plan is under 
implementation.  As far as Government policy is concerned, till the 
revival plan is formulated and approved by the Government, the support 
in terms of wages, salary and statutory dues is provided every quarter by 
the Government.  Money is sanctioned for that; and provided to those 
PSUs which have not been given the revival plan but those which have 
already undertaken the revival plan, they are supposed to stand on their 
own legs and have their own internal generation of resources to support 
their activities.  As a result of which, they will not be a burden on the 
Government.  So, this is the basic principle on which we are working. 
 
As far as HMT is concerned, Praga Tools Ltd., which is another 
unit and which has been merged with HMT Machine Tools Ltd.  As far as 
personnel problems are concerned, these are being sorted out; those 
which are yet to be sorted out are under consideration.  I am expecting 
that it would be sorted out as soon as possible. 
 
It is a fact that since 1992 wages are prevailing in HMT units.  It is very 
difficult to retain talent in the company.  It is a fact because outside 
other units are paying much better wages, talent, etc.  We also want that 
all these units should come up and stand on their own legs based on the 
projections made in the revival plans. 
 
Of late, the HMT units compared to last year have not been doing well 
because they are facing this particular problem of manpower, and 
working capital.  For example, HMT Bearings, the whole package was 
approved but the point was that Rs. 10 crore was envisaged towards 
working capital loan, Rs. 14.8 crore towards the Capex to be given-50 per 
cent as loan and 50 per cent as equity -but there also, it was the loan to 
be raised against Government guarantee.  So, about Rs. 17.4 crore was 
supposed to be raised against the Government guarantee.  But  because 
of the stipulations from the Finance Ministry that the loans must be 
negotiated with the banks at the rate of G-sec plus 50 basis points which 

 15
no bank was willing to give.  For the last two years, we faced the problem 
of providing working capital support to HMT Bearings. 
 
Recently, with a lot of efforts, Finance Ministry has come to the view that 
loans must be negotiated at the rate of G-sec plus 1.5 per cent but even 
then we are finding it difficult to get loans from the banks at the present 
rate, especially, because of the non-provision of the working capital 
support over the last two years has made the HMT Bearings company 
again being referred to BIFR.  So, what we intended was that HMT 
Bearings should come out of BIFR on its own has not taken place and we 
are again slipping into BIFR fold and we are facing the problems. 
 
Because of the peculiar situation prevailing due to liberalization of the 
economy, HMT units faced these problems.  Some of the units which 
were set up, for example, the lamp manufacturing unit at Hyderabad, 
Central Metal Forming Institute and Watch Case Factory were not 
performing well and they were to be closed.  As far as tractor unit at 
Pinjore is concerned, it was working well.  We have a plan which is under 
formulation.  We are looking into the business plan in detail.  There are 
plans to increase the capacity from 6,000 to 15,000 tractors.  But the 
point there also is that, substantial investment is necessary because 
mere production of tractors is not enough.  It should be technological 
and environmental-friendly in the sense that they should satisfy Euro-III 
A norms by April, 2010. 
 
This requires substantial investment by the company in terms of their 
production facilities and also the technological upgradation that is 
necessary.  So, we are looking into the business plan in detail as to how 
to revive the units. 
 
Basically we are going subsidiary by subsidiary. The two subsidiaries 
that are under the consideration of the Government are the HMT 
Watches and HMT holding, the tractor division.  As far as HMT Chinar 
Watches is concerned, we are negotiating with the Government of 
Jammu and Kashmir whether the State Government can take up and 
have the units started with the support of the State Government.  The 
State Government has given a positive feedback and we are going to 
negotiate further with them to clinch the issue.  That is, in brief, the 
situation in HMT.” 
 
28. While supplementing the efforts of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises, the representative of the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
stated as under:  
 
“We note that the Ministry of Heavy Industry has been taking specific 
tailored action with regard to different divisions of HMT, and that for 
want of certain timely steps, sometimes the best efforts have not borne 

 16
the fruits that they are expected to bear.  The Ministry is still trying and 
we would be supportive of their efforts to ensure that the units come up 
in a manner that is sustainable.  That is what I want to say from our 
side.” 
 
29. Another representative of the HMT Organization in this regard stated 
that: 
 
“As the Committee is aware, HMT is a leading precision engineering 
goods manufacturer in the country and has evolved in the design, 
development and manufacture of various products like machine tools, 
tractors, watches and bearing.  Over the years, the company has 
established manufacturing facilities for these products across the 
country in places like Bangalore, Tumkur, Kalamachary near Cochin, 
Hyderabad, Ajmer, Ranibagh, Pinjore and Srinagar in Kashmir.  HMT 
Limited presently operates the tractor business directly and is the 
holding company for four subsidiaries incorporated for the manufacture 
of machine tools, watches, bearings, as well as one subsidiary which has 
been incorporated as the exclusive export arm for all the products 
manufactured by the company and also for taking up overseas projects 
and services and trading activities.  In the 1990s when the Government 
of India launched a series of regulatory measures aimed at ushering in a 
freer economy and welcoming the flow of foreign capital, the performance 
of the company declined as it could not change quickly in accordance 
with the new economic environment.  The decline in performance was 
mainly on account of vertically integrated manufacturing plants, 
widespread manufacturing units and assembly ancillaries which have 
been established in line with earlier trends and policies. 
 
Other factors like increase in social overhead cost, ageing plant and 
machinery, surplus manpower and high interest cost took high toll on 
the performance leading to considerable erosion of network.  Further the 
perennially loss-making units like lamp manufacturing units at 
Hyderabad and watch factory at Ranibagh continues to erode resources.  
With a view to turn around this performance, the company prepared a 
plan during 1998, aimed at addressing the issues through organizational 
restructuring, manpower restructuring as well as financial and debt 
restructuring which was approved and implemented by the Government 
of India in August 2000. 
 
Though these activities were completed as per plan, the financial position 
did not improve due to factors like constraints in working capital 
experienced by various units, unaddressed liabilities to the extent of Rs. 
374 crore, non-fructification of efforts for sale of NPAs, sale of stake to JV 
partner, as envisaged in the turnaround plan and inability to address 
issues relating to product development, diversification, technology 
upgradation and plant modernization due to resource crunch.  The 

 17
disinvestments process, initiated in respect of HMT Machine Tools Ltd., 
HMT Watches, HMT Chinar and HMT Bearings during 2002-03, attracted 
sufficient response, but the process could not be completed as the 
requisite go-aheads were not received from the Disinvestment 
Department of the Government. 
 
The above factors resulted in heavy losses in the operations and 
necessitated the formulation of revival plans for the company and its 
subsidiaries.  The company and its subsidiaries have formulated and 
submitted a comprehensive restructuring and revival plans to effectively 
meet the current market demand and operate efficiently in the changed 
business environment.  The revival plans of HMT Bearings and Praga 
Tools and HMT Machine Tools have been approved by the Government 
and the same are under implementation; in these companies activities 
pertaining to financial aspects have been completed while the activities 
related to CAPEX are under progress.  The revival plans of HMT Ltd. and 
Chinar are under consideration of the Government while in respect of 
HMT Watches, the company appointed a consultant as per the direction 
of the Ministry to examine all relevant points and validate the plans as 
formulated. 
 
I would like to inform that during June 2008, BIFR issued orders for the 
merger of Praga Tools with HMT Machine Tools Ltd., as per the approved 
revival plan of HMT Machine Tools Ltd.  With this, Praga Tools have been 
merged with Machine Tools and Praga Tools have now become one 
among the manufacturing units of the HMT Machine Tools Ltd.  The 
activities in respect of merger process including employee-related issues 
are being addressed.  In respect of HMT Bearing, the Company has made 
several efforts through various banks to raise funds against the 
Government of India guarantee, as envisaged in the approved revival 
plans.  But the banks were not forthcoming with funds.  Canara Bank 
sought additional guarantee to make these funds available, against the 
Government of India guarantee and also asked for a higher rate of 
interest.  The matter was put up to the Ministry, who finally agreed for 
the terms and provided the guarantee.  By this time, over two years had 
elapsed; and the company was unable to sustain its operations due to 
non-availability of working capital and went into further losses and is 
under reference to BIFR again.  Salaries have not been paid to the 
employees since August, 2008.” 
 
30. The representative of the Ministry of Finance also appeared before the 
Committee and stated: 
 
“We have fully supported the revival of HMT.  We consider that it is a 
very core sector, very important for further subsequent industrialization.  
So, almost Rs. 450 crore of cash support has been sanctioned and 
recommended by the Finance Ministry.  The only issue is the payment of 

 18
the kind of financing of this plant.  We believe that the company has 
almost Rs. 617 crore of surplus land and also is very much over-staffed.  
The third point that we had was that the company is a multi-product and 
to be entirely competitive in these times, and perhaps they may subject 
themselves to a fewer products where they have advantage in terms of 
technology as well as being the first in the field. 
 
With these measures, we hope that if the business plan is properly 
formulated, as the Secretary, Heavy Industry, has put it right in the 
beginning, we are very emphatic that a rationale business plan will be in 
place, along with the rationalization of the employees and getting the 
talent wherever required, preventing attrition, etc., we  would be happy 
to completely support this sector because we believe that it is a core 
sector with great spin-off effects.” 
 
 
31. The Committee during their visit to Bangalore interacted with the 
representatives of the various Trade Unions who informed the Committee that 
thousands of HMT employees were sent home by way of VRS and many of the 
employees were transferred to other units keeping them away from their 
families and aged parents.  The employees whoever opted to work are still 
working on 14 year old salaries, leaving two Wage Revisions behind.  They also 
submitted their Charter of Demands which is as under:- 
 
(i) Merging of HMT Machine Tools Unit with BHEL/Defence 
Organisations, for survival and useful to the organizations for their 
achievements requirements. 
(ii) Implementation of wage revision, pending since 1997 and the new 
wage scale to workers on par with public sector officers as decided by 
Union Cabinet. 
(iii) Retaining the age of superannuating as 60 years (reduced to 58 from 
60 years), on par with other Central Government Public Sector 
Undertakings. 
(iv) Merger of 50% D.A. in the basic pay on par with other Public Sector 
Undertakings. 
(v) Payment of 1992 wage arrears for the employees presently on the rolls 
of HMT. 
(vi) Implementation of HRA applicable for “A” class cities, by 
lifting/extending ceiling. 
(vii) To strengthen the tractor project at Hyderabad to meet the heavy 
demand of South India Market. 
(viii) Waiver of training period for junior employees. 
(ix) Renewal of exemption granted to HMT from provision of ESI Act 1948, 
from 01.10.2008. 
(x) Enhancement of conveyance allowance on par with PS cadre 
employees. 

 19
(xi) Transfer of Ex-LMH employees back to Hyderabad, who are working 
in various locations of HMT. 
 
32. The Committee were also apprised by the representative of the Trade 
Unions that for the last 4 decades HMT has earned and paid dividends to the 
Government of India and our Prime Minister Late Shri Pandit Jawaharlal 
Nehru designated HMT as “JEWEL OF THE NATION”.  Even today HMT is 
competing tooth & nail in the world market and providing employment to lakhs 
of people directly/indirectly.  As on date  the senior workers of such a glorious 
Public Sector Undertaking are the poorest paid employees among the 
Government.  Even the Teachers, a Lower Division Clerks working in the 
Central/State Government are drawing much more than HMT employees, 
because of non-implementation of Pay Revisions.  Other Bangalore based 
Public Sectors such as HAL, BEML, ITI & BHEL, BEL etc., are already 
implemented 1997 Pay Revision for their employees long back.  HMT deprived 
its employees on the pretext of losses and performance.  HMT Machine Tools 
Limited, Hyderabad is manufacturing and marketing High Speed Machining 
Centres in India.  The fact involves manufacture of Machining Centre for both 
domestic and overseas market.  These Machining Centres have wide 
Applications in strategic sectors and automotives. 
 
Revival Plan for various units of HMT 
 
33. The following is the revival plan of the Government for the various units 
of HMT as submitted by the representatives of the Trade Unions: 
 
HMT Machine Tool Limited (subsidiary) 
 
• The Government of India (GOI) has approved a revival package for the 
subsidiary wherein it has recommended for the implementation of 
wage/pay revision to its employees.  On the contrary, so far the 
Government of India has not accorded the approval for implementation. 
 
HMT (international Limited) (subsidiary) 
 
• HMT (I) Ltd. is a Mini Ratna company. 
• HMT (I) Ltd. is posting profits consistently for the past 33 years. 
• The Government of India in its policy has recommended wage/pay 
revision as well as to increase the retirement age from 58 to 60 years to 
the employees of this subsidiary.  Unfortunately, for the last 17 years the 
holding company has not accorded permission to implement wage/pay 
revision for 1997 and 2007 to the employees of this subsidiary. 
 
HMT Bearings Ltd. (subsidiary) 
• This company has also a profit making company and was a Mini Ratna 
upto 2002. 

 20
• Though the employees of this subsidiary were eligible to have their 
wage/pay revision for 1997 (as per the Government guidelines), the 
holding company did not give approval for the implementation of 
wage/pay revision for 1997. 
 
HMT Holding Company and HMT Watches Ltd. (subsidiary) 
 
• The Government of India is actively processing revival package for both 
these groups. 
• The component of wage/pay revision should also be included in the 
revival package for implementation inline with the other HMT 
subsidiaries. 
 
34. The representatives of the HMT Officers’ Association who appeared before 
the Committee, stated the following regarding the company:  
  
“The plight of HMT officers who are working on 16 years old stagnated 
salaries.  Although the government of India has already 
disbursed/sanctioned revival package to HMT Machine Tools Limited, 
the long outstanding demand of pay revision has not been considered 
favorably so far despite a circulate dated 2 nd May, 2006 from Secretary 
(HI&PE) that the new pay scales can be considered where ever revival 
package has been provided.  With the 16 years old stagnated salaries the 
HMT employees are perhaps least paid employees in the organized sector 
in the whole country. 
 
Also all other four Bangalore based PSUs viz., HAL, BEL, BEML and ITI 
have implemented 1997 pay revision and is in the verge of going for 
revision of pay scale w.e.f. from 01.01.2007.  The employees of HMT are 
finding it very difficult to meet the basic needs in the highly inflated cities 
like Bangalore, Hyderabad, etc., and I understand that because of the 
above situation there has been a continuous drain of skilled work force 
from the company.  The most of the newly recruited Engineers during 
last 4-5 years have left the company seeking better opportunities.  The 
non-revision of pay scale, which is due since 1997 has made HMT, the 
poaching ground of skilled work force for Private Sector Companies. 
 
Most of the officers of HMT are not drawing their annual increments 
because of stagnation of basic pay.  On the contrary workmen are 
drawing annual increments on percentage basis and due to this officers 
up to Asst. General Manager are drawing less than their own 
subordinates in the working cadre which has resulted in disparities of 
pay structure.  If the trend is allowed to continue like this there is no 
wonder if the workmen draw more than the top executives of the 
company.  Discrimination of Officers against workmen has badly 
shattered the confidence and moral of the Officers.  This is an issue of 

 21
very serious nature because self respect of Officers is at stake.  If the 
company has the resources to pay higher package for the workmen the 
motive behind non payment of the same to Officers is not understood.  
This kind of discriminatory attitude of the HMT Management has led to 
unrest among Officers and may reach its flash point any time.” 
 
 
Submission from other Trade Unions: 
 
35. Since from the year 2002, the salaries are not paid regularly to the 
employees, once in six months the Government sanctions the salaries in the 
form of budgetary support, rest of the months the employees have to undergo 
lot of financial difficulties, mental agony and finding very difficult to cater the 
needs for their day to day livelihood.  The total strength of the employees of our 
unit is around 415, all these employees are in the average age group 54-56 
years.  These senior employees have to perform social obligations like children 
education, marriage of their children, planning for their future livelihood etc.  
In the prevailing critical conditions all the employees are demoralized, 
frustrated and totally directionless.  Maximum number of employees have 
approached us and are requesting for the introduction of Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme, in our opinion 60 to 70% of the employees have shown their 
willingness to opt for AVRS. 
 

 22
 
 Problems of workers in HMT units 
 
 
36. The Committee note that HMT was set up in 1953 
for manufacture of machine tools in collaboration with a Swiss company 
named OERLIKON.  Over the years, the company diversified its products 
into various kinds of machine tools, watches, printing machinery, 
presses, tractors, bearings and food processing machinery.  As of now, the 
company has subsidiaries of machine tools, watches, bearings, HMT 
International and Praga Tools under the ambit of holding company, HMT 
Limited. At present the company has 8873 permanent employees and 
1700 contract workers in its different units.  The Committee find that the 
company is plagued with various problems which are having direct 
bearing on the workforce of the company.  They vary from inharmonious 
industrial relations to lower wages and inhospitable working conditions.  
This has significantly eroded not only the confidence of the workforce but 
their numerical strength also.  The inept handling on the part of the 
Government and management of the company has done irreparable 
damage to the interest of the workers and to the future of the company as 
well.  Lack of foresight in the implementation of VRS resulted in 
substantial depletion of staff strength leading to non-availability of even 
bare minimum staff to manage the affairs of the company.  Needless to 
say, the VRS of such a magnitude drained the much-needed finance which 
could otherwise have been made use of in a more meaningful way for the 
sustenance and growth of the company.  Ironically, those who opted for 
VRS are at an advantageous position as they are being paid 150% of their 
remuneration whereas those who are working are not getting the revised 
wages.  Even the arrears arising out of 1992 wage revision have not been 
paid to the workers who are working in different units of the company.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that issues regarding 
problems of workers be immediately addressed with specific attention to 
revision of wages, payment of arrears following wage revision of 1992 and 
suitable career avenues be charted out for the workers of HMT.  

 23
 
Harmonious industrial relations 
 
37. The Committee note that the industrial 
atmosphere in the units of HMT is far from being congenial.  The 
harmonious relationship between the management and workers is the 
touchstone for purposeful working and peaceful existence of any 
industrial unit.  In reply to a question whether any discussions on 
industrial relations took place at the Board Meetings or at Ministerial 
Meeting during the last three years, the Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises conceded that no such discussion took place in any of 
the meetings.  Regarding review of industrial relations machinery in HMT 
organization during the last three years, it has been evasively stated that 
consequent to formation of subsidiary companies, the IR machinery got 
reviewed and reorganized in the company.  On being asked the reasons for 
not discussing the issues at board meeting, it has been replied that most 
of the IR issues are sorted out at the unit level.  The left over issues are 
ultimately solved at the subsidiary company’s level.  The Committee feel 
that perhaps this is a unique case wherein no issues regarding industrial 
relations have been discussed during the last three years. The Committee 
were apprised by the representatives of the various trade unions about the 
prevailing industrial atmosphere in the HMT organization.  Inaccessibility 
of the top management and consequent lack of interaction between the 
management and workers’ representatives were cited as the primary 
reasons for many avoidable and small problems of the workers.  
Undoubtedly, such a strained relationship between the management and 
workers is bound to impair invariably the efficiency and smooth 
functioning of any organization more so of one which is sick and 
struggling for its survival.  Obviously, the responsibility for creating 
cordial climate of working relations in any industrial unit lies more on the 
management than on the workers.   The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that, despite demarcated and distinct responsibilities 
assigned to management and workers, it is incumbent upon both the 
sides, with a far greater responsibility on the management, to preserve 
and promote harmonious industrial relations in the larger interest of the 
workers, management, company and the nation as a whole.  The 
Committee hope all out efforts would be made by the Government in right 
earnest to achieve the objective. 
 

 24
 
 
Low morale of existing depleted staff and need for  
corrective measures 
 
 
38. The Committee observe that the morale of the 
workers of the HMT organization is at its lowest ebb.  The major 
contributory factor in this regard is the issue of pending wage revision 
since January 1997.  With low wages and uncertain future of the 
company, workers are demotivated as they are more preoccupied with the 
economic costs and social status vis-à-vis their peers in the society.  
Educated and skilled workers with appropriate age profile desert the 
organisation the moment they find greener pastures elsewhere.  It is only 
the employees of higher age group who are forced to continue with their 
jobs with no or little option left.  Such circumstances in their entirety 
take a heavy toll on the spirit and working capacity of the worker 
ultimately affecting the utilization of productive capacity and overall 
efficiency of the organization.  Asked about the reasons for non-revision 
of wages, the Ministry replied that the issue of wage revision is pending 
since 1.1.1997 but further informed that various proposals have been 
submitted to the Government for consideration.  Distressingly, till date, 
the issue has not been resolved due to non-fulfilment of Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE) guidelines and other reasons varying from unit to 
unit of HMT organization.  Consequently, not only the workers but the 
executives are also not getting the wages  that are due to them.  To arrest 
further deterioration, emergent steps are the need of the hour to bail out 
the workable units of HMT.  Moreover, there is no reason as to why the 
viable and profit making unit of the organization is not being given proper 
attention.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that an 
urgent, effective and time bound action plan be drawn up for 
implementation so that not only the morale of the staff is restored but 
the functional and financial viability of all the units is guaranteed 
through such measures.     
  

 25
Reasons for sickness 
 
 
39. The Committee note that HMT was established in 
1953 with a view to meet our machine tool requirements and to 
manufacture and supply high precision automatic and hand wound 
mechanical watches to domestic and international markets.  For five 
decades, HMT had achieved its objective and was the market leader for a 
long time earning the title of ‘Jewel in the Crown’ and remained a brand 
in the country for long.  HMT also contributed significantly to national 
exchequer with its profits and made forays in diverse fields of 
production/manufacturing.  The Company also served in other critical 
and strategic areas like Defence, Railways, Aero space, Nuclear science, 
Automobile and General Engineering Industries. Even today, the 
organization has the capability to serve the nation in specialized fields 
particularly in the areas of space and atomic energy.   However, due to 
lack of foresightedness and unimaginative handling of the situation, HMT 
continuously kept yielding its ground to their competitors in the private 
sector.  On being asked about the reasons for present state of affairs of 
the organization, the Government replied that with the setting in of 
liberalization in 1990, HMT units faced a lot of problems which included 
lack of upgradation in plant and machinery, problems in marketing of 
products, excess manpower, etc.  Liberalisation, opening of global 
boundaries and import of second hand machinery are the other 
contributory factors, statedly, for the present status of HMT units.  Lack 
of orders and non-adherence to time schedule coupled with inability of 
the company to acclimatize itself quickly in accordance with the new 
economic environment led to the decline in the fortunes of the company.  
Besides, vertically integrated and widespread manufacturing plants and 
assembly ancillaries have also contributed significantly to the current 
position of the organisation.  Other factors like increase in social 
overhead costs, high interests have also added considerably to the erosion 
of the company’s worth. In view of the stiff competition from the market 
in the backdrop of liberalization and open economy, the company became 
unviable following its products becoming uncompetitive and non-
remunerative.    In this state of affairs, it became increasingly difficult to 
attract fresh talents to infuse competitiveness, quality production and 
aggressive market strategy to keep the company’s presence felt in the 
market in a significant manner.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that in order to make the company viable, it would be 
essential to integrate the various units of the organization with the other 
establishments of the Government of India like BHEL, HAL, NTPC, 
Railways, IAF, etc. wherein the technical requirements of these 
establishments are first invariably met by the products of HMT paving the 
way for strengthening HMT as an organization and also ensuring supply of 
high quality implements to the various wings of the Government of India.    
 

 26

 27
 Need for revival  
 
40. The Committee note that the HMT used to be the ‘Jewel of the 
nation’ and it performed so well for about five decades as per its brand 
image.  However, deterioration set in due to several reasons which is 
recorded elsewhere in this report. The diversified activities of the 
organization touch upon the significant sphere of our industry including 
Railways, Defence, Space and other strategic areas.  Prudence, therefore, 
demands that Government take essential and urgent steps for effecting a 
successful turnaround in the fortunes of all the units of HMT.  The 
company prepared a plan during 1998 which tried to address the issues 
through organization restructuring, manpower streamlining, ensuring 
financial health of the company, etc.  The Government of India approved 
and implemented the plan in August 2000.  The Committee are inclined 
to infer that this plan was a skewed one as it could not help in improving 
the finances of the company.  Constraints like lack of working capital, 
unaddressed liabilities to the extent of Rs.374 crores, non-fructification 
of efforts for sale of NPAs, sale of stake to joint venture partner, inability 
to address issues relating to product development, diversification, 
technology upgradation and plant modernization, resource crunch 
remained as nagging as before.  The disinvestments process initiated in 
respect of HMT Machine Tools Limited, HMT watches, HMT Chinar and 
HMT bearings during 2002-03 could not be completed as requisite go 
ahead was not received from the concerned quarter of the Government.  

 28
  
The above reasons led to heavy losses and necessitated revival plans 
for the company and its subsidiaries.  A restructuring package is currently 
under consideration of the Government.  The Committee find that even 
this plan is not comprehensive being laden with piecemeal approach.  
Instead of addressing the problems of HMT as an organization, a unit-wise 
revival plan will only delay the achievement of desired target.  Inter se 
segregation of the various units of HMT for the purpose of revival will 
adversely impact the welfare of workers and sustenance of the company 
as a whole.  Even the revival package cannot be contingent and will have 
to be encumbrance free.  No contingencies like loans from banks, raising 
of internal resources, sale of surplus assets, etc. should be the part of 
revival scheme.  These are the negative appendices and smack lack of will 
power on the part of the Government to move seriously in the direction of 
revival.  In the considered view of the Committee, the plan should be 
comprehensive for all the units of HMT and should inter-alia consist of 
working capital for each unit wherever necessary, retrospective wage 
revision of employees, payment of arrears, liquidation of liabilities, 
transparent methodology for infusion of fresh and skilled talent into the 
organization, a clear and well defined marketing strategy and firm tie up 
with other Government departments.  The Committee are pained to note 
that revival plans are not time bound in nature and their implementation 
procrastinate indefinitely making revival plan a mockery.  HMT bearings 
is a glaring instance of this kind of exercise wherein the company was 

 29
referred to BIFR again due to the lo ng time taken in the completion of 
various stages of activities regarding its revival.  The Government is also 
not taking the revival plan in the proper perspective.  Till the revival plan 
is formulated and approved by the Government, the support in terms of 
wages and statutory dues provided for every quarter.  Money is provided 
to those PSUs which have not been given the revival plan but PSUs which 
have already undertaken the revival plan are supposed to stand on their 
own and have their internal generation of resources to support their 
activities.  Consequently, the revival plan is not wholesome and one or 
the other aspects in the entire process goes out of tune crippling the 
revival plan altogether.  Of late, the Government is infusing hundreds of 
thousands of crores in uncertain and grey areas in the name of reviving 
economy. The Committee feel that lacing the proposal of revival of HMT 
with impractical conditions for releasing a few hundred crores, 
particularly when the organization has paid handsome dividend to the 
nation continuously for five decades, amounts to self-defeat and leaving 
the workers in the lurch.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that a wholesome revival package for all the units of HMT be released 
immediately for being executed in a time bound manner so that not only 
the interest of the workers are well taken care of but the glory of the HMT 
organization is reinstated and it again becomes a pioneer in its activities.  

 30
 
Other issues of importance   
  
41. The Committee, further recommend that in addition to the above recommendations, the 
following steps may also be taken urgently for fulfilling the aspirations of the workers and 
the health of the organization.   
(i) Merging of HMT Machine Tools unit with BHEL/Defence 
organizations. 
(ii)      Retaining age of superannuation as 60 years.  
(iii) Merger of 50% DA in the basic pay on par with other PSUs. 
(iv) Implementation of HRA applicable for “A” class cities by 
lifting or extending the ceiling.  
(v) Strengthen the tractor project at Hyderabad to meet the heavy 
demand of South India. 
(vi) Waiver of training period for junior employees, who worked for 
few years earlier and underwent training.  
(vii) Enhancement of conveyance allowance on par with PS cadre 
employees.  
(viii) Revision of pension scheme.  
(ix) Transfer of Ex-LMH employees back to Hyderabad who are 
working in various locations of HMT.        
       
 
Labour problems in various establishments of Government of 
India 
 
 

 31
42. The Committee observe that of late, most  of the establishments (PSUs) of the 
Government of India are facing various kinds of problems relating to the workforce.  
Outsourcing of jobs, engagement of contrac t labour, drastic down sizing of staff, 
violation of social security statutes etc. have become rampant.  Units of Defence, 
Telecommunications, Railways, Heavy Industries, Road Transport and Highways, Coal 
& Steel,  etc. with whom the Committee ha ve had interaction during various study 
tours undertaken by the Committee, have b een found lagging in fulfilment of their 
statutory obligations towards the workforce.  The Committee feel that the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment should play a strong proactive role in identification and 
rectification of the problems of workforc e in Government Sector.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry of Labour and Employment should 
devise a strategy wherein all the PSUs of th e Government of India are brought within 
the labour scanner of the Minist ry so that the problems of workers are identified before 
hand and necessary corrective measures applied in right earnest and direction.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;          SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY,       
                                                                       Chairman , 
 24th February, 2009           Standing Committee on Labour.  
5 Phalguna, 1930  (Saka) 

 32
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR  HELD ON  MONDAY, THE 5TH JANUARY,  2008  
 
The Committee met from 1100 hours to  1400 hours in Committee Room `C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New  Delhi.   
 
 
PRESENT  
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Subrata Bose 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
4. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot  
5. Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Shri Basangouda R. Patil  
7. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
8. Shri Devidas Pingle 
9. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
10. Shri Mohan Rawale 
11. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
12. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
               
  RAJYA SABHA  
  
13. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
14. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
15. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
  
SECRETARIAT 
         
   
1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Joint Secretary 
2.         Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
 3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Deputy Secretary  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 33
 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
1. Smt. Sudha Pillai, Secretary 
2. Shri S. Krishnan, Special Secretary 
3. Shri K.M. Gupta, Economic Advisor 
4. Shri N.K. Prasad, Deputy CLC (C) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES & PUBLIC 
ENTERPRISES 
 
1. Dr. S.N. Dash, Secretary 
2. Dr. Amit Sahay, Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE HINDUSTAN MACHINE TOOLS LIMITED (HMT) 
 
1. Shri A.V. Kamat, CMD 
2. Shri A.K. Sharma, DGM (Liaison) 
3. Shri Hemchandra Babu, MD 
4. Shri S. Paulraj, MD, HMT Watches Ltd.  
5. Shri S.K. Kampasi, Director (Finance) 
6. Shri S.G. Sridhar, Director Operation 
7. Shri B.K. Panda, GM (HR) 
 
2.   XX    XX    XX 
         
3.          XX    XX    XX  
 
4. XX    XX    XX  
 
  
 
 
 
 
5. The Chairman welcomed the representati ves of the Ministries of Labour and 
Employment, Finance, Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises and the Chairman and 
Officers of HMT Ltd and invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 
55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
6. Among the various points which were deliberated upon regarding the revival 
of  HMT Limited the following were the main issues discussed during the meeting:- 
 

 34
(a) Preparation of a comprehensive revival package.  
(b) Attracting new recruits/talents into the organization. 
(c) Revision of pay scales of em ployees in HMT with immediate 
effect. 
(d) Extending VRS to those employees who seek retirement. 
(e) Ensuring workers’ participation in management. 
(f) Ensuring participation of trade unions in the decision 
making process of the company.  
(g) New business plan and marketing techniques to be chalked 
out and implemented for enhancing production and profit of 
the organization. 
(h) Need for technological upgradation in the various units of 
HMT.  
(i) Expediting sale of surplus land of HMT. 
(j) Finding alternate proposal to gather funds for the 
organization.  
 
B.  
7. The representatives of the Ministries  Labour, Heavy Industries & Public 
Enterprises, Finance and Chairman, HMT Li mited then responded to the aforesaid 
queries.  The Chairman requested the Mi nistry of Heavy Industries & Public 
Enterprises and Chairman, HMT to send wr itten replies of those questions whose 
replies were not readily available within ten days to the Committee.    
 
      ( The witnesses then withdrew).  
 
8.  XX    XX    XX 
 
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR HELD ON TUESDAY, 24TH FEBRUARY 2009  
 
The Committee met from 1500 hours to 1600 hours in Committee 
Room `C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi to consider and adopt 
draft Fortieth Report on the ‘Problems being faced by workers due to 
sickness of HMT Units’. 
 
 
PRESENT 

 35
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
A. MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Subrata Bose 
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee  
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
6. Shri  Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
8. Shri Devidas Pingle 
9. Shri Chandra Dev Prasad Rajbhar 
10. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
               
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
    
11. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
12. Smt. Renubala Pradhan 
  13. Shri.Mohammed Adeeb 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
           
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
 2.  Shri R.K. Bajaj  - Director 
 3. Shri.N.K.Pandey  - Deputy Secretary 
         4. Shri A.S. Sajwan  - Deputy Secretary  
  
  

 36
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them 
about the draft Fortieth Report on ‘Problems being faced by workers due to 
sickness of HMT units.’ 
  
3.  The Committee, then, took up the draft Report for consideration and 
adopted the same with some amendments/modifications.   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report and 
present the same to the Parliament on 25th February 2009. 
   
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 