15    
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2005-06) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on   
“Development Schemes for Handloom Sector”. 
 
 
 
 
 FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August 2006/Sravana 1928 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2005-06) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Labour on    
“Development Schemes for Handloom Sector”. 
 
 
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.8.2006 
  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 1.8.2006  
 
 
 
            
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
August  2006/Sravana 1928 (Saka) 

  
CONTENTS 
 
       
    P A G E    
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   (iii) 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N           
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………    
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
accepted by the Government………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s reply…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
replies of Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee and which require reiteration…………… 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of    
which  replies of the Government  are interim  
in nature    …………. 
 
APPENDIX-I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on   
 12 June 2006  
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR      
                                                                   (2005-06) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar    
10. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi   
12. Shri Ananta Nayak   
13. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
14. Shri Lal Mani Prasad   
15. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
16. Shri Mohan Rawale  
17. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
18. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
19.       Shri Parasnath Yadav   
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  20. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  21. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
  22. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
23. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
24. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany   
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
26.       Shri Dilip Ray 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
3.       Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Comm ittee on Labour having been authorised  by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth Report on the 
action taken by the Government on the reco mmendations contained in the Ninth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Labour (F ourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Development 
Schemes for Handloom Sector”. 
 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  a nd also  laid in  Rajya Sabha on       
20 December 2005.  The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on  24 March 2006.  The  report 
was considered and adopted  by the Standing Committee on Labour at their sitting held 
on 12 June 2006. 
 
3. The Report has been divided into the following chapters:- 
 
I. Report. 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations whic h have been accepted by Government. 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which th e Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s reply. 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration. 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which replies of the Government 
are interim in nature. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the St anding Committee on Labour (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
5. For the facility of reference reco mmendations/observations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY   
12 June, 2006                          CHAIRMAN  
22 Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka)         STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
   

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
REPORT 
         
 
1.1 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Ninth Re port (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Labour on “Development Schemes for Handloom Sector.” 
 
1.2 The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and was also laid in Rajya Sabha on  20 
December 2005.  It contained 22 recommendations.  Replies of Government in respect of all the 
recommendations have been examined and are categorised as under: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 1,9,16,20,21 and 22. (Total 6 – Chapter-II). 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Co mmittee do not desire  to  pursue  in view 
of the  replies  of  the Government: 
 
Paragraph  Sl.  Nos. 2,4,6,7,10,12,13,17 and 19 (Total 9 - Chapter  III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Paragraph Sl.  Nos. 5,11,14,15 and 18 (Total 5 - Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim in nature: 
  
Paragraph Sl. Nos. 3,8,9,16,20,21 and 22 (Total 7- Chapter V)  
 
 
 Recommendations Nos.9,16,20,21 and 22 have been included in two Chapters (II & V) as 
the replies furnished by the Government are interim in nature alt hough these recommendations 
have been accepted by the Government. 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in respect of recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V for which only interim replies have been given by the Government 
may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. The Committee will now deal with recommendations/observations 
in respect of which the replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
A. Organisation of Handloom Workers  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5, Para 2.11) 
1.4 The Committee had noted that the Govern ment have come up with a new Scheme, 
namely “Integrated Handloom Cluster Development Scheme”. As per this Scheme, weavers who 
are organized as clusters, would get the assi stance directly from the Union Government. 
Although this Scheme is proposed to be implemented in 20 clusters, a diagnostic study has so far 
been conducted only in 5 clusters. The Committ ee, therefore, urged th e Ministry to take 
expeditious steps to implement this Scheme in  all the 20 clusters during 2005-2006 as planned 
and inform the Committee of the progress made in this regard. The Committee also 
recommended that all the handloom clusters in  the country should be covered by the Scheme 
within a definite period of time.  
 
1.5 In response to the above recommendation, the Ministry of Textiles in its action taken 
reply has stated as follows:- 
 
“In respect of 20 clusters under the Integr ated Handloom Cluster Development Scheme, 
it may be clarified that the names of the implementing agencies have since been finalized 
and the work in 19 clusters excepting the clus ter at Varanasi, is likely to commence by 
April 2006.  However, in respect of the cluster in Varanasi, it may be stated that the work 
has already commenced from October, 2005.  In  so far as extending the coverage of the 
scheme all over the country, it may be stated  that it is envisaged to develop 100 more 
clusters throughout the country in the 2
nd phase commencing from the next financial 
year”. 
 
1.6 During the examination of the subject “Development Schemes for 
Handloom Sector”, the Committee had noted that the efforts made by the 
Government to organize handloom workers during the last 50 years have not 
yielded the desired results.  In this regard, the Committee were informed that 
a new Scheme, namely, “Integrated Handloom Cluster Development 
Scheme” was launched by the Government to organize handloom weavers 
and to provide them directly the assistance of the Union Government.  This 
Scheme was proposed to be implemented in 20 clusters during the year 2005-
2006.  As the diagnostic study for the same was conducted only in five 
clusters, the Committee urged the Government to take expeditious steps to 
implement the Scheme in all the 20 clusters during 2005-2006.  In reply, the 
Government has stated that the names of the implementing agencies have 
been finalized and the work in 19 clusters is likely to commence by April 
2006.  As such, the Scheme was not implemented during 2005-2006 as 
planned.  The Committee take a serious view of such lapses in 
implementation of important Schemes and recommend that sincere efforts 
should be made by the Government to implement the Scheme in all the 20 
identified clusters and to start the actual functioning of these clusters without 
any further delay.  The Committee further recommended that all the 
handloom clusters in the country should be covered by the Scheme within a 

definite period of time.  In this regard, the Government replied that it is 
envisaged to develop 100 more clusters throughout  the country in the second 
phase commencing from the next financial year.  The Committee are not 
satisfied with this reply of the Government.  The Government should work 
out strenuously the implementation period of the such development schemes 
before their launching and it should be ensured that every scheme  is 
implemented within the stipulated time frame.  In many cases time-lapse 
becomes the main reason for failure of the schemes.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Government to chalk out a definite time frame for 
implementation of the Scheme in all the 100 clusters identified for the 
purpose and take concrete steps for the implementation of the scheme as per 
the schedule.  Information in this regard should be communicated to the 
Committee within a period of three months.  

Weavers Welfare Schemes 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para 3.41) 
1.7 The Committee were concerned to note that  Insurance Schemes were often either 
withdrawn or merged with new Schemes which leads to confusion in the minds of handloom 
weavers. For instance, Bunkar Bima Yojana was introduced in place of Group Insurance Scheme 
and the Committee were informed that policy hold ers of erstwhile Group Insurance Scheme are 
required to switch over to Bunkar Bima Yojana. Recently, a new Scheme named Mahatma 
Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY) has been launched and this would replace the Bunkar 
Bima Yojana. The Committee were of the view th at such mergers should be preceded by proper 
information to policy holders regarding merger. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all 
the policy holders of Group Insurance Scheme and Bunkar Bima Yojana should automatically be 
covered under the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY). Necessary instructions 
should be given to the Insurance Company in this regard. The Committee also recommended that 
the eligibility criteria  in regard to the upper age limit fo r coverage under MGBBY should be 
raised from 58 to 70 years as desired by the weavers.  
 
1.8 Reply of the Government to the above recommendation is as follows:- 
 
“The Bunkar Bima Yojana was introduced  in December 2003 in place of the 
earlier Group Insurance Scheme In the gui delines of the Bunkar Bima Yojana, it 
has been clearly mentioned that the earlier Group Insurance Scheme stands 
discontinued with the introduction of th e Bunkar Bima Yojana and that the 
weavers already covered under the Group In surance Scheme will be required to 
switch over to the Bunkar Bima Yojana. Similarly when the Mahatma Gandhi 
Bunkar Bima Yojana was introduced in September 2005, it has b een indicated in 
the guidelines that on intr oduction of Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana, the 
earlier Bunkar Bima Yojana stands discon tinued. Necessary instructions in this 
regard have already been circulated to all State Governments and the LIC.  The 
matter regarding extension of age lim it under the MGBBY have been taken up 
with the LIC.  The LIC has informed that since the scheme is approved by the 
Ministry of Finance, the matter regarding extension of age limit has been referred 
to the Ministry of Finance for modifications”.  
 
1.9 The Committee having been concerned over th e frequent withdrawal or merger of 
insurance schemes which lead to confusion in the minds of handloom weavers, had 
recommended that all the policy holders of Group Insurnace Scheme and Bunkar Bima 
Yojana should automatically be covered  under the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima 
Yojana.  In this regard, the Government has gi ven an evasive reply that the policy holders 
of the erstwhile Group Insurance Scheme wo uld be required to switch over to Bunkar 
Bima Yojana and that on introduction of  Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana, the 

earlier Bunkar Bima Yojana stands disconti nued.  The Committee are concerned to note 
that poor planning and the resultant evasive tendencies of the Government defeat the very 
purpose of the welfare schemes and the target  population are hardly benefited despite the 
huge expenditure being incurred by the Government on those schemes.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation  and urge the Ministry to take immediate 
steps to cover all the policy holders of Group Insurance Scheme and Bunkar Bima Yojana 
automatically under the Mahatama Gandhi  B unkar Bima Yojana.  In their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee had further reco mmended that the elig ibility criteria  
regarding the upper age limit for coverage under Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana 
should be raised from 58 to 70 years as desire d by the weavers.  In this regard it has been 
stated that the matter has been  referred to the Ministry of Finance as the Scheme was 
approved by that Ministry.  The Committee regret  to note that the Government could not 
dispose of this matter even after a period of three months.  This just demonstrates the lack 
of coordination between the Ministries in implementation of welfare schemes for the 
people.  The Committee expect  this matter to be taken up on a top priority with the 
Ministry of Finance and communicate the progress made to the Committee without any 
further delay. 

 
Research and Training Programmes  
Recommendation (Sl.No. 14, Para 3.53) 
 
1.10 The Committee were deeply con cerned to note that the Ministry  has repeatedly failed to 
achieve the targets fixed for a particular year under Integrat ed Handloom Training Programmes 
and that it could complete the programme targets in the subsequent years only. As a result, the 
remaining targets are carried forward to the next  Five Year Plan. The reasons put forth by the 
Ministry are : time taken to understand the Scheme by the States , invitation of proposals and 
their scrutiny, release of  funds and other ground preparations . On the whole, the Scheme could 
not be implemented in the first year of the Te nth Plan. The Committee were of the view that 
before launching a Scheme all th e ground prepara tions, including 
properly educating implementing agencies/State s should be done and recommended that the 
Ministry should take concrete st eps to achieve the target of im parting training to 1 lakh weavers 
within the Tenth Plan period.  
  
 REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
1.11 The then Prime Minister on 15 August 2002 had announced for skill up-gradation of one 
lakh weavers and artisans. This includes 90,000 handloom weavers and 10,000 handicraft 
artisans. Prior to announcement, training to  the handloom weavers was provided under the 
Decentralized Training Programme (DTP) with c overage of about 2,000 weavers per year by the 
Weavers’ Service Centres. In order to achie ve the targets as per announcement till the new 
scheme was approved, the targets under DTP Scheme were increased for the year 2002-2003 and 
2003-2004. Consequent upon announcement, a new Scheme “Integrated Handloom Training 
Project” (IHTP) was formulated  with a wider coverage and hi gher financial assistance towards 
raw material, stipend to the trainees, honorar ium to the master tr ainer, provision of 
documentation of designs, provision of hiring of shed etc. and the Scheme was approved in Dec. 
2003, 
i.e. in the third quarter of 2nd year of the Xth Plan. The target of training for the period Jan. 
– March 2004 was fixed to 4000 trainees. This target could not be implemented during the said 
quarter as it was a new Scheme, which required various steps lik e release of advertisement for 
inviting the proposals, scrutinisa tion of the proposals received, constitution of the State Level 
Training Committee (SLTC), convening the meeting of the SLTC, etc. and therefore, the target 
of 2003-04 under IHTP Scheme spilled over to  the year 2004-05. Similarly, some of the 
programmes sanctioned during the year 2004-05 spilled over to 2005-06 and so on.  The  
progress of  implementation   of IHTP Scheme is as follows: 
 
S.No. Year No. of beneficiaries 
covered 
1. 2002-03          5,575 
2. 2003-04          9,590 
3. 2004-05        16,540* 
4. 2005-06        12,740* 
 Total         44,445 
* Sanctioned 
 
However, efforts are made to achieve the maximum possible targets.   

 
1.12 The Committee were concerned to note that the Government had repeatedly failed to 
achieve the targets fixed for a particular ye ar under Integrated Handloom Training Project 
and had, therefore, recommended th at the Government should take concrete steps to achieve 
the target of imparting training to one lakh weavers within the Tenth Plan Period.  In the 
action taken reply, it has been stated that 15,165 persons were trained during the period 2002-
2004 and the Government sanctioned to tr ain further 29,280 persons during 2004-2006.  The 
details regarding the actual number of persons, who were trained during the period, have not, 
however, been provided.  It has been merely st ated that efforts are be ing made to achieve the 
maximum possible targets.  The Committee are deep ly concerned to note the lack of proper 
planning and steadfastness on the part of the Government made a target set by itself an 
unachievable one since the term of the Tenth Plan is on the way of completion.  The 
Committee, while reiterating their earlier recomme ndation of achieving th e target to impart 
training to one lakh weavers within the Tenth Plan Period, further recommend that a special 
cell comprising  senior officers should be set up in the Ministry to coordinate and achieve the 
target in this regard.  The steps taken in this regard and the progress achieved should be 
communicated to the Committee within three months. 
 

 
Marketing Promotion Programme 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 15, Para 3.68) 
1.13 The Committee had noted that marketing even ts such as National/Special Handloom Expos 
and District Level events provide great opportunity to handloom weavers to market their products in 
various parts of the country and that 83 Nationa l/Special Handloom Expos were organized during 
the period from 2002-2005 as against a target of only 56 Expos.  Howe ver, there were fluctuations 
in achieving the targets of District Level Events . The Committee were of the view that District 
Level Events (DLEs) would be easily accessible both to the weavers and consumers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended that reasons  for which DLEs could not be organised by 
implementing agencies should be found out and corrective steps taken to achieve targets in regard to 
DLEs. The Committee also recommended that the feasibility of providing mobile marketing 
facilities to the Primary Handloom  Weavers’ Cooperative Societie s be explored which would be 
very useful for them for marketing their products.     
 
 
1.14 In its action taken reply on the above recommenda tion, the Ministry of Textiles had stated as 
follows:- 
 
“The slight variation in achie ving the target under District Level Events (DLEs) is due to 
non-availability of ground at that point of time which leads to postponement of the DLEs in 
the next year.  Also the implementing agencies could not submit the Utilization Certificate 
for the previous events sanctioned.  The targ et of DLEs for the year 2005-2006 has been 
doubled making it to 300 as against 150 in the year 2004-2005 in view of the tremendous 
response received from the Dir ectors of Handlooms of the Stat es.  So far 290 events have 
been sanctioned to various states against the target of 300.  The target for National/Special 
Handloom Expos have also been increased from  37 in the year 2004-2005 to 50 in the year 
2005-2006.  So far 42 National/Special Handloom Expos have been sanctioned against the 
target of 50.  A decision is being taken to  sanction National Handloom Expos during the 
Melas where the congregation is more than 10 lakh people like Meerut Nauchandi (15 lakh), 
Allahabad Mag / Kumbh (17 lakh), Gwalior Trad e Fair (20 lakh), Sonepur Mela (50 lakh) 
and Rath Yatra Puri (10 lakh).  The concer ned State Governments should send the proposal 
for organizing Special Expos during the melas where the congregation of people is around in  
Kullu Dusshera (8 lakh), Pushkar Fair (5 lakh), Kota Dusshera (8 lakh), Pandarpur Yatra 
Mah (8 lakh).  As regards mobile marketing facilities, the possibilities are being explored”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.15 The Committee had noted that Marketing events such as National/Special Handloom 
Expos and District Level events (DLEs) provid e great opportunity to handloom weavers to 
market their products in various parts of the country.  As there were fluctuations in achieving 
the targets of District Level Events, the Committee recommended that reasons for which 
DLEs could not be organized by implementing agencies be found out and corrective steps 
taken to achieve the desired targets.  The Gov ernment had stated in the action taken reply 
that non-availability of ground and non-submission  of utilization certificates were the reasons 
for not achieving targets in this regard.  Mo reover, a target of 300 DLEs was set for 2005-
2006, out of which 290 were sanctioned by the Ce ntral Government.  The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Government because the Government could have easily solved 
the problem of non-availability of ground with it s numerous field offices and with the help of 
State Governments.  The Government  has not indicated how many DLEs were actually 
organized out of 290 DLEs sanctioned for 2005- 2006.  It is pertinent to note that the 
Government could not organize the sanctioned DLEs during the previous years due to non-
submission of utilization certificates by implementing agencies.  The Committee regret to find 
that implementation of many schemes are halted due to non-submission of utilization 
certificates and recommend that in case of non-performance of implementing agencies an 
alternative panel of implementing agencies should  be kept readily available so that the work 
could be entrusted to them to organize the ev ents as planned.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge  the Government to take effective steps to 
achieve targets with regard to DLEs and organize more number of Marketing Promotion 
Programmes such as DLEs/National/Special Handloom Expos in future. 
 
1.16 In their earlier recommendation, the Committee also recommended to explore the 
feasibility of providing mobile marketing facilities to the Primary Handloom Weavers’ 

Cooperative Societies.  In this regard, it ha s been replied that the possibilities are being 
explored.  While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee desire that the 
steps taken in this regard should be communicated to the Committee within three months. 
                                 Recommendation (Sl.No. 18, Para 3.71)  
1.17 The Committee had noted that certain export promotion measures have been contemplated 
to boost export of handlooms and to withstand the disadvantages of post Multi-Fibre arrangement 
period. The Committee expected that sincere efforts would be made to  implement measures such as 
projection of the handloom as unique, custom designed and niche pro duct besides conducting 
exclusive handwoven shows in leading international consumer centres and seeking tariff exemption 
for handloom products through WTO to boost handloom  exports, etc. The progress made in this 
regard should be intimated to the Committee.  
 
1.18 In reply to the above recommendation, the Minist ry of Textiles in its  action taken notes had 
stated as follows:- 
 
“As per the Foreign Trade Policy announced  on 8 April 2005 by the Hon’ble Union 
Minister for Commerce & Indus try, Government has decided to develop a Brand for 
Handlooms similar to the lines of ‘Woolmark’ and ‘Silkmark’, which will enable 
handloom products to develop a niche market with a distinct identity.  The Textile 
Committee has been entrusted with the task of development of brand for handlooms.  
Regarding the exclusive Handwoven Shows to  be conducted in l eading international 
consumer centres, HEPC is conducting Buyer-Seller Meets and shows periodically in 
different consumer markets of the world, which are basically exclusive events/shows 
of handloom products. As regards seeking tariff exemption for handloom products 
through WTO, the Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms has 
already taken up the issue with the Ministry  of Finance for allotment of separate 
International Trade Classification (Har monious System) (ITC (HS)) codes for 
handloom products.  Once that is through, ne cessary proposal for seeking tariff 
exemption will be initiated.   HEPC is also  in the process of submitting a proposal to 
UNCTAD seeking Generalised System of Preference (GSP) concessions for the 
handloom products”. 
 
1.19 The Committee had been informed earlier that certain export promotion measures 
were contemplated by the Government to boost export of handlooms and to withstand the 
disadvantages of Post Multi-Fibre arrangemen t period.  They had accordingly recommended 
that sincere efforts should be made to seek  tariff exemption for ha ndloom products through 
WTO to boost handloom exports.  The Government has replied in this regard that the office 
of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms has already taken up the issue with the 
Ministry of Finance for allotment of separate International Trade Classification (Harmonious 

System) [ITC (HS)] codes for handloom products and then the necessary proposal for seeking 
tariff exemption will be initiated.  The Committee regret to note that the issue of separate ITC 
(HS) code for handloom is pending with the Mini stry of Finance for quite some time now.  
This clearly indicates the lack of coordina tion between the Ministries on important 
development issues and the lack of sincerity of the Government to boost export of handlooms.  
The Committee, therefore, reiter ate their earlier recommendation  and urge the Ministry of 
Textiles to take up the issue with the Ministry of Finance at the Secretary level immediately 
for allotment of separate ITC (HS) code for handloom products.  The Committee also 
recommend that expeditious steps should be take n to seek Generalized System of Preference 
(GSP) concessions for handloom products from UNCTAD. 
 

CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para 1.7) 
2.1 The Committee find that the data on number of weavers and allied workers engaged in 
Handloom Sector cannot be taken as authentic as it is based on a Survey conducted almost a decade 
ago. The Working Group of Textile Industry for Xth Plan has shown the data as about 120 lakh 
weavers and allied workers. Th e Committee, therefore, recomme nd that a new Survey should be 
conducted to find out the number of handloom weavers and allied workers as they are now. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT  
 
Action has been initiated for conducting Census of handloom weavers. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated   23 March 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para 3.25) 
   
The Committee also feel that a comprehens ive review of the unit cost calculation of 
Rural/Urban Work-sheds and Rural/Urban Workshed-cum-Houses should be carried out and the 
scale of central assistance per unit should be enhanced accordingly.    
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Currently, the Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme is being evaluated alongwith the other 
Handloom Sectors Schemes. 
 
 The units cost as well as the Central Assi stance under the scheme will be reconsidered, 
based on the evaluation study.  
 
 
 (Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 16, Para 3.69) 
 
The Committee have also noted that there is a proposal to develop a Trade Mark namely 
“Handloom Mark” for handlooms on the lines of W oolmark. Such a trade mark would definitely 
enable handloom products to develop a niche market  with a distinct identity both in domestic and 
international markets. The Committee, therefore, recommend that expeditious steps should be taken 
by the Ministry to develop this trademark for handloom products.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 The emerging need for a brand identity of pan National and International importance in 
respect of Indian Handlooms has been recognized at various fora .  Brand adds in enhancing the 
economic value of the product and provides a focus around which product attributes and benefits 
can be articulated in a manner that  is attractive to the customer.  Towards this direction Creation of 
Handloom Mark for the handloom products has b een entrusted to the Textiles Committee of 
Ministry of Textiles which have prepared a concept paper alongwith logo, etc.   National Institute of 
Design (NID) is finalizing the logo. 
   
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.20, Para 3.85)   
The Committee have noted that a Scheme for reimbursement of one-time rebate of 10 per 
cent was given to handloom weavers on sale of handloom cloth from 2002-2003 to 2004-2005 so as 
to kick-start this employment-intensive industry and revive its production cycle. The Committee are 
of the view that this one-time special rebate helped the handloom weavers to compete with the 
organized sector and recommend th at the feasibility of extending this reimbursement of rebate 
should be examined and necessary relief should be  provided to handloom weavers to protect them 
from powerloom and mill sectors.               
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
The Government of India had received repres entations from various State Governments 
requesting for continuation of the Scheme specially  since the scheme not only helped in clearance 
of handloom stocks but kept the production cycle alive and sustaine d the employment of weavers in 
the Sector.  A proposal has therefore been moved to Ministry of Finance for continuation of the 
10% rebate Scheme for another period of 3 years. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 21, Para 3.86)  
  

The Committee are concerned to find that handl oom weavers are given credit at the rate of 
12 per cent which is same as that given to indust ries. They just could no t understand the logic of 
equating industries with poor handl oom weavers. The Committee consid er the high rate of interest 
as one of the reasons for failure  of cooperative societies in ha ndloom sector. Moreover, handloom 
sector is the second largest employment provider, next only to ag riculture, comprising several lakh 
handloom weavers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that expeditious steps should be taken to 
lower the interest on the credit given to Handloom Weavers.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 A proposal for reducing the rate of interest  on loans to the Handloom weavers is under 
consideration of the Government. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 22, Para 3.87)   
The Committee have learnt that there is a propos al to examine the possibility of waiving the 
interest on the loans availed of by the Handloom units which are having poor financial health. The 
Committee expect that the proposal  would be examined expediti ously and interest on handloom 
units with poor financial health is considered for waiver.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
A proposal for waiving the interest on lo ans availed by Handloom weavers is under 
consideration. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
 

CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHIC H THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Para 1.8) 
The Committee have noted that as many as  11 Development and Welfare Schemes for the 
Handloom Sector are being implemented by the Minist ry of Textiles. But, there is no perceptible 
improvement in the Handloom Sector as a whole or in the conditions of workers engaged in 
it. Handloom Sector is in no position to compete with the powerloom despite the protection given to 
handloom by reserving 11 articles to be produced only in this Sector. This  necessitates the total 
recast and a new fillip to revive it and make it viab le, competitive and self-s ufficient.  Instead of 
loading it with the multiplicity of Sc hemes and programmes and looking for adhoc solutions to 
problems plaguing the Handloom Sector, the Committee recommend that solutions should be found 
with regard to the streamlining of the producti on in Handloom Sector with high productivity and 
latest technologies, ensuring avai lability of sufficient working capital, widening of the product 
range and strengthening of market links. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT  
 
The production in the handloom sector had been registering a declining trend from the year 
2000-2001 to 2004-2005 mainly due to shifting of work force from handlooms to powerlooms. 
However, this declining trend had been arrested during the year 2004-2005 in that the production 
figure reached 5,704 million sq. mtrs. as compared to the figure of 5,493 million. sq. mtrs. in the 
year 2003-2004.  In the year 2005-2006 (April-December 2005), the production figure is reported to 
be of the order of 4,629 million sq. mtrs., which as compared to the corresponding figure of last 
year, is 10% higher.  
 
 In order to streamline production in the handloom sector with  high productivity  and latest 
technologies, the Integrated Handloom Training Programme is bei ng implemented as a Centrally 
sponsored scheme from December 2003.  The scheme  provides assistance for skill upgradation of 
the weavers in weaving, designing, dyeing tec hniques and marketing. This scheme therefore 
envisages enabling the weavers to produce and mark et high value and dive rsified quality products 
in keeping with the current trends in domestic and international market and providing the weavers 
with equipments.   Under the Mill Gate Price Scheme, hank yarn is provided to the handloom 
organizations at the Mill Gate price through the National Handloom Deve lopment Corporation.  
The National Centre for Designs helps to promote tr aditional and contemporary designs so as to be 
responsive to the rapidly changing marketing demand, thereby providing adequate growth 
opportunity to the handloom sector.  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
To improve the competitiveness of the handloom sector and to provide a sustainable path for 
growth and diversification in li ne with the emerging market tren ds, the Government has adopted a 

cluster development approach in the handloom s ector.  Accordingly, a new scheme named as 
“Integrated Handloom Developmen t Programme (IHCDP)” has been introduced from the current 
year 2005-2006.  Under the scheme 20 clusters  have been taken up for a comprehensive 
development in the first phase of the scheme. The objective of the scheme is to build capacity of the 
weavers to meet the challenges of the market and global competition in a sustainable and self reliant 
manner, facilitate collect ivization of handloom weavers to ta ke up input procurement, production, 
marketing and other support activ ities, provide common infrastructure and encourage convergence 
of assistance and support from various other sche mes and programmes of the Government so as to 
optimize resource utilization and enhance quality of life of handloom weavers.  
 
In order to strengthen the marketing links of handloom products directly to the customers 
and to obtain a direct feedback, the Government  of India is implementing marketing promotion 
programme.  The target of District Level Ev ents (DLEs) for the year 2005-2006 had been doubled 
making it to 300 as against 150 in the year 2004-2005 in view of th e tremendous response received 
from the Directors of Handlooms of the States. The target for National/Special Handloom Expos 
had also been increased from 37 in the year 2004-2005 to 50 in the year 2005-2006. 
 
 To help the handloom organizations and soci eties to sell their merchandise and augment 
their marketing efforts, the one  time 10% special rebate scheme was launched, which helped the 
handloom agencies to liquidate stocks of  approx. Rs.900.00 crore. The scheme had been 
discontinued w.e.f. 31.3.2005.  A proposal has already been initi ated for continuation of the scheme 
for a period of three years beginning 2006-2007.  
 
The Marketing Incentive component of Deen Daya l Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana is assistance 
to the implementing agency for preparing c onditions, which are conducive to marketing of 
handloom products. This is largely an incentive to the price in co mpetitiveness of handloom sector 
so that while on the one hand they are able to ma rginally reduce the price, on the other hand they 
invest in infrastructure so as to improve the pr oduction and productivity. The agency is expected to 
use this amount towa rds activities, whic h would attract consumers in order to gear up the overall 
sales of handloom goods.  
 
 The details of funds released under the Mark eting Incentive component of DDHPY is given 
as under:- 
                                                                                        (Rs. in lakh) 
Year Amount released 
2000-01    932.06 
2001-02 2,993.69 
2002-03 5,421.69 
2003-04 3,538.98 
2004-05 4,787.75 
2005-06(Upto 21.3.06) 5,073.24 
 
 
 
 
 
The Hon’ble Finance Minister  in his Budget Speech 2006-2007 has announced that cluster 
development approach will continue with 100 cluste rs to be added at a cost of Rs.50.00 crore in 
2006-2007, yarn depots will be established, a handloom  mark will be launched, scheme to be 

introduced to provide interest subsidy on term loan, provision for the handloom sector to be 
increased from Rs.195 crore to Rs.241 crore.  
 
             Working Capital requirements: 
 
            This issue is taken care of unde r the Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana (DDHPY) 
Scheme.  However, in September 2003 the Reserv e Bank of India had launched the Swarojgar 
Credit Card Scheme to provide adequate and timel y credit i.e. working capit al/or block capital or 
both to handloom weavers.  The term loan is provided to the tune of Rs.25,000/- @ interest 9%, 
repayable in 5 years.  Further, NABARD provi des concessional re-finance to the Weavers 
Cooperative Societies and State Handloom Cor porations through State Cooperative Banks 
(SCB)/District Cooperative Consumer Banks (DCCB) to meet their working capital requirement.   
 
 (Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para 2.10) 
 
The Committee note that the Scheme to revi talize apex cooperative  organizations under 
Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana has so far covered only tw o States. In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should also assist the other States in revitalizing their apex 
cooperative societies in a time- bound manner if the desired result s have been achieved under the 
Scheme in the two States. The Committee furthe r recommend that this Scheme should cover 
primary cooperative societies in addition to apex cooperative organizations.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
The strengthening of Handloom Organizatio n component of Deen Dayal Hathkargha 
Protsahan Yojana provides assist ance to revitalize the Apex Organi zations on the basis of viable 
proposals received from the concerne d State Government, which is re quired to share the assistance 
equally to that of Centre.  The viable projec ts received for revitalizing Andhra Pradesh State 
Handloom Weavers Cooperative Society, Tamil Nadu Handloom Weavers Cooperative Society, 
Karnataka State Handloom Corpor ation and U.P. State Handloom Corporation have since been 
sanctioned and Central assistance re leased to match the assistance released by the States.  Viable 
proposals received from other Stat es in conformity with the gui delines to revitalize the Apex 
Societies would be considered in a time bound manne r. In so far as Primary Weavers Cooperative 
Societies are concerned, it may be stated that si nce these are very large in number, it may not be 
feasible to consider revitaliz ing them under the Restructuring component of the Deen Dayal 
Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para 3.10) 
 
The Committee have noted that Deen Dayal Ha thkargha Protsahan Yojana was launched by 
the Ministry of Textiles to provide comprehensiv e assistance in an integrated manner during the 
Tenth Plan period. However, the performance of the Scheme has not so far been encouraging as 

only 1,004 projects were sanctioned out of 2,59 2 projects received dur ing 2003-2004 and only 418 
projects were sanctioned during 2004-05 upto 31 December 2004 out of 2,572 projects received 
under the Basic Input Component. The reasons put forth by the Mi nistry are non-provision of 
matching State share, non-submissi on of utilization certificate for the past releases of funds, non-
issue of certificate by banks about loan tie-up, etc. The Co mmittee find that the condition of 
providing matching share by the concerned State is not uniformly met by the States. Some States 
are proactive in this regard while others ar e not. As such, the Scheme has not been fully 
operational. The Committee take a serious view of this and recommend that immediate steps should 
be taken to review the Scheme comprehensively and re vise it particularly with regard to the aspect 
of matching share and also in the light of the fact that a fully Ce ntrally-Sponsored scheme, namely 
Integrated Handloom Cluster Development Scheme has been introduced though in a limited way on 
the pilot basis. The Scheme should be 100 per cent Centrally funded so as to make it fully 
operational in all States. The Committee are of the opinion that this compre hensive Scheme should 
not be confined to Tenth Plan period only particul arly when the vast majority of the weavers have 
not yet been benefited from the Scheme. They, th erefore, recommend that this Scheme should be 
extended beyond Tenth Plan period. 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
It may be mentioned that assistance under the Basic Input component of the Deen Dayal 
Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana is released only towards the projects that are found in conformity 
with the guidelines of the scheme.  During the year 2004-2005, assistance was released towards 838 
projects.   
 
 It is relevant to mention fu rther that, besides assistance to wards Basic Input components of 
the scheme, assistance is also released in the form of Marketing Incentive which helps large number 
of weavers cooperative societies in marketing of handloom produc ts and to gear up production 
conducive to market requirements.  The performa nce under this component since inception of the 
scheme has been as under:- 
 
                                                                                        (Rs. in lakh) 
Year Amount released 
2000-01    932.06 
2001-02 2,993.69 
2002-03 5,421.69 
2003-04 3,538.98 
2004-05 4,787.75 
2005-06 (Upto 21.3.2006) 5,073.24 
 
 
  During first three years of the X Plan, i.e; 2002-2003 to 2004-2005, 15,53,998 
weavers have been benefited under Basic Input and Marketi ng Incentive components of the 
Deendayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana. 
 
However, the State Governments are impressed upon from time to time the need to 
implement the scheme extensively so that the be nefit of the scheme reaches to the weavers.  
However, sharing of assistance by the States ha s been the major bottleneck and impediment in 
implementation of the scheme.  It is with this in view that the Integrated Handloom Cluster 
Development Scheme is being implemented under wh ich assistance will be released directly to the 

implementing agencies in the form of 100% Central Grant for development of 20 handloom clusters 
throughout the country in the first phase on a pilot basis.  However, as announced in the Budget for 
the year 2006-2007, development of 100 more clusters  will be taken up in the coming years as a 
100% Centrally Aided Scheme. 
 
 (Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para 3.17)  
  
The Committee have noted that the Mill Gate Price Scheme was introduced in 1992-93 to 
ensure regular supply of yarn to weavers at prices at which yarn is available at Mill Gate. However, 
the Scheme has not achieved the desired results even  after a decade of its implementation as it has 
covered only 15 per cent of the handlooms in the country so far. The reason given by the Ministry 
for the poor coverage of the Scheme is supply of yarn to weavers mainly through cooperatives. The 
Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and are of the opinion that the steps taken 
by the Ministry were not adequate enough to increase the coverage  of the Scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that immediate steps should be  taken by the Ministry to extend the scope of 
the Scheme to the weavers outside the Cooperative fold besides encouraging individual weavers or 
a group of individual weavers to avail of the ya rn supply through Mill Gate Price Scheme. More 
yarn depots should be opened near Handloom Weaving Clusters as far as possible or at places from 
where weavers could easily avail of the supply of yarn. Availabi lity of a sufficient number of 
mobile vans may be ensured to cater to the yarn needs of the weavers. As the Cooperative concept 
has failed to deliver the desired resu lts, other alternatives should be  tried to make the Scheme more 
effective. Cooperatives are engaged in the Sche me on the recommendations of State Handloom 
Directors. Hence, steps should be taken to ensure that each of the State Handloom Directors is held 
responsible to own the responsibilities for the fa ilure of Co-operatives recommended by them. The 
Committee also find that the publicity being given to the Scheme is not enough and recommend that 
the benefits of the Scheme should be widely publicized and steps taken for the speedy 
implementation of the recommendations of National Productivity Council.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Mill Gate Price Scheme is implemented through National Handloom Development 
Corporation  (NHDC).  Following are eligible agencies:- 
 
(a)  All handloom organizations of National/ State/ Regional/ Primary level 
 
(b) Handloom Development Centres. 
 
(c)  Handloom producers/ exporters/ manufact urers registered with HEPC/ any other 
export promotion council under Mini stry of Textiles/Director of 
Industries/Handlooms of States/UTs. 

 
(d)  All approved export hous es/ trading houses/star tradin g houses for production of 
handloom items. 
 
(e)  Members of recognized/appr oved handloom associations. 
 
(f)  NGOs fulfilling CAPART norms 
 
(g)  Any other agency approved by the Office of the Development Commissioner (Handlooms), 
Ministry of Textiles, Government of India. 
 
It is estimated that currently only 15% weaver s are organized in cooperative fold.  Other 
weavers are either working thorough Master Weavers system or independently. 
 
The weavers outside the cooperative  fold are already e ligible to avail of the benefit of the 
Mill Gate Price Scheme through members of recognized/approved asso ciation, NGOs fulfilling 
CAPART norms.   
 
The National Handloom Development Corporat ion has already allowed operation of 169 
depots through State Handloom Corporations, Apex B odies, Weavers Societies and Exporters, etc.   
Presently, they cover 65 handloom clusters ha ving more than 1,000 looms and 10 clusters having 
1,000 looms. More yarn depots would be opened near Handloom Weaving clusters as for as 
possible or at places from where weavers could easily avail of the supply of yarn.  
 
Previously NHDC used to supply yarn to the eligible agencies only after recommendation of 
Director of Handlooms but now NHDC has been auth orized to supply yarn  to the weavers even 
without recommendation of Director of Handlooms of the State Govern ment to facilitate the supply 
of yarn to the weavers outside the cooperative fold.  
 
The benefits available under the Scheme ar e being widely publicized by NHDC through 
focused advertisement in Newspapers. 
 
 
Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 10, Para 3.40)   
The Committee have noted that Bunkar Bima Yojana was launched  in 2003 to provide 
enhanced Life Insurance coverage of Rs.50,000/- in  the case of natural death and Rs.80,000/- in the 
case of accidental death. A target has been set to  cover one-third of all the handloom workers under 
the Scheme by 2007. The Committee recommend that an action plan should be chalked out and 
concrete and vigorous steps shoul d be taken to cover one-third of handloom weavers under the 
Scheme by 2007 and to cover all the weavers before the end of next Five Year Plan.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
In pursuance of the budget announcement 2005, ma de by the Hon’ble Fi nance Minister, the 
Government of India has introduced a scheme ca lled Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY) 

during the year 2005-06 in place of the earlier Bunkar Bi ma Yojana.  The Government of India has already 
written to various State Governments and Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) to maximize the 
coverage of the weavers under the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY).  The Secretary 
(Textiles) has also written a letter dated 13 February 2006 to all States Chief Secretaries to instruct the field 
machinery to educate the weavers about  the benefits of the scheme and ta ke all possible steps to enroll the 
maximum number of handloom weavers under the scheme.   
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para 3.42)   
 
The Committee have also noted that onl y 26,814 weavers and 72,198 weavers were covered 
under Health Package Scheme during 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 respectively. A target for covering 
3.2 lakh weavers each in the year 2005-2006 a nd 2006-2007 has been set under a new Health 
Insurance Scheme which is likely to be launche d soon. The Committee expect that concrete steps 
would be taken to fulfill the targets duri ng 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 as e nvisaged under the new 
Scheme. The Committee should be informed of the progress made in this regard at quarterly 
intervals. The Committee further recommend that suitable steps should be taken to cover all the 
beneficiaries of the existing Health Package Scheme under the proposed Health Insurance Scheme 
in a time-bound manner.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Government of India has already introduced the Health Insurance Scheme, the guideline of 
which have been circulated to all State Governments on 9 August 2005.   The Government of India has 
already written various State Governments to maximize the coverage of the weavers under the Health 
Insurance Scheme (HIS).  The Secret ary (Textiles) has also wr itten a letter dated 13 February 2006 to all 
States Chief Secretaries to instruct the field machin ery to educate the weavers about the benefits of the 
scheme and take all possible steps to enroll the maximum number of handloom weaver under the scheme.   
 
As regards coverage of all the beneficiaries of  the Health Package Scheme under the Health 
Insurance Scheme, it may be stated that all those weavers who deposit their share of premium  @Rs.200/- 
per annum will be covered under the Health Insurance Scheme.  The coverage wi ll be available for the 
weaver his pause and two children.  
  
During 2005-2006 (upto 17 March 2006), 2,40,868 weav es have been covered under Health 
Insurance Scheme (HIS).   More number of weavers are being covered under the scheme.  
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 13, Para 3.52) 
 
The Committee have noted that Research an d Development in the handloom sector is 
essential to enable them compete with other sect ors. However, it is noted that fund allocation for 
Research and Development is hardly sufficient to meet the needs of Research and Development 
efforts in the Handloom Sector especially for suggesting measures for cost reduction in the 

production of handlooms, exclusive design de velopment and development of superior 
handlooms. The Committee, therefore, recommend th at the Ministry should take more proactive 
steps for accelerating Research and Development efforts in Handloom Sector including 
enhancement of fund allocation and engagement of  reputed institutions lik e Indian Institutes of 
Technology to find out ways and means for the de velopment of Handloom Se ctor. More IITs and 
other Technical Institutions of repute should be  requested to introduce the Textiles Technology as 
one of the courses keeping in view the ground situation of Textiles Industry particularly 
Handlooms.    
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Research and Development Scheme has b een implemented in the handloom sector to 
develop means and ways for cost reduction in the production of handlooms, exclusive design 
development and development of superior handloom s.  90 projects have been undertaken under the 
Research and Development Scheme since 1996-1997.  The implementing agencies inter alia, 
include the following agencies/ institutions: 
 
Sl 
No.  
Name of the Institution  Details of Project undertaken  
1 Textile & Engg. Institute, 
Ichalkaranji, Maharashtra 
‘Development of an Instrument for Identification 
of Handloom Woven fabrics for its origin’  
(in the year 1998-99 ) 
2 ATIRA, Ahemdabad.  One day workshop on Development of Computer 
aided Design Package 
( in 1996-97) 
3 NITRA, Ghaziabad Development of  cost effective model process 
house for handloom sector (in 1997-98 ) 
4 NITRA, Ghaziabad Supply and inst allation of Effluent treatment 
Plant at Orissa & Tamilnadu 
( in 1998-99 ) 
5 SITRA, Coimbatore Design & De velopment of High Production 
Handloom  
(in 2002-03) 
6 Regional Research Laboratory 
and WSC, Bhubneshwar. 
Natural dyes from plant resources in 2002-03 
7 SITRA, Coimbatore Design & Development of a Jacquard Card 
repeating machine (in 2002-03) 
8 IIT, Delhi Development of Sizing Techniques for 
Handloom weaving (in 2002-03 ) 
9 NITRA, Ghaziabad Design and Deve lopment of an ETP suitable for 
erratic discharge and its installation at WSC, 
Delhi. (In 2003-04) 
10 Malaviya Institute of 
Technology, Jaipur.  
Design and Development of low built –wider 
width handloom. (2004-05) 
11 Orissa University, College of 
Home Science, Bhubneshwar. 
Revival and Development of Ethnic textiles of 
Dhalpatra area of Orissa. (2004-05) 
12 IIT, Delhi Design & development of Electromagnetic punch 
cards in conventional handlooms (in 1998-99 ) 
 

 A sum of Rs.109.18 lakh has been released to various implementing agencies during the 
years 2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005. A provision of Rs.26.50 lakh ha s been made in R.E. 
2005-06 and so far an amount of Rs.19.13 lakh has been released and the balance would be released 
during the current financial year.   The fund allocation for Research & Development Scheme will be 
enhanced as per requirement from time to time.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.17, Para 3.70) 
 
The Committee note that export of handloom products has shown an increasing trend over 
the years. However, this increase is lopsided. Wh ile the export to the continents of Europe and 
America is on very high side, the export to the c ountries in the continents of Asia, Africa, Latin 
America and Oceania is not appreciable. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that export 
promotion measures should be augmented in such untapped markets which would boost handloom 
exports to those markets. In this regard, the Committee further re commend that apart from 
participation in potential fairs, Buyer-Seller-meets should be regular ly arranged with the help of 
Indian Missions abroad to tap the potential market s for handlooms. The Committee also expect that 
the Government would help exporters of handlooms through bilateral trade ta lks with the countries 
concerned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 
The Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms continues to focus on the 
growth of exports in Asia, Africa, Latin Amer ica and Oceania while su staining the established 
markets of Europe and America, by way of par ticipation in various international fairs and 
exhibitions and organising Buyer-Se ller-Meets.  Japan and Australia have emerged as very strong 
markets for the Indian handloom goods and shown a steady increase over the years.  The exports to 
Asian Continent had increased by 30.33% in value terms during 2002-03 compared to the previous 
year.  The exports to the major countries in Asian Continent are furnished below: 
  
        (Value in Rs. Lakhs) 
2001-02 2002-03 Country 
Fabrics Made-
ups 
Total Fabrics Made-
ups 
Total 
%age 
change 
Japan 984.21 8899.93 9883.25 942.67 9342.87 10285.54 4.07 
UAE 1796.34 2218.67 4015.01 3218.97 2668.61 5887.58 46.64 
Saudi 
Arabia 
601.84 916.55 1518.39 732.87 1554.84 2287.71 50.67 
Malaysia 1364.72 573.80 1938.52 1093.63 1203.48 2297.11 18.50 

Israel 281.98 1262.43 1544.41 1191.54 964.25 2155.79 -39.59 
Indonesia 501.36 148.71 650.07 1431.01 192.27 1623.28 149.71 
  
Japan, one of the largest importers of handlooms, had also shown 4.07% 
increase.   
  
Buyer-Seller Meets and participatio n in international events have  also been organised through 
Handloom Export Promotion Council (HEPC) in Asian, African, Latin Am erican and Oceania 
countries during the years 2003-04, 2004-2005 and 2005-2006. 
  
2003-2004: 
  
Buyer-Seller Meets Abroad: 
  
14 India Home Furnishing Fair (BSM) & 3 rd India Handicrafts and Gift  Fair held at Tokyo, Japan 
during 27 to 29 May 2003.  
Buyer – Seller  Meets in Australia and New Zealand during 21 to 29 July 2003.  
  
 
Exhibitions Abroad: 
  
Made in India Show held at Beijing, China during 16 to 19 October 2003.  
Mini India Promotion held at Cape Town, South Africa during 4 to 6 November 2003.  
Incredible India Show held at Kuala  Lumpur, Malaysia during 2 to 6 December 2003.  
Exintex Fair, Puebla City, Mexico, 9 to 12 March 2004 
  
  
2004-2005: 
  
Buyer-Seller Meets Abroad: 
  
Buyer Seller Meet at Auckland, Newzealand during 25 to 27 May 2004.  
Buyer Seller Meet in Chile during 4 to 6 November 2004.  
  
Exhibitions Abroad: 
  
15th  India Home Furnishing Fair & 4 th India Handicrafts & Gift Fair  at Osaka, Japan during 18 to 
20 May 2004.  
Impex TCF Fair held at Melbourne, Australia during 18 to 20 May 2004.  
Eveteks-2004 held at Istanbul, Turkey during 19 to 23 May 2004.  
Apparel, Textile, Footwear 7 Machinery Trade E xhibition held at Cape Town, South Africa during 
2 to 4 November 2004.  
  
2005-2006: 
  
Hongkong Houseware Fair held at Hongkong during 21 to 24 April 2005.  
16th India Home Furnishing Fair & 4 th India Handicrafts & Gift Fa ir at Tokyo, Japan during 18 to 
20  May 2005.  
Impex TCF Fair held at Melbourne, Australia during 7 to 9 June 2005.  

TITAS-2005 held at Taipei, Taiwan from 29 September to 1 October 2005.  
ATF – 2005 held at Cape Town, South Africa, 2 to 4 November 2005.  
Fatex-2005, held at Paris, France, 8 to 10 November 2005. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para 3.84)   
 
The Committee have noted that at present 11 textile articles have been reserved for 
exclusive production by handloom weavers to pr otect them from the encroachment of the 
Powerloom and Mill Sectors unde r the Handloom (Reservation of Articles of Production) Act, 
1985. This reservation was done in 1985 and after th at no review of the same has been done so 
far. An Advisory Committee has been constituted under Section 4(1) of the Act to look into the 
various aspects including the demands for additi on of more articles under reserved category of 
articles and to submit its recommendations to the Government for its consid eration. However, no 
such demand have been received from the indus try. The Committee are of the view that this 
Advisory Committee can suo-moto determine the nature of any articl e or class of articles that may 
be reserved for exclusive production by handloom s as per the provisions of the Act. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the textile articles reserved  for Handlooom Sector should be 
comprehensively reviewed and necessary steps taken to reserve more textile  articles for Handloom 
Sector so as to protect it from powerloom and mill sectors.  
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Government of India promulgated the Handloom (Reservation of Articles for 
Production) Act, 1985 with a view to protect the in terest of the handloom weavers in the country 
from the encroachment of the powerloom and mill sector on their livelihood.  Under the Act, 
protection to the handloom sector was extended by way of reserving certain textile articles, which 
were traditionally being produced on handlooms. 
 
 At present, 11 textiles articles or class of articles are reserved for exclusive production on 
handloom which were notified vide S.O. 557(E) dated 26 July 1996 and amendments thereto vide 
S.O. 408(E) dated 2 June 1999 and 405(E) dated 25 April 2004.  The items are as under: 
 
1. Saree; 
2. Dhoti; 
3. Towel, Gamcha and Angawastaram; 
4. Lungi; 
5. Khes, Bed Sheet, Bedcover, counterpane, furnishing (including tapestry, upholstery); 
6. Jamakkalam Durry or Durret; 
7. Dress Material; 
8. Barrack Blanket, Kambal or Kamblies; 
9. Shawl, Loi, Muffler, Pankhi, etc.; 
10. Woollen Tweed 
11. Chaddar, Mehala/Phanek.  
 

PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
S.N. Physical progress 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-2005 2005-2006 
1. Targets for Powerloom 
Inspections 
1,50,000 1,64,250 1,82,280 1,91,387 
2. Number of Powerlooms 
inspected 
1,77,636 1,79,683 1,88,588 1,62,793 
3. Number of FIRs Lodged 30 13 10 32 
4. Convictions 33 15 7 10 
 
The last meeting of the Advi sory Committee constituted under the section 4 of the Handlooms 
(Reservation of Articles for production) Act, 1985 was convened under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Textiles) on 17.11.2005 to review the reservation order and to advise the Government on 
the articles to be reserved under the Act.  The Committee has not recommended for any revision in 
number of articles presently reserved. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para 2.11) 
 The Committee also note that the Government  have come up with a new Scheme, namely 
“Integrated Handloom Cluster De velopment Scheme”. As per this Scheme, weavers who are 
organized as clusters, would get the assistance di rectly from the Union Government. Although this 
Scheme is proposed to be implemented in 20 clusters, a diagnostic study ha s so far been conducted 
only in 5 clusters. The Committee ur ge the Ministry to take expeditious steps to implement this 
Scheme in all the 20 clusters during 2005-2006 as  planned and inform the Committee of the 
progress made in this regard. The Committee also recommend that all the handloom clusters in the 
country should be covered by the Scheme within a definite period of time.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 In respect of 20 clusters under the Integrat ed Handloom Cluster Development Scheme, it 
may be clarified that the names of the implemen ting agencies have since been finalized and the 
work in 19 clusters excepting th e cluster at Varanasi, is likel y to commence by April 2006.  
However, in respect of the cluster in Varanasi , it may be stated that  the work has already 
commenced from October 2005. 
 
 In so far as extending the coverage of the scheme all over the country, it may be stated that it 
is envisaged to develop 100 more clusters throughout the country in the 2nd phase commencing from 
the next financial year. 

 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23rd March, 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11, Para 3.41)   
The Committee are concerned to note that Insu rance Schemes are often either withdrawn or 
merged with new Schemes which leads to conf usion in the minds of handloom weavers. For 
instance, Bunkar Bima Yojana was introduced in place of Group Insurance Scheme and the 
Committee were informed that policy holders of erstwhile Group Insurance Scheme are required to 
switch over to Bunkar Bima Yojana. Recently, a new Scheme named Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar 
Bima Yojana (MGBBY) has been launched and th is would replace the Bunkar Bima Yojana. The 
Committee are of the view that such mergers should be preceded by proper information to policy 
holders regarding merger. The Committee, therefor e, recommend that all the policy holders of 
Group Insurance Scheme and Bunkar Bima Yoja na should automatically be covered under the 
Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana (MGBBY). Necessary instructions should be given to the 
Insurance Company in this regard. The Committee al so recommend that the eligibility criteria in 
regard to the upper age limit for coverage under MGBBY should be raised from 58 to 70 years as 
desired by the weavers.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Bunkar Bima Yojana was introduced in December 2003 in place of the earlier Group 
Insurance Scheme In the guidelines  of the Bunkar Bima Yojana, it has been clearly mentioned that 
the earlier Group Insurance Scheme stands discon tinued with the introduc tion of the Bunkar Bima 
Yojana and that the weavers already covered under the Group Insurance Scheme will be required to 
switch over to the Bunkar Bima Yojana. Similarly when the Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana 
introduced in September 2005, it has been indicat ed in the guidelines th at on introduction of 
Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana, the earlie r Bunkar Bima Yojana stands discontinued. 
Necessary instructions in this regard have alread y been circulated to all State Governments and the 
LIC. 
 
    The matter regarding extension of age lim it under the MGBBY have been taken up with the 
LIC.  The LIC has informed that since the sche me is approved by the Mini stry of Finance, the 
matter regarding extension of age limit has been  referred to the Ministry of Finance for 
modifications.  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23rd March, 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 14, Para 3.53) 
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the Ministry has repeatedly failed to 
achieve the targets fixed for a particular year und er Integrated Handloom Training Programmes and 
that it could complete the programme targets in  the subsequent years only. As a result, the 
remaining targets are carried forward to the next  Five Year Plan. The reasons put forth by the 
Ministry are : time taken to understand the Scheme by the States, invitation of proposals and their 
scrutiny, release of funds and other ground prepara tions. On the whole, the Scheme could not be 
implemented in the first year of the Tenth Pl an. The Committee are of the view that before 
launching a Scheme all the ground preparations, including properly educating implementing 

agencies/States should be done an d recommend that the Ministry should take concrete steps to 
achieve the target of imparting training to 1 lakh weavers within the Tenth Plan period. The 
Committee also recommend that work loss of weavers should be continuously compensated by an 
appropriate amount of stipend during the trai ning period. The stipend amount should also be 
reviewed periodically and enhanced, so as to attract more weavers for training.  
 
 REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The then Prime Minister on 15 August 2002 had announced for skill up-gradation of one 
lakh weavers and artisans. This  includes 90,000 handloom weavers and 10,000 handicraft artisans. 
Prior to announcement, training to the handloo m weavers was provided under the Decentralized 
Training Programme (DTP) with coverage of about 2,000 weavers per year by the Weavers’ Service 
Centres. In order to achieve th e targets as per announ cement till the new scheme was approved, the 
targets under DTP Scheme were increased for the year 2002-2003 and 2003-2004. Consequent upon 
announcement, a new Scheme “Integrated Handloom  Training Project” was formulated with a 
wider coverage and higher financial assistance towards raw material, stipend to the trainees, 
honorarium to the master trainer, provision of documentation of designs, provision of hiring of shed 
etc. and the Scheme was approved in Dec. 2003, i.e. in the third qtr. of 2nd year of the Xth Plan. The 
target of training for the period Jan. – March 2004 was fixed to 4,000 trainees. This target could not 
be implemented during the said quarter as it was a new Scheme, which required various steps like 
release of advertisement for inviting the propos als, scrutinisation of the proposals received, 
constitution of the State Level Training Committ ee (SLTC), convening the meeting of the SLTC 
etc. and therefore, the target of 2003-2004 under IHTP Scheme spilled over to the year 2004-2005. 
Similarly, some of the programmes sanctioned during the year 2004-2005 spilled over to 2005-2006 
and so on.  The  progress of  implementation   of IHTP Scheme is as follows: 
 
S.No. Year No. of beneficiaries covered 
1. 2002-2003 5,575 
2. 2003-2004 9,590 
3. 2004-2005 16,540* 
4. 2005-2006 12,740* 
 Total 44,445 
* Sanctioned 
 
 However, efforts are made to achie ve the maximum possible targets.   
 
 The wage loss during the training to the trainee under “IHTP”  is compensated by way of 
paying them ‘Stipend’ of Rs. 100/- per day while the Master Trainer is paid an Honorarium of Rs. 
200/- per day. 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para 3.68) 
 
The Committee note that marketing events su ch as National/Special Handloom Expos and 
District Level events provide gr eat opportunity to handloom weaver s to market their products in 
various parts of the country and that 83 Nationa l/Special Handloom Expos were organized during 

the period from 2002-2005 as against a target of only 56 Expos. This shows the overwhelming 
response of the weavers to such marketing events. However, there are fluctuations in achieving the 
targets of District Level Events . The Committee are of the view that District Level Events (DLEs) 
would be easily accessible both to the weavers and the consumers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that reasons for which DLEs could not  be organised by implementing agencies should 
be found out and corrective steps taken to achieve targets in regard to DLEs. The Committee also 
recommend that fund allocation for such marketi ng events should be enhanced and the number of 
National/Special Handloom Expos and District Level Events should be increased as per the need of 
a particular area. The Committee further recomme nd that the feasibility of providing mobile 
marketing facilities to the Primary Handloom Weav ers’ Cooperative Societ ies be explored which 
would be very useful for them for marketing their products.     
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 The slight variation in achi eving the target under District Level Events (DLEs) is due to 
non-availability of ground at that point of time which leads to postponement of the DLEs in the next 
year.  Also the implementing agencies could not submit the Utilization Certif icate for the previous 
events sanctioned. 
 
 The target of DLEs for the year 2005-2006 ha s been doubled making it to 300 as against 150 
in the year 2004-2005 in view of the treme ndous response received from the Directors of 
Handlooms of the States.  So far 290 events have  been sanctioned to vari ous States against the 
target of 300. 
 
 The target for National/Special Handloom Expos have also been increased from 37 in the 
year 2004-2005 to 50 in the year 2005-2006.  So far 42 National/Special Handloom Expos have 
been sanctioned against the target of 50. 
 
 A decision is being taken to sanction Nati onal Handloom Expos during the Melas where the 
congregation is more than 10 lakh people like Meerut Naucha ndi (15 lakh), Allahabad Mag / 
Kumbh (17 lakh), Gwalior Trade Fa ir (20 lakh), Sonepur Mela (50 lakh) and Rath Yatra Puri (10 
lakh) {Source: Impact Communications}. 
 
 The concerned State Governments should send  the proposal for orga nizing Special Expos 
during the melas where the congregation of people is around in  Kullu Dusshera (8 lakh), Pushkar 
Fair (5 lakh), Kota Dusshera (8 lakh), Pandarpur Yatra Mah (8 lakh).   
  
This Office is proposing to enhance the fund al location of these events during the XI Plan 
period. 
 
 As regards mobile marketing facilities, the possibilities are being explored. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.18, Para 3.71) 
The Committee further note that certain export promotion measures have been contemplated 
to boost export of handlooms and to withstand the disadvantages of post Multi-Fibre arrangement 
period. The Committee expect that si ncere efforts would be made to implement measures such as 
projection of the handloom as unique, custom designed and niche pro duct besides conducting 
exclusive handwoven shows in leading international consumer centres and seeking tariff exemption 
for handloom products through WTO to boost handloom  exports, etc. The progress made in this 
regard should be intimated to the Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
As per the Foreign Trade Policy announced on 8 April 2005 by the Hon’ ble Union Minister 
for Commerce & Industry, Government has decided to develop a Brand for Handlooms similar to 
the lines of “Woolmark” and “Silk mark”, which will enable handl oom products to develop a niche 
market with a distinct identity.  The Textile Committee has been entrusted with the task of 
development of brand for handlooms.  Regardin g the exclusive Handwoven Shows to be conducted 
in leading international consumer centres, HEPC is conducti ng Buyer-Seller Meets and shows 
periodically in different consumer markets of the world, which are basically exclusive events/shows 
of handloom products. As regards seeking tariff  exemption for handloom products through WTO, 
the Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms has already taken up the issue with 
Ministry of Finance for allotment of separate IT C (HS) codes for handloom products.  Once that is 
through, necessary proposal for seeking tariff exemp tion will be initiated.   HEPC is also in the 
process of submitting a proposal to UNCTAD seeking GSP concessions for the handloom products. 
 
 
 (Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 

CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.3, Para 2.9)   
 
 The Committee has noted that the Handloom Sect or is a highly decentralized and dispersed 
sector.  Efforts have been made to organize handloom weavers into  Cooperatives during the last 50 
years.  However, these efforts proved dismal failures as only 17 per cent of the handloom weavers 
could be brought under the Cooperative fold so fa r.  Moreover, many of the Cooperatives are 
defunct due to inaction on the part of the Union Governments to fi nd out the root cause of their 
failure and to take timely and suitable correctiv e steps for their success.  Since assistance under 
many of the Central Schemes is channelised thr ough Cooperatives, the Committee are but skeptical 
about the percolation of intended benefits of Central Schemes to weavers when the Cooperatives are 
becoming increasingly defunct, more so when on ly 17 per cent of the weavers are covered under 
cooperative fold.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should have a reappraisal 
of the role of Cooperatives in the Handloom Sector  as to how Cooperatives can revive this Sector 
particularly in the light of the fact that only 17 per cent of the weavers have been brought under its 
fold despite such Herculean efforts.  Alternative strategies may be chalked out for revival of the 
Sector.  In this regard, the Committee further recommend that the Ministry should apprise the 
Department of Cooperation about the problems be ing faced by Cooperative Handloom Societies 
and take necessary corrective step s urgently in coordination with the State Governments and the 
Department of Cooperation to revitalize and restructure the cooperative societies on priority basis. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 The recommendations/observations of the Committee have been communicated to the 
Commissioner/Director In-charge of  Handlooms & Textiles of all States, eliciting their comments. 
Further, to improve the coverage of weavers outside the cooperativ e fold, scope of the Schemes is 
widened for their implementation by NGOs, Self Help Groups, etc. The Govt. has already 
introduced Schemes called Integrated Handloo m Cluster Development Programme, Mahatma 
Gandhi Bunkar Bima Yojana, Health Insurance Sche me, Integrated Handloom Training Project etc. 
Under these schemes, all weavers, including th ose within and outside the cooperative fold are 
covered. Further, in order to st rengthen the State Handloom Corporat ions and Apex Societies, the 
Govt. has provided assistance  to four Agencies, 
i.e. UP Handloom Corporation, APCO, Cooptex 
and Karnatka Handloom Development Corporation, wh ich have large coverage of weavers in their 
fold and extend the benefits of Schemes to them. 
 
  
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March  2006) 

Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para 3.24)   
 
The Committee note with concern the impl ementation of Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme 
at a tardy pace by the Ministry which aims at providing suitable work place and dwelling units for 
creating better working environment to the handloom weavers. Only 24 viable project proposals 
have been received during the last two years, out of which 20 project proposals have been 
sanctioned. The reasons advanced by the Ministry  that the State Govern ments submit the proposals 
which are not complete or not as per guidelin es of the Scheme are not acceptable to the 
Committee. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry is not serious enough to implement the 
Scheme and as a result the budgetary allocati on has been reduced from Rs.17 crore for 2004-2005 
to Rs.12 crore for 2005-2006. While allocation for the No rth-Eastern States has been kept at Rs.7 
crore for the last three years, th e allocation for the rest  of India has been reduced to a mere Rs.5 
crore for 2005-2006 which would be hardly sufficient to meet the requirements  of the majority of 
the States. The Committee take a serious view of the pace of implementation of this Scheme and 
recommend that immediate steps should be taken by the Ministry to properly educate the State 
machinery about the features of the Scheme. The gui delines of the Scheme are also required to be 
reviewed on a priority basis and amendments carri ed out to facilitate the States to adhere to 
them. The Committee also consider it improper to release funds only on the basis of viable 
proposals submitted by the States. They recommend th at a State-wise assessment of need of funds 
should be carried out for effective implementation of the Scheme and funds should be allocated as 
per the need of each State.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERMENT 
 
The Ministry of Textiles is serious about the implementation of the Workshed-cum-Housing 
Scheme and is making all efforts for its proper implementation.  The State Governments have been 
requested from time to time to submit viable pr oposals under the Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme as a 
result of which during the current financial year 2005-2006, till 16 March 2006, 34 proposals from the State 
Governments have been received.  Out of which 24 proposals have been sanctioned on the basis of their 
viability.  A sum of Rs.1,444.00 lakh has so far been released for construction of 17,971 units.   
 
 In fact, the allocation for the current financ ial year has been increased to Rs.1,444.24 lakh 
by way of re-appropriation from the original allocation of Rs.1,200.00 lakh for 2005-2006.   
 
 The Government of India is making effort s for educating about the various Handloom 
Sectors Schemes.   The National Handloom Development Corporation (NHDC) Ltd., has conducted 
10 training programmes in various States for educating about the developmental and welfare 
schemes including the Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme. 
 
 The State Governments submit the proposals on th e basis of the requir ements of units/funds 
under the scheme with the recommendation of the State Level Project Committee (SLPC) and funds 
are released on the basis of the viability of the proposals.  
 
 
 
 
 

 The Government of India is getting the eval uation of the various Ha ndloom Sectors scheme 
done by an external agency.  Based on the recomme ndation of the Evaluation Study, the changes in 
the Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme will be considered after the submission of its report.  
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March  2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para 3.25)   
 
The Committee also feel that a comprehens ive review of the unit cost calculation of 
Rural/Urban Work-sheds and Rural/Urban Workshed-cum-Houses should be carried out and the 
scale of central assistance per unit should be enhanced accordingly.    
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Currently, the workshed-cum-Housing Scheme is being evaluated alongwith the other 
Handloom Sectors Schemes. 
 
 The units cost as well as the Central Assi stance under the Scheme will be reconsidered, 
based on the evaluation study.  
 
 
 (Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March  2006) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para 3.69) 
 
The Committee have also noted that there is a proposal to develop a Trade Mark namely 
“Handloom Mark” for handlooms on the lines of W oolmark. Such a trade mark would definitely 
enable handloom products to develop a niche market  with a distinct identity both in domestic and 
international markets. The Committee, therefore, recommend that expeditious steps should be taken 
by the Ministry to develop this trademark for handloom products.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 The emerging need for a brand identity of pan National and International importance in 
respect of Indian Handlooms has been recognized at various fora .  Brand adds in enhancing the 
economic value of the product and provides a focus around which product attributes and benefits 
can be articulated in a manner that  is attractive to the customer.  Towards this direction Creation of 
Handloom Mark for the handloom products has b een entrusted to the Textiles Committee of 
Ministry of Textiles which have prepared a concept paper alongwith logo, etc.   National Institute of 
Design (NID) is finalizing the logo. 
   
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23  March 2006) 

 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 20, Para 3.85)   
The Committee have noted that a Scheme for reimbursement of one-time rebate of 10 per 
cent was given to handloom weavers on sale of handloom cloth from 2002-2003 to 2004-2005 so as 
to kick-start this employment-intensive industry and revive its production cycle. The Committee are 
of the view that this one-time special rebate helped the handloom weavers to compete with the 
organized sector and recommend th at the feasibility of extending this reimbursement of rebate 
should be examined and necessary relief should be  provided to handloom weavers to protect them 
from powerloom and mill sectors.               
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
The Government of India had received repres entations from various State Governments 
requesting for continuation of the Scheme specially  since the scheme not only helped in clearance 
of handloom stocks but kept the production cycle alive and sustaine d the employment of weavers in 
the Sector.  A proposal has therefore been moved to Ministry of Finance for continuation of the 
10% rebate Scheme for another period of 3 years. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March  2006) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 21, Para 3.86)   
The Committee are concerned to find that handl oom weavers are given credit at the rate of 
12 per cent which is same as that given to indust ries. They just could no t understand the logic of 
equating industries with poor handl oom weavers. The Committee consid er the high rate of interest 
as one of the reasons for failure  of cooperative societies in ha ndloom sector. Moreover, handloom 
sector is the second largest employment provider, next only to ag riculture, comprising several lakh 
handloom weavers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that expeditious steps should be taken to 
lower the interest on the credit given to Handloom Weavers.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 A proposal for reducing the rate of interest  on loans to the Handloom weavers is under 
consideration of the Government. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March  2006) 

 
Recommendation (Sl.No.22, Para 3.87)   
The Committee have learnt that there is a propos al to examine the possibility of waiving the 
interest on the loans availed of by the Handloom units which are having poor financial health. The 
Committee expect that the proposal  would be examined expediti ously and interest on handloom 
units with poor financial health is considered for waiver.  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
A proposal for waiving the interest on lo ans availed by Handloom weavers is under 
consideration. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M.No.2(47)/2005-DCHL/Parl. dated 23 March 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     SURAVARAM SUDHAK AR REDDY       
                                       Chairman 
12  June, 2006          Standing Committee on Labour 
22 Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka) 

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH  SITTING OF THE STANDI NG COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
HELD ON MONDAY, 12 JUNE  2006. 
 
The Committee met from 1130 hours to 1230 hours in Committee Room `B’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Joachim Baxla 
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
6. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
7. Shri Virendra Kumar 
8. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
9. Shri Ananta Nayak 
10. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal) 
11. Shri Lal Mani Prasad 
12. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Smt. C.S. Sujatha   
               
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
15. Shri Gandhi Azad 
16.       Shri Debabrata Biswas 
17.       Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
18.       Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
19.       Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
20.       Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena               -           Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed the Members and apprised them about the 
Draft Fifteenth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in Nint h Report on the subject “Development Schemes 
for Handloom Sector”.  The Committee then we lcomed two new Members from Rajya Sabha viz. 
Shri Rudra Narayan Pany (re-nominated) and Shri Narayan Singh Kesari. 
 
3. Thereafter, the  Committee considered the draf t Fifteenth Report  and adopted the same with 
the following modification: 
 
Page 7, Para 1.12 , add at the end of the Para “The step s taken in this regard and the 
progress achieved should be communicated to the Committee within three months” 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the above Report and present the same 
to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
5. XX     XX    XX 
 
6. XX    XX    XX 
 
7.         XX    XX    XX 
 
    The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 