 
11 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
(2005-06) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 
 
The Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005 
 
 
 
 
   ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
      
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 February 2006/Phalguna  1927 (Saka) 

 
11 
  ELEVENTH REPORT 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2005-06) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES  
 
 
The Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005  
 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 27 February 2006 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  27 February 2006 
 
 
 
  
      
  
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 February 2006/Phalguna 1927 (Saka) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
           P A G E  
           
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (iii) 
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N          ( i v )  
 
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE         ……………………    1  
 
 
ANNEXURE – I The Central Silk  Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005 
     
 
ANNEXURE - II Minutes of the  sittings of the Standing Committee on Labour  
 held  on  6.10.2005, 18.10.2005, 28.11.2005, 16.1.2006 and  
24.2.2006 
  
 
  
 

COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
      (2005-2006) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar    
10. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi   
12. Shri Ananta Nayak   
13. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
14. Shri Lal Mani Prasad   
15. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
16. Shri Mohan Rawale  
17. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
18. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
19.       Shri Parasnath Yadav   
20. Vacant 
21.       Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA  
  22. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  23. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
  24. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
  25. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
  26. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
  27. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  28. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
29. Shri Dilip Ray 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
  SECRETARIAT 
         1.    Shri John Joseph  -           Secretary 
2.    Shri N.K. Sapra   -  Joint Secretary 
3.    Shri R.S. Misra   - Deputy Secretary  
4.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
5.    Shri C. Kalyanasundaram- Committee Officer  
 

  
     INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour   having been authorised 
by the Committee to submit the report on thei r behalf present this Eleventh Report on 
“The Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005” of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Rajya Sa bha on 30 August 2005 and was referred to 
the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sa bha under Rule 331E (b) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and report within three 
months from the date of publication of the re ference of the Bill in Bulletin Part-II of Lok 
Sabha dated 13 September 2005.  Since the Committee sought more time to complete 
their examination of the Bill,  Hon’ble Speaker granted extension of time for a period of 
three months till the end of February 2006 to present the Report.  
 
3. The Committee in their meeting held on 6 October 2005 heard the views of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Textiles, Central Silk Board and the Ministry of Law 
and Justice on the Bill. The Committee also held discussions on the Bill at their sittings 
held on 18 October 2005, 28 November 2005 and 16 January 2006.  The Committee 
considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill at their sitting held on 24 February 
2006.    
 
4.  The Committee also undertook on-the-spot study visits to Bangalore on 
9.11.2005, Pochampally on 12.11.2005 and   Varanasi on 11.2.2006 and heard the views 
of farmers, reelers and weavers on the Bill.  
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the farmers, reelers and weavers 
for placing before the Committee their views on the Bill.  
 
6. The Committee also wish to express their th anks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Textiles and Central Silk Board for placing before them detailed written notes on the Bill 
and for furnishing the desired information  in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 
          
         
Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy 
N E W  D E L H I ;        Chairman, 
24  February 2006                        Standing Committee on Labour 
5  Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)  

REPORT 
 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
1. India has a natural advantag e in sericulture.  It enjoys  a distinction of being the 
only country producing all the 4 commercially  exploited varieties of silk, viz., Mulberry, 
Tasar, Muga and Eri.  The Golden Muga Silk and Tropical Tasar Silk are unique to India.  
It has a labour intensive agricultural pattern with traditional strengths since the times of 
Tipu Sultan. It has capabilities along the enti re value chain from cultivation of the raw 
material till the production of the finished products, which has obtained for the country 
5% share of world silk trade, and export earnings of about 641 m illion US dollars.  
Promotion of the Indian Silk Industry is an important sphere of development planning.  
Silk products have a significantly high unit value realization and find a large market 
around developed countries of the world. 
 
2. India ranked second in the world in the year 2003 as a producer of silk accounting 
for about 13% of the total world raw silk  production.  China’s share of the world 
production of 1,17,042 MT of raw silk is 81% .  India is the only other significant 
producer of raw silk in the world as the rest of the world accounts for 6% of the 
production of raw silk.  It is also  to be noted that India is th e largest consumer of silk in 
the world with a demand estimated at 26,000 MT annually, it is important for the country 
to emphasize an increase in silk production, not  only in order to meet its own domestic 
demand, but also to take an advantage of its  position as one of the two world players in 
silk production and to aim at increasing its share of world silk trade.  
 
Silk Production in the country 
 
3. Raw Silk Production in the country  since 1999-2000 is as follows:- 
 
YEAR                PRODUCTION OF RAW SILK (TONS) 
 
 MULBERRY NON-
MULBERRY 
TOT
AL 
1999-2000 13,944 1,270 15,214 
2000-2001 14,432 1,425 15,857 
2001-2002 15,842 1,509 17,351 
2002-2003 14,617 1,702 16,319 
2003-2004 13,970 1,772 15,742 
2004-2005 14,620 1,880 16,500 
 
 
Demand - Supply Gap 
 

4. Demand for raw silk in the country is estimated at 26,000 MT per annum.  There 
is a shortfall of approximately 8000 tones as our production is 16,500 MT per annum.  
The gap between demand and supply is fulfilled by imports mainly from China. 
 
 
 
Imports 
 
5. The quantity of raw silk imported since 1998-99 is indicated as under:- 
 
YEAR QUANTITY (IN TON) 
 
1998-1999 2,824 
1999-2000 5,018 
2000-2001 4,713 
2001-2002 6,808 
2002-2003 9,054 
2003-2004 9,258 
2004-2005 7,948 
 
 To fulfill the demand supply gap of the qua ntity as well as quality of raw silk, 
imports of raw silk have been put under OGL since 1.4.2001. 
 
Exports 
 
6. Exports of Indian Silk products comprise mainly, natural silk yarn, fabrics, made-
ups, ready-made garments, silk carpets and silk waste. The export of silk goods since 
1998-99 is indicated as under:- 
 
YEAR                 EXPORT EARNINGS 
 CRORE (RS.) MN. US $ 
1998-1999 1250.55 297.04 
1999-2000 1755.55 404.97 
2000-2001 2421.98 530.21 
2001-2002 2359.56 495.29 
2002-2003 2294.05 474.08 
2003-2004 2779.19 694.70 
2004-2005 2879.56 640.90 
 
 
 
 
Employment  
 

7. Sericulture is a labour in tensive industry providing em ployment to about 58 lakh 
persons, most of whom are tribal, small and marginal farmers and other economically 
weaker sections of the society.  It is estim ated that every acre under sericulture creates 
work for 12 persons down the value addition chain.   
 
The table below indicates the estimated employment generation under this sector:- 
 
YEAR EMPLOYMENT 
(LAKH PERSONS) 
2001-2002 55.00 
2002-2003 56.00 
2003-2004 56.50 
2004-2005 58.00 
 
Stages of Processing of Silk  
 
8. Processing of Silk involves food plant cultivation, rearing of cocoons, reeling, 
spinning, twisting, dyeing and weaving etc.,  
 
• Farm activities and rearing activitie s are done by and large by small and 
marginal farmers.  Vanya silk is traditionally cultured by the tribal and 
economically disadvantaged groups. 
 
• Reeling:  Reeling is mainly done on Charkha and Filature/Cottage Basin.  
Multi-end reeling machines devised by CSB are also being made available 
to reelers, which have increased productivity. 
 
• Weaving:  The silk weaving sector is dominated by the handloom as 
Indian multivoltine raw silk is not strong enough for powerlooms, and is 
suitable for the lower speed handl ooms.  However, weaving on 
powerloom in the country is increasing with use of bivoltine silk, which is 
presently imported, mainly from Chin a.  There are an estimated 2,58,000 
numbers of handlooms and 29,340 number s of powerlooms in the country 
weaving silk fabric. 
 
Central Silk Board 
 
9. The Central Silk Board is a statutory body under the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Textiles, Government of India, constituted by an Act of Parliament (Act 
No.LXI of 1948), the Board has a compositio n of 36 members including the Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman, Member-Secretary, representa tives from the Lok Sabha and the Rajya 
Sabha, nominees of the Central and State Governments and representatives from 
Industry.  The Board has a work force of 4,370 employees (including scientists) and 
about 2,436 farm workers all over the country. 
 
 

 
 The main functions assigned to the Board under the Act are: 
 
1. Promoting the development of silk industry by such measures as it thinks fit. 
 
2. Undertaking, assisting and encour aging, scientific, technological and 
economic research. 
 
3. Devising means for improved methods of mulberry culti vation, silkworm 
rearing, developing and distributing healthy silkworm seeds, improved 
methods of silk reeling and spinning of the cocoons and silk waste, improving 
the quality and production of raw silk, if necessary, by making it compulsory, 
for all raw silk to be marketed, only afte r the same has been tested and graded 
in properly equipped raw silk Testing and Conditioning Houses. 
 
4. Improving the marketing of raw silk. 
 
5. The collection of statistics. 
 
6. To advise the Central Government on all matters relating to the development 
of silk industry including import and export of raw silk. 
 
7. To prepare and furnish such other reports relating to the silk industry as may 
be required by the Central Government from time to time. 
 
8. Undertaking voluntary quality inspecti on of silk goods meant for exports. 
 
Central Silk Board (Amendment ) Bill, 2005 
 
10. The Ministry of Textiles has stated in  a written note furnished to the Committee 
that Sericulture is mostly practiced by sma ll and marginal farmers who belong mainly to 
the under privileged and marginalized SC/ST/O BC categories.  The silk reeling; twisting 
and weaving industry is also mainly in the small, tiny cottage or household sector.  
Moreover, the production of seed, cocoons and silk yarn has traditionally been carried out 
under a regulated trade regime with restric tions on imports, exports, movement of goods 
between States, and in highly controlled market s.  Globalisation has exposed the industry 
to several risk factors and has necessitated the following changed responses:- 
 
• With all import barriers having been dismantled and Tariff levels having 
dropped, the country is open to imports of all kinds of sericulture products, 
including silkworm seed, with no sta ndardized system or regulation in 
place to screen, select or authorize races and varieties. This is fraught with 
the danger of importing unpredictable varieties and also debilitating 
diseases which will lead to unreliable performance in the field, putting the 
farmers and sericulturists to additional risk. 
 

 
• With recent R&D success in developing new Silkworm races, the 
productivity levels have increased and non-traditional States are also 
taking up sericulture in a big way ra ising the demand for seed, which may 
in turn give room for malpractices in seed production like unauthorized 
crossing (between silk worm races), sales of unauthorized hybrids, 
slackness in quality control and disease checks. 
 
• Silkworm seed is supplied to the fa rmers through the Central Silk Board 
and the state run Silkworm Seed Pr oduction Centres or by private Seed 
Producers licensed by the States as  Licensed Seed Producers (LSP).  
Private Licensed Seed Producers comp rise the main source, and supply 
about 75% of the seed.  By the e nd of the Xth Five Year Plan, the 
country’s total requirement of silkworm  seed is estimated to be 45 crore 
disease free layings (from 30 crores in the III year of Xth Plan) to achieve 
the Raw Silk Production target.  Th e rising demand is being met by the 
private producers by compromising on quality, and new producers and 
suppliers are being licensed without sufficient regard to standards of 
quality.  This exposes the farmers to risks of crop disease and crop loss. 
 
• The strength of the sericulture industry in any country can be measured by 
the quality of silkworm seed produced and the efficacy of its distribution 
system.  Sericulturists look up to the grainages for supply of disease free 
silkworm layings which is critical to the quality and the success of the 
cocoon crop.  Since silkworm seed is  biological material and a highly 
perishable product, its production, st orage, incubation and distribution 
needs to be based on strict technical parameters. 
 
• The quality of seed to a large extent is the basic determinant of the quality 
and productivity of rearing, reeling (or spinning) and the quality and grade 
of the raw silk.  Thus, to achieve the targets of production and quality of 
raw silk, besides increasing seed pr oduction, quality maintenance of the 
silkworm seed is essential. With an  ambitious project for producing about 
25,000 MT of silk by 2010, the single biggest constraint would be 
maintenance of the quality of the silkworm seed being produced. 
 
11. Further in regard to the changes to be  brought about, a repr esentative of the 
Ministry of Textiles explained to the Committee as follows during the briefing :- 
 
“We have a very glorious history of sericulture and silk industry.  In the 
Independent India we have spent nearly 56 to 57 years in promoting the 
silk industry.  But we have come to a very critical stage today.  The 
criticality is in terms of the benefici aries like farmers, reelers, weavers – 
covering all the sectors.  The further sustenance depends on two factors.  
One is he has to improve the productivity not the general increase in 
production…..The second is, there has to be lot of value addition which 

should take place to the product.  This value addition cannot happen 
unless we improve the quality---we have  been doing sericulture in a very 
casual way, in a very traditional way.  But if we compare with the other 
countries, the improvement which they have achieved in the past just ten 
years, for example China, is something unimaginable.  This they have 
achieved by bringing in certain concre te reforms, improvements in the 
whole system, in the whole approaches-----In the seed sector our 
requirement is around 26 crore.  But it will be a surprise to know that to 
produce these 26 crore we have mo re than 1,300 units involved in 
production.  This is in the small sector.  Every lead farmer in West Bengal, 
for example, himself produces seeds.  There is no organized activity as 
such when the whole activity, such a critical activity itself is met by the 
farmer himself, you can very well understand where the quality stands.  
The majority of the producers do it traditionally wit hout understanding 
much about the mechanisms involved.  The whole concentration today of 
defining quality of the seed is it has to be free from the seed bound disease 
called Pebrin.  If it is Pebr in free they assume that everything else is okay. 
But in practicality it is not so.  Fo r the seed production if we go through 
the linkages we have to first identif y the authorized, approved productive 
races, the breeds.  We have to mainta in systematically lacking diluting its 
original characteristic.  We have to get it generated by the best farmers 
possible, not that all farmers can do th is type of a seed  cocoon generation.  
Then, this has to be purchased on a quality-linked system, not through an 
open market where everything is dump ed.  Since there is a shortage, 
whatever is dumped in the market is  purchased and produced and seed is 
made.  Then the processing is there.  On the processing side, you can very 
well understand that if a farmer is  producing seed, what about the 
optimum conditions of light, temperature, humidity etc. Nothing is cared 
at present.  The examination system  is age-old crushing and seeing 
through the microscope whereas the modern system is involving the 
technique of centrifuge and th en seeing through the high power 
microscope. So, magnification and a ll those things are involved, and 
setting up that sort of laboratory has b ecome costly.  It is in this respect 
when the infrastructure requirement is high, the cost i nvolved is high, the 
technical know-how and the skill required has become high that the 
relevance of the small producers exis ting today has become irrelevant.  
They cannot do that sort of a job.  So a stage has come that from the small 
producers, it has to go into a sort of private company set up where they 
can really invest what is required for the seed production and the required 
quality assurance system.  For seed cer tification, what is existing today is 
the unit’s or the producer’s  declaration.  He says that ‘whatever seed I 
have produced is disease free’, bu t there is no mechanism to ensure 
whether he has gone through all the stages required.  It is not that one step 
will contribute to the quality; every step involved in seed production 
contributes a little by little to the quality and it is the wholesome quality, 
what we say the best quality seed.  We are focusing on the high quality 

international grade raw seed production, that is bi-voltine variety.  In the 
bi-voltine process, the skill involved is entirely different from the 
traditional skill.  This has to be give n to a trained lot of producers.  A 
system has to be set up and it has to be monitored continuously, and it is 
only at the end product level that we can  assure about the quality.  So, this 
sort of changes may be difficult in th e present system.  That is why, we 
have to go for a little bit of flexib ility in identifying those factors which 
are ultimately going to contribute to the best quality seed, and support 
legislatively this particular mechanism.  Unless we force it, the nature of 
seed production as it  exists today w ill continue.  Its relevance is slowly 
getting away and we will land into mu ch more difficult situations in 
future.  So, we have a concept of modernization, we have a concept of 
improving the quality and we ha ve a concept of improving the 
productivity.  Everything is linked to small, small changes, and to start 
with, the seed.  The whole concentrati on is on this Act so that we can do 
the expected job in a very scient ific way, in a well thought and well 
studied way”.  
 
12. The Ministry of Textiles has further stat ed that the Central Silk Board Act which 
was enacted in 1948 made provisions for thos e aspects which were vi sualized at the time 
of its enactment.  In the present context of globalisation as  indicated above, the said Act 
requires a re-look into the provi sions to give legal backing in those aspects which were 
left unattended.  Therefore, the Ministry has proposed to amend the existing Central Silk 
Board Act, 1948 by insertion of provisions for the creation of a regulatory mechanism 
with respect to silkworm seed.  The Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005 has been 
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 30 August 2005.  The Salient features of the Bill are :- 
 
1. The Bill empowers the Central Government to issue notification to notify 
the Authorised kind or variety of Silkworm Seed on the recommendations 
of Central Silkworm Seed Committee. 
 
2. The Bill provides for constitution of  a 10-Member Central Silkworm Seed 
Committee with responsibility of:- 
 
(i) laying down of quality standards for kind or variety of Silkworm 
Seed; 
(ii) authorization of silkworm races and hybrids for commercial 
exploitation; 
(iii) laying down of quality standards for production of Silkworm 
Seeds; 
(iv) undertaking registration of notif ied kind of varie ties of Silkworm 
Seed and Silkworm Seed producers and dealers; 
(v) laying down the conditions and standards for export and import of 
Silkworm Seed; 
(vi) advising the Central Governme nt and the State Governments on 
the matters aforesaid. 

 
3. Constitution of Hybrid Authorisatio n Committee to advise the Committee 
and to assist the Committee in the matter of authorization of kind or 
variety of Silkworm Seed and races. 
 
4. Constitution of Registration Committee empowering it to register the 
notified kind or variety of Silkworm  Seed: Silkworm Seed producers and 
dealers. 
 
5. Constitution of one or more Seed Certifying Agencies (or accredit the 
existing one) to conduct inspection for regist ration of producers and 
dealers. 
 
6. establishment of (accredit the existing one) Central Seed Testing 
Laboratory to carry out the functions  as may be entrusted to it by the 
Committee. 
 
7. appointment of Seed Inspectors and Seed analysts in connection with 
testing of Silkworm Seed as to its conformity to the specified standards. 
 
8. empower the Committee to make regul ations to implement the provisions 
of the Amendment Bill. 
 
9. The provisions of the Act or any rule or regulation shall have effect 
notwithstanding any inconsistency ther ewith contained in any enactment 
other than this Act, Rules and Regulations. 
 
13. On 9.11.2005, the Committee first visite d grainage and cocoon market at 
Ramnagaram.  Then they held informal disc ussions with the silk farmers, reelers, 
weavers and the officials of Central Silk Board and the Ministry of Textiles at Bangalore 
and also with farmers at Pochampalli in Andhra Pradesh on 12.11.2005.  
 
Views of farmers, weavers and reelers on the Bill 
 
(a) Silk farmers 
 
14. Silk farmers informed the Committee that  there are two differe nt races of silk 
seed. One is traditional pure Mysore which is cross bred into Multivoltine.  Second one is 
bivoltine which is an import substitute.  Tr aditional variety is time tested and proved 
successful since Tipu Sultan’s time. This has its own seed areas.  They further informed 
the Committee that Karnataka seed Act is quite in order. This Act helped all the sectors 
and they have a very effective system going on in  the State.   They want that the present 
system may continue.  National policy in pla ce of the present system may totally dilute 
the requirements of local farmers. They furthe r stated that the local Acts (Acts of the 
State Government), as far as seed legisla tions are concerned have contributed for the 

development of the industry.  They also informed the Committee that Karnataka Seed Act 
has been a success and is being copied by other States.  
 
15. They also brought to the attention of the Committee that the proposed amendment 
would benefit Multi National Companies/Capita lists and they may e xploit the people of 
the State.  They further desired that Rese arch and Development in Sericulture Sector 
should not be given to the private sector. They also stated that only two members 
representing farmers have been proposed in the Bill and suggested that this may be 
increased to five members. The farmer s thus opposed the Central Silk Board 
(Amendment) Bill.  However, they were of the opinion that the national legislation may 
be enacted for bi-voltine variety, which is an  import substitute and the traditional local 
cross-breed variety of Karnataka may be left untouched.  
 
16. The Committee also visited Pochampally  (Andhra Pradesh) to find out the 
problems of weavers.    The farmers of Andhra Pradesh are also opposing the 
amendments proposed in the Bill.   
 
(b) Reelers 
 
17. Reelers informed the Committee that there are 13,000 reelers in the State of 
Karnataka. In India, there is a requirement of 25,000 tons of raw silk. Only 15,000 tons of 
raw silk is produced in the c ountry.  Rest is imported.  They further stated that about 
1,80,000 metric tons of cocoons are necessary for the industry. Only 50% of this is being 
produced in the country.  Out of this 50% pe r cent cocoons produced in the country, only 
20% are quality cocoons and 80% are of poor qua lity.  Indian silk industry’s failure is 
due to production of poor quality Cocoons.  To produce quality cocoons, good quality 
eggs are needed. They also informed that there is a failure in quality egg production.  
 
Reelers welcomed the Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005.  They 
stated that many aspects of the am endment are good.  Amendment is very 
essential not only for bivoltaine but for the crossbreed variety because quality of 
cocoons are very poor.  
 
 (c ) Weavers 
 
18. Weavers stated that China silk is permitted upto Bangalore and there is no 
regularised market for China Silk. When weavers buy China Silk heavy penalty is 
imposed on them. They also stated that an ti-dumping duty has been imposed on the raw 
Chinese silk. Recently price of 1 kg. of ration of  silk has increased from 10 dollars to 30 
dollars. They demanded that anti-dumping duty should also be imposed on Chinese silk 
cloth.  They also brought to the notice of  the Committee that price of one metre of 
Chinese cloth sold in India is less than their domestic price. Weavers are also in favour of 
amendments proposed in the Bill.  However,  the reelers and weavers are more worried 
about the aggressive silk mark et tactics of China and request ed the Government of India 
to arrange safeguards to Indian Silk. 
 

Outcome of the Interactions held by Central Silk Board with the Silkworm 
Seed Farmers and other stakeholders of the Industry on the Bill 
 
19. In a note submitted to the Committee, the Mi nistry of Textiles has stated that in 
furtherance to the discussions held by th e Standing Committee on Labour during their 
visit to Bangalore on 9.11.2005 and to P onchampalli, Andhra Pradesh on 11.11.2005 and 
the meeting of Secretary (Textiles) w ith Hon’ble Chairman of the Committee on 
15.12.2005 on the Bill, the Central Silk Board ha s held a series of meetings with 
silkworm seed farmers and other stakeholde rs of sericulture industry on the proposed 
Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005.  The meetings were convened by the end of 
December 2005 in three Southern states na mely, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, and Tamil 
Nadu and the five North Easter n States viz., Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram and 
Tripura to elicit the views of seed/commerc ial farmers, reelers, weavers and seed 
producers on the utility and necessity of the proposed legislation were explained to the 
participants and a write up to that effect  was also given in concerned vernacular 
languages.  Details of participation in the meetings are as under:- 
 
State Districts No. of 
Clusters/locations 
covered 
No. of 
participants 
Karnataka Bangalore 104 215 
 Mysore   27  54 
 Mandya  40  88 
 Kolar  51 148 
 Chamrajanagar  46 189 
Andhra Pradesh Chittor  25 207 
 Anantpur  18 155 
Tamil Nadu Dharmapuri  34  65 
 
 North Arcot  32  53 
 Krishnagiri   7  50 
 Salem  35 103 
 
 
State Districts No. of 
Clusters/locations 
covered 
No. of 
participants 
Assam Lakhimpur - 165 
 Sonithpur - 133 
 Darrang -  37 
 Dibrugarh -  51 
 Sivasagar -  34 
 Jorhat -  71 
 Golaghat -  30 
 Kamrup -  64 
 Goalpara -  12 

Meghalaya Jayantia Hills -  40 
Manipur Imphal -  27 
Mizoram Aizawl -  12 
Tripura Agartala -  10 
8 24 419 2,248 
 
20. The Ministry of Textiles has stated in the note that there was a comprehensive 
coverage of stakeholders in 24 districts in 8 States and 419  villages/reeling and weaving 
clusters were covered.  Out of a total num ber of 2,248 stakeholders involved, 686 were 
from the five North Eastern States while  the remaining 1,562 were from Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.  A copy of the format used by the Ministry for collection 
of opinion from farmers, seed producers, reelers and weavers on the proposed Central 
Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005 is enclosed ( Annexure-I).  O n  t h e  b a s i s  o f  
information received from the stakeholders, an  abstract was prepared by the Ministry of 
Textiles and is placed at Annexure-II.  It can be seen from the abstract that- 
 
a. Out of 195 seed farmers, a total of 184 (94.87%) responded in favour of the 
amendments. 
b. In all, 1,803 commercial farmers had pa rticipated in the interactions, out of 
which a whopping majority of 1,751 (97.12%) and all the 59 weavers 
responded in favour of the amendments, and  
 
c. Out of 176 reelers covered, almost all (99.43%) and al l the 59 weavers 
responded in favour of the amendments, and 
  
d. Out of 15 seed producers, 12 were in favour of the amendments and this 
constitutes 80% of the participants. 
e. In Karnataka State, 120 seed farm ers, 568 commercial farmers, 6 licensed 
seed producers (LSP), 87 reelers and 15 weavers gave thei r opinions with 
respect to the proposed amendments.  Out of total 796 participants in the 
State, 758 have responded in favour of the amendments (95.22%). 
 
21. Central Silk Board has issued a Public Notice in different ve rnacular newspapers 
in Kannada, Tamil, Telugu, Assamese, Beng ali, Hindi and English to explain the 
objectives of the proposed amendments in simple language (local).   The Ministry of 
Textiles has stated that the public notice (Annexure-III) also seeks to dispel the 
apprehension, if any, that the existing ‘Mysore Seed Area’ Pure Mysore Race or any race 
specific to a particular geographical area/State or traditional multi-voltine silk breeds 
would be affected/wiped out/replaced if the Amendment Bill, 2005 is given effect to, is 
not true. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Impact of the proposed amendments on small scale seed farmers/producers 
 
22. A grainage is the silkworm seed production centre and the activ ity is done by the 
silkworm seed sector.  It was stated during the evidence that cost of setting up of a multi-
voltine grainage, as per the specifications of the Bill, may be around Rs.10 lakh.  The cost 
of bivoltine grainage alongwith cold storage,  which is an essential requirement for 
bivoltine silkworm seed production, may be around Rs.1 crore.  There is a danger of the 
private sector monopolized by a few people ta ke over the production of silkworm seeds 
in the country.  This may be the end of  1,300 small scale seed producers and their 
dependents.   
 
23. When asked, what would the impact of the proposed amendments on small scale 
seed farmers/producers, the Mini stry of Textiles in a writte n reply stated that the seed 
farmer will be benefited because they will be adopted under the provisions of the 
proposed amendments for generation of qualit y seed cocoons and quality linked stable 
pricing policy.  Currently, it is arrived at by open auct ion and subjected to high 
fluctuation depending upon the demand.  However,  if the question is with respect to the 
seed producers, probably, small scale sub-optim al seed producers will find it difficult to 
flourish, in due course of time due to lack  of competence to match the independent 
certification system, required linkage with s eed farmers, quality linked pricing method 
and excellence expected in crop performance.   Therefore, small scale, ill equipped, sub-
optimal seed producers will necessarily have to transform to the changing requirements 
or come together to form an economically viably company/cooperative.  
 
24. In written reply to a question, whethe r any financial assi stance, including 
subsidies, would be provided to the seed farmers to enable them set up grainages after the 
enactment of this law, the Ministry of Textiles has stated as follows:- 
 
“Silkworm Seed Sector, it is prop osed that for production of quality 
silkworm seed, all possible requirements will be met either by way of 
financial assistance/subsidy for creating infrastructure and also meeting 
the expenses on independent certifi cation of silkworm seed system 
through Central and State sponsored joint schemes”. 
 
Comments of the State Governments on the Bill 
 
25. During the Standing Committee on Labour’s visit to Bangalore on 9.11.2005, they 
were informed by the officials of the Ministry of Textiles that the Bill has been circulated 
to the State Governments for their comments.  The Ministry was requested to furnish the 
copies of the comments for the perusal of the Committee.  Accordingly, comments of the  
State Governments of Karnataka, Tamil Na du, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, 
Kerala, Goa and Union Territories of Chandi garh and Andaman & Nicobar Islands have 
been sent to the Committee.  State Governments of Kerala, Goa and the Union Territories 
of Chandigarh and Andaman & Nicobar Islands had no comments to offer.  Comments of 
the other States are as follows:- 
 

26. (i) Karnataka  - Karnataka is the premier silk producing state, contributing 
more than 50% of the country’s and, 5.62% of  world’s mulberry raw silk production, 
nearly 85,000 hectares is under mulberry cultivation, giving employment to 12 lakh 
persons in both downstream and upstream sericultural activities.  Nearly 12,670 reeling 
units employing 82,500 reeling workers are f unctioning in the State.  79 Government 
Grainages and 533 private licensed seed prepar es are engaged in production of quality 
seeds in addition to 6 grainages of Central Silk Board.  The Silkworm Cocoons produced 
by the farmers are traded on a day-to-day basis in 66 Government  Cocoon markets and 
the system has been well accepted by the farm ers and the reelers mainly because of the 
transparency involved in the transactions, accurate weighment and cash payment to 
farmers on the same day of transaction.  The Government has set up 10 Silk Exchanges 
Industry for the sale and purchase of Raw Silk  Yarn.  Karnataka has also set up a Silk 
marketing Board with a view to Stabilise th e Silk prizes.  The state has also a well 
established silk weaving facility under the aegis of Karnataka Silk Industries Corporation 
producing the world famous Mysore Crepe Silk Sarees.  
 
27. The Karnataka State is having a reas onably foolproof Legislation since 1959, 
enforced the entire state. The Karnatak a Silkworm Seed Cocoon and Silk Yarn 
(Regulation of production, supply, distribu tion and sale) Act, 1959, regulates the 
production of quality Silkworm seeds, reari ng of Silkworms, possession, disposal, sale 
and purchase of silkworm, silkworm cocoons, licensing of reeling establishments and 
establishing maintenance of coc oons and silk markets. The existing laws are adequate to 
ensure production and supply quality silkworm seeds.  The provision  in the Karnataka 
Silkworm seed, cocoon and silk yarn (Regulation and production, supply, distribution and 
sale) Act, 1959 are stringent enough to ensu re quality and liberal enough to encourage 
large scale production of silkworm seed.  The dreaded pebrine diseases has been 
controlled during 1991-92 effectively by the Stat e Machinery facilitated by constant vigil 
and frequent instruction at all stages commencing from the maintenance of basic seed. 
 
28. Under the circumstance, some of the provisions proposed in  the Central Silk 
Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005 run paralled to the provisions in the Karnataka Silkworm 
Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of production, supply, distribution and sale) 
Act, 1959 and therefore, would amount to duplication, overlapping and probably 
confusion as well. 
 
29. The provisions relating to constitution of Central Silkworm Seed Committee to 
specify quality parameters for silkworm seed, regulation of export and import of 
silkworm seed, construction of Hybrid Authorisation Committee, etc, are welcome. 
 
30. However, provision relating to registration of seed production and imposition of 
conditions and requirements to be met by such producers may not be necessary.  
Adequate provisions to this effect are alre ady in place and being practiced in Karnataka 
as per the Karnataka legislation. 
 
 
 

 
31. The programming and planning of silkworm  and production should be left to the 
sole discretion of the State as it relates to the very basic functioning of the Directorate of 
Sericulture in the State.  The Directorate,  having 246 grassroots level Technical Service 
Centres with trained manpower, is in a be tter position to assess the requirement of 
silkworm seed and plan for its timely produc tion and distribution.  The Directorate in 
Karnataka ensures production and distribution of an average of one crore disease free 
layings per months.  The basic seed cocoons required for this magnitude of production is 
also assessed in advance, planned and produced in the State considering seasonality. 
 
32. In the Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Co coon and Silk Yarn  (Regulation of 
production, supply, distribution and sale) Act, Sericulture Demonstrators and above level 
staff in the field have been notified.  They inspect the grainages and certify the silkworm 
eggs before release to the farmers about its disease freeness.  The quality and the disease 
freeness of the silkworm eggs are ensured by means of microscopic examination of pupae 
and mother moths before release to the farmer s.  These staff is provided with advanced 
instruments and technical know-how to record  the quality certifica tion.  Moreover, the 
quality of seed cocoons produced in the seed areas, marketed and used for production of 
eggs is also monitored stringently and certifie d before sale in the markets.  Under the 
circumstances, constitution of Silkworm Seed  Certification Agencies would only add to 
delay and make the entire process more cumb ersome and difficult from the viewpoint of 
farmers.  Inclusion of this provision in  the proposed amendment would amount to 
duplication of the existing provisions and practice. 
 
33. Under the existing Karnataka Silkworm Seed Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation 
of production, supply, distribution and sale) Act, seed testing is conducted in the seed 
production centers by the staff on day-to-day ba sis.  The working of the officials is 
specified and seed testing is to be conducted before selection for seed.  The production of 
eggs is frequently tested for disease-freeness.   Only after certification they are permitted 
to be supplied to the farmers.  Therefore, the proposed amendments relating to setting up 
of Central Seed Testing Laboratory, tes ting and inspection may be limited to the 
Silkworm seed intended for export or import. 
 
34. The Central Silk Board is the principal agency in the country to advise 
Government of India and State Governments as well on the various  aspects concerning 
the different activities involve d in the sericulture industry.  Its role in the areas of 
evolution of new races, research, developments  and promotion of advanced technologies 
is paramount and should naturally become the focus of its activities. 
 
35. The subject of brining in a Central Legislation for regul ating production and 
distribution of silkworm seed is being discussed since 1986.  Even the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Commerce (1995-96) in its 14 th Report on Sericulture presented 
to the Rajya Sabha on 31 st May 1995 has elaborated on these aspects and has observed 
that the Central Silk Board should gradually relieve itself from the unassigned role such 
as extension centers for propagation of mu lberry cultivation, production of dfls., seed 

distribution etc. which are in the domain of the State Government, and leave such 
functions to the State Government to act what is really in their domain.   
 
36. The respective roles of Central Silk Bo ard and State Departme nts of Sericulture 
need to be clearly defined to make the w hole system user-friendly and efficient which 
definitely helps in increasi ng qualitative and quantitative silk production in the country, 
in general and Karnataka in particular. 
 
37. The Central Silk Board shoul d integrate vertically the various practices and bring 
in harmonization with the objective of producti on of superior quality silk which is the 
need of the hour. 
 
38. Therefore, it is the considered view of the Government of Karnataka that any 
amendment proposed to enhance the role of Central Silk Bo ard within the ambit of the 
objectives contained in its ma ndate is welcome, whereas, such of the amendments which 
lead to duplication and overlapping may be dropped in the best interest of the industry. 
 
39. Karnataka has further quoted 8B (Power s and functions of th e Central Silkworm 
Seed Committee), 8E(1) to (4) (Registration Committee), 8F (Constitution of Seed 
certification Agency) 8G(1)(2)(3) (Constitution of Central Seed Testing Laboratories) 
8H(1)(2)(3) (Appointment of seed inspectors), 8J (Statement by Silkworm Seed 
Producers) etc. of the proposed amendments  as having parallel  provisions in the 
Karnataka Silkworm seed, cocoon and silk  yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, 
Distribution and Sale) Act, 1959 and Rules 1960.  
 
40. (ii)  Tamil Nadu – As per rule 8 A (1) it is proposed to constitute a Central 
Silk Worm Seed Committee consisting of Vice Chairperson of the Board as Chairperson.  
As per 8 A (1) (b) (i) it is proposed to nominate  three Directors of Sericulture from States 
as members with others.  Hence, it may be  pointed out that since Karnataka, Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal are majo r silk producing States, it is suggested 
that the number of members may be increas ed from 3 to 4 and all the above 4 State 
Directors of Sericulture may be notified as permanent members.   All the other members 
may be retained as decided. 
 
41. At present the licensing power to establish a commercial egg production center is 
vested with concerned State Governments and the Director of Sericulture of the 
concerned State is issuing license to establish new commercial seed centers.  The State 
Governments are also running their own commercial grainages.  Therefore, the proposed 
rule 8 E (1) may be modified to the effect that the powers of the registration committee 
may be limited up to basic seed production only without disturbing the existing powers of 
the State Governments. 
 
 
 
 
 

42. The Registration Committee proposed under 8 E (2) shall be constituted in such a 
manner that respective State Sericulture Departments Seed Organisation Head be 
nominated alongwith other members. 
 
43. It is proposed that the amendments pr oposed are aiming at competing with the 
Global Silk market by India in the future.  Wh ile it is true, that the State Government can 
be no longer confine itself with in the State Market which is  shrinking gradually due to 
competition and changing demand scenario, care also should be taken to safeguard the 
present industrial set up beari ng in mind the role of Government and its commitment to 
the people.  At present the Tamil Nadu Ha ndlooms and Textiles is having a well knitted 
market tie-up right from Silkworm cocoon to silk fabric which is not in existence any 
where in India.  All the category of people i nvolved in the industry are benefited by this 
market arrangements.  So, it is necessary to assure that the amendments proposed will not 
disturb the existing system in Tamil Nadu. 
 
44. Tamil Nadu requested to consider the above facts and also to convene a meeting 
with all Sericulture Heads of the State and ot her officers concerned to  take final view on 
the proposed amendments to Central Silk Board Act, 1948. 
 
(iii) Jammu & Kashmir  
 
45. The proposed Central Silk Board (A mendment) Bill was examined by the 
Sericulture department in the State and it has no specific comments to add to the 
amendments.  Although in the State of Jammu & Kashmir the responsibility of producing 
silkworm seed is vested with the Department  of Sericulture and va rious units of Central 
Silk Board, it is expected that the proposed  legislation will help the State in further 
improving the quality standards in the Silkworm seed production sector. 
 
(iv)        Himachal Pradesh  
 
46. State Government agrees with th e proposed Amendment of Sections 
3,4,6,8,13,14,15 and 16 of the Central Silk Board Act, 1948 which primarily regulate the 
production of silk seed by private silk producers in the country. 
 
Clarifications of Central Silk Board on the comments of Karnataka 
 
47. The proposed amendments to the Central Silk Board Act are felt necessary as the 
provisions under the State Legislations are not adequate to take the interest of farmers 
(sericulturists) and the Silk Industry in tota lity, more particularly, when the industry is 
facing the challenges conseque nt to the liberalization of  the world economy under the 
provisions of the WTO.  Only recently, the Central Silk Board a nd all those who matter 
like the Department of Sericulture of various St ates, farmers, reelers, and other interested 
groups joined hands to combat the onslaught of dumping of silk ya rn by the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC) which has caused imme nse threat to the very existence of the 
industry and together, we have succeeded in salvaging the situati on by getting the Anti-
Dumping Duty imposed on the silk yarn, ba sed on merits of the case.  Again, an 
application has been filed by Central Silk Board along with Karnataka Weavers’ 

Federation, Mysore   Powerloom Associ ation and the Bangalore Rural District 
Powerloom Association before the Competen t (Designate) Authority for imposition of 
Anti-Dumping Duty on silk fabrics being dumpled from PRC and the case is under 
investigation.  Even if we get a favourable or der, these measures are only for a specific 
period and they by themselves cannot offer permanent solution to the problems of the 
Indian Silk Industry in the long run. 
 
 
48. The cost of  production of ra w silk in India vis-à-vis PRC is relatively high, and if 
the industry has to sustain en suring better returns to the farmers, it is only through 
improving productivity and value addition by quality improvement.  This will also 
facilitate our farmers, reelers and weavers (of silk) to get relatively higher income. 
 
49. This increase in productivity /production of silk resulting in higher income mainly 
to the farmers, reelers and weavers has been  possible by the concerted efforts of the 
Central Silk Board and the major silk producin g States of the country namely Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, J& K etc.  and by the implementation of the 
Catalytic Development Programme, JICA Programme and the R&D innovations of 
Central Silk Board.  Karnataka’s claim that  the increase has been possible by its own 
efforts is preposterous. 
 
50. First and foremost, these amendments to  the Central Silk Board Act has been 
proposed after detailed discussions at the Mee ting of the State Sericu lture Ministers held 
at New Delhi on 16 th December, 2003, in which the Sericulture Ministers of Karnataka, 
Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur , Meghalaya, Orissa, 
Uttar Pradesh and Haryana and Secretaries and Directors of Sericulture from 21 States 
attended the Conference.  As regards the Silkwrom Seed sector , it was unanimously 
resolved that “Ministry of Textiles to draft a National Silkworm Seed Regulatory 
Authority (NSSRA) Bill taking into account the existing State Acts in seed regulation of 
Mulberry cocoons in order to reconcile th em with the proposed NSSRA Bill so as to 
provide for an All India Quality Certification and Testing Body for all local and imported 
seeds of Mulberry and Non-Mu lberry silkworm races”.  Ac cordingly, since the last two 
years, the process of drafting the proposed Amendments has been on, and they have been 
circulated to the State Governments.  The proposed amendments are not meant to give 
enormous powers to the Central Silk Bo ard, but, on the contrary, the Amendments 
proposed will facilitate setting up of a Nationa l level Central Silkworm Seed Committee, 
Hybrid Authorization Committee and the Re gistration Committee.  These Committees 
will have representatives of the State as memb ers (including Karnataka since it is still the 
largest producer of mulberry silk).  Moreover, these Committees will have experts in the  
field of silkworm seed production and representatives from the sericulture sector.   
 
51. The contention that the Karnataka Seed Ac t, 1959 is time – tested and is very 
effective and does not need amendments is far from the truth.  The Karnataka State 
Government itself had felt the need for ame nding their said Act, to meet the changed 
global regime and had constituted a Comm ittee under the Chairmanship of the then 
Principal Secretary to Government, Comm erce and Industries Department in 2001, to 

suggest amendments to the Karnataka Silkworm  Seed, cocoon and Silk Yarn Act, 1959.  
The said Committee had deliberated in detail with various stakeholders and suggested the 
following changes to the Karnataka Act: 
 
1. For silkworm rearing and reeling, no license is required (registration for 
Statistical purpose can be incorporated). 
 
2. Restrictions on movement of silkworm seed and cocoons shall be 
removed. 
 
3. The Reelers be allowed to sell their silk  either in Silk Exchange or in the 
open market, and 
 
4. The Corporate Sector be allowed to take up sericulture activity on contract 
farming without going to cocoon markets. 
 
52. Though the recommendations of the said Committee are yet to be implemented by 
the Government of Karnataka, the very inten tion of the Government of Karnataka to set 
up this Committee to bring far reaching amendmen ts to their Act is clearly indicative of 
the fact that this Act has certain restrictiv e provisions which impede the development of 
sericulture in Karnataka and since Karnataka is  a lead player, its policies will affect  the 
entire sector in the country. 
 
53. The Revenue Reforms Commission set up by Government of Karnataka in its 
Final Report submitted in February 2004 has also said – “The Karnataka Silkworm Seed, 
Cocoon and Yarn (Regulation of production, supply, distribution and sale) Act 1959 had 
a useful role to play at the time of enactment  when the sericulture i ndustry needed to be 
nurtured carefully and the interests of small farmers and reelers had to be protected.  
However, the Act is now outdated.  The restrictive clauses need to be removed and the 
role of government in sericulture reviewed, if silk industry in the State is not be relegated 
to a backwater”.   
 
54. Again, when the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labour visited Karnataka 
on 9 November 2005, and heard the farmers, reelers and weavers.  The main 
apprehension of the farmers on proposed amendments to the Central Silk Board Act was 
that the existing “Mysore Seed Area” and the “Pure Mysore Race” would be affected and 
wiped out.  Central Silk Boar d made it very clear to the Committee that these proposed 
Amendments do not tamper with the existi ng “Mysore Seed Area” system and also the 
“Pure Mysore Race”.  In fact, it was al so clarified that the Pure Mysore race 
(Multivoltine Silkworm race) is being used extensively by the Karnataka State and the 
Central Silk Board to produce cross breed layings, (which means the female of the 
“Mysore Race: is mated with the Bivoltine (Rac e) Male).  As the “Pure Mysore Race” is 
crucial to the production of cr oss-breed layings, Central Silk  Board would never suggest 
obliteration of this race and hence, the fear that the “Mys ore Seed Area” will be wiped 
out (once the amendments come into force) is totally misplaced. 
 

55. The intention of these amendments are not only to increase the productivity, but 
also to improve the quality of the silk produ ced, which will directly benefit the farmers, 
as they would be able to produce good quality of cocoons, which will in turn fetch higher 
rates in the open market.  The amendments  are All-India in character and will be 
applicable to all over the country and not onl y to the state of Karnataka.  The proposed 
amendments is also not for transferring the power from the States to the Central Silk 
Board.  In various meetings with the DOS, it has been expressed very explicitly that the 
present Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of production, 
supply, distribution and sale) Act, 1959 has provisions restricting the development of 
sericulture in the changed scenario.  No doubt, this legislation has been helpful in the past 
in regulating quality of silkworm seed produc tion in the State and was guiding factor for 
other States to follow suit.  However, vari ous provisions which are unfavourable to the 
free movement of various inputs for the industr y such as silkworm seed, cocoons, yarns, 
are to be freed from the limitations posed by the said Act as it does not take care of the 
quality aspects of silkworm seed production. 
 
56. It is reiterated that Cent ral Silk Board does not have the desire to bring in 
legislation to duplicate the work carried out by the States.  The objec tive of the proposed 
amendments is also not to cause any hardsh ip to the farmers, but, on the contrary, the 
entire legislation is directed to ensure that the farmers get the most out of critical inputs 
such as silkworm seed which will determine the quality of cocoons, yarns and ensure 
increased economic returns to the farmers. 
 
57. It may be seen from the constitution of the Seed Committee under the proposed 
Bill, that the Commissioners of Sericultu re themselves are the Members of the 
Committee and it is broad-based and empow ered to lay down quality standards for 
various kinds of silkworm seed.  It will bear the responsibility of authorization of new 
breeds at national level and also at the regional level.  This has been though of to rein in 
unscrupulous utilization of silkworm races  by various seed production agencies and 
short-cut methods adopted by a fe w States to release breeds at premature stage, without 
proper validation.  In the past , various Organizations star ted producing silkworm seed 
without proper evaluation and authorization of race.  Their unscientific methods are 
always fraught with danger and could wipe out Indian sericulture.  
 
58. The State of Karnataka in their rejoi nder have said that the export and import 
regulation can be left to the Central Silk Bo ard.  However, this is only one issue of the 
entire gamut of silkworm seed production, qu ality control, indepe ndent certification and 
marketing, and the quality of the seed has wide  ramifications across the silk sector.  The 
Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005, ther efore, deals with not only regulation of 
exports and imports of silkworm seed, but al so encompasses all the quality norms in a 
holistic manner, with a clea r emphasis on third party certif ication of seed production 
system.  Today, the Production Ag encies are also the Certifiers of their own seed and the 
situation cannot be allowed to go on as it tends to compromise on quality.  The strength 
of silkworm seed produced in a State depe nds on the potential niche and environmental 
conditions which need to be harnessed to fully  meet the demand of silkworm seed for the 
entire country, and the proposed legislation should be seen as an enabling condition for 

the silkworm seed production for the whole nation rather than be governed by a particular 
State, in isolation. 
 
59. The contention by the State of Karnatak a that races authorized by the Race 
Authorisation Committee of Central Silk Boar d are only being reared for which, Breeder 
Stock is maintained and released by the Central Silk Board, is not true in entirety.  There 
are instances where the races were released before it could be authorized (based on the 
fitment norms) by the Race Authorisation Comm ittee and these races were put on to the 
production channel down the line (s tarting from Nuclear seed of F1 seed) in the State.   
Many States have ventured to set up their own Regional or State Level Committees to 
evaluate and recommend silkworm races/hybrids, as short cut methods to support funded 
programmes.  State owned R&D Institu tion funding.  Therefore, the proposed 
amendment is considered nece ssary to regulate all such unhealthy pr actices which could 
be detrimental to the intere sts of the industry.  Under an Exchange Programme during 
1999, the Oak Tasar Cocoons were imported fr om China and grainage operations were 
started by the then Government of U.P (Now  Uttaranchal). After the second year of 
rearing, an unknown disease was observed from RTRS, Bimtal, that has considerably 
affected the Oak Tasar industry in  Uttaranchal.  This disease is yet to be controlled and 
threatens to totally wipe out Oak Tasar Silk  which is unique to an Indian Himalayan 
region. 
 
60. In the draft Amendments under point Nos. 8E(1) and (2), 8H (1) and (2) in respect 
of Licenses to be issued for farmers, reeler s, seed prepareres, Central Silk Board had 
itself suggested that instead of Licensing/In spection, Registration/Certification is would 
be enough.  Third – party certification and ra ndom checks will also adequately meet the 
requirements of quality silkworm seed production. 
  
61. Under the proposed amendments, there is  a provision to set up a Central Seed 
Testing Laboratory and accredit the laboratorie s both of the Central Silk Board and the 
State Governments as also Private Labs for ca rrying out quality testing.  There is also a 
provision to appoint Seed Certifiers and Analysts from among the Central Silk Board 
staff and trained personnel from the State Governments (Sericulture Departments).  These 
provisions would enable the sericulture farmers to get assured quality – seed and all these 
will be done in regular consultation and with  the involvement of the State Sericulture 
Departments and Central Silk Board will not fu nction in isolation or try to “impose” its 
views on the State Sericulture Departments. 
 
62. The proposed amendments also provide for the terms and conditions on the 
Exports – Imports of silkworm seed.  The amendments have the application to the entire 
country silkworm seeds of all the varietie s produced in the country.  Checks will be 
prescribed against the illega l entry of pathogen – carrying seed material and this is 
possible only by a Central Government Authority viz. Central Silk Board. 
 
 

63. The Revenue Reforms Commission set up by the Government of Karnataka 
(which was headed by the former Chief Minister of Karnataka, Sri M. Veerappa Moily), 
in its final report has also observed that : 
 
“The concept of silkworm seed area should be given up.  While P4, P3 and 
P2 seeds should continue to be produced in government seed farms, the 
responsibility of commercial seed  production should move towards the 
private sector.  A Silkworm Seed Re gulatory Authority should be set up 
by the Government to certify the quali ty of the seed.  The Central Silk 
Board has already proposed to the G overnment of India the creation of a 
National Silkworms Seed Regulatory Authority”. 
 
64. If the amendments proposed  are not passed, then the restrictive provisions of the 
State laws and the unhealthy practices in cluding unchecked quality seed production, 
which are detrimental to the interest of the industry will continue to operate, stagnating 
the future growth of silk indus try in the country, particularly  in view of the huge imports 
of silk yarn and fabrics from PRC and our  dependency on PRC.  These amendments are 
of All-India nature, and it is in the interest  of the overall development of the sericulture 
industry in the country and will facilitate and energize the se ctor towards self sufficiency 
in silk yarn and fabrics.  Hence, the Ministry may kindly recommend for the 
promulgation of the proposed amendments to the Central Silk Board Act. 
 
Composition of the Central Silkworm Seed Committee 
 
65. The Central Silkworm Seed Committee is proposed to be comprise 9 members.  
The Committee will be headed by the Vice Ch airperson of the Central Silk Board who 
shall be the ex-officio Chairperson of the Committee.  Three Directors of Sericulture 
from States as Members, the Director of th e Sericulture Research and Training Institutes 
as Member, two experts from the field of silkworm seed development as Members and 
two representatives from the Sericulture sector as Members.  All these Members are to be 
nominated by the Central Government from  amongst the Members of the Central Silk 
Board.  The Secretary of the Central Silk Bo ard shall be the ex-officio Secretary of the 
Committee.  When asked, whether a seed farmer would be given exclusive representation 
in the Committee, the Ministry of Textiles in  a written reply has stated that the Central 
Government is empowered to nominate to the Central Silkworm Seed Committee; two 
representatives from the Sericulture sector from among the Board Members.  Of the two 
Members, one is to be identified to repres ent the interests of the seed farmers/seed 
producers.   When the Committee asked the reasons for proposed nomination of the 
Members of the Central Seedworm Committ ee only from amongst the members of the 
Central Silk Board, the Ministry in a written reply had stated that the Central Silkworm 
Seed Committee has the membership of ten Members with a provision to take an 
additional member by way of co-option.  The Central Silk Board has membership of 36 
members representing the different sectors of s ilk industry.  Therefore, it has been found 
appropriate to nominate 7 memb ers of the Central Silk Board as members of the Central 
Silkworm Seed Committee. 
 

66.  No provision has been made in the Bill for the inclusion of a representative of 
National Silkworm Seed Organization in the Central Silkworm Seed Committee. 
 
67. During the briefing of the Committee by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Textiles, the Secretary (Textiles) submitted in this regard as follows:- 
 
“Actually, I would like to say that in S ection 8(a) of the Act, we have put 
Director, Central Sericulture Research and Training Institute.  I would like 
to make an  amendment.  We have ma de a mistake in this.  Actually, it 
should be Director, National Silkworm Seed Organisation”. 
 
Seed Inspectors 
 
68. As per Clause 8H of the B ill, it is proposed to appoint such persons as the Central 
Silkworm Seed Committee thinks fit or notif y an employee of the Central Silk Board to 
be the Seed Inspectors.  In this regard, the Secretary (Textiles) stat ed during the briefing 
as under:- 
 
“Sir, I would like to make one more  submission to the hon. Committee.  
We have used the words ‘seed inspectors’ in the Act.  Now, we feel that 
‘inspector’ would be a bad word.  Therefore, we want to change it to ‘seed 
certifiers’.  If the Committee agrees, then ‘seed inspectors’ can be replaced 
with ‘seed certifiers’”. 
 
 
Government of Karnataka has stated in its comments that its department of 
Sericulture is having 246 Technical Servi ce Centers in the Stat e.  789 Sericulture 
Inspectors are working in the State with special qualifications in graduation 
having capability of doing the work of seed  Inspectors for moth examinations in 
their area of operation. 
 
Monitoring Mechanism 
 
69. An entire set of agencies such as Re gistration Committee, H ybrid Authorisation 
Committee, Seed Certification Agency, Test Labor atories, Seed Certifiers etc. have been 
proposed in the Bill.  In re ply to a question, what is the monitoring mechanism proposed 
in the Bill  to monitor and to take corr ective steps in case of non-function/misuse of 
powers by various Committees/agencies/inspectors  proposed in the Bill, the Ministry of 
Textiles had stated as follows:- 
 
“The Members  of the Committees/Age ncies/Inspectors pr oposed in the 
Bill are either from the Central Silk  Board or from the State Governments 
are subject to the rules of discipline formulated by the respective 
departments under whom they work.  Through such disciplinary rules, 
their work could be monitored and co rrective steps could be taken in case 
of non-function/misuse of powers.  For those members other than 
Government Officials, appropriate rules will be framed”. 

 

 
70. The Committee note that the Bill seek s to amend further the Central Silk 
Board Act, 1948.  As per the proposed amendments, a Central Silkworm Seed 
Committee is to be constituted from amongst the Members of the Central Silk 
Board. Since the Central Silkworm Seed Committee has been envisaged to work on 
All India Basis to lay down the quality st andards for silkworm seed, to authorize 
silkworm races and hybrids for commercial exploitation, etc., the Committee are of 
the view that its composition should be of national character representing the 
interests of the entire Silkworm industr y.  As per Clause 8A(1)(b)(iv) of the 
proposed amendments, two representatives of the Sericulture sector are proposed to 
be nominated as Members in the Central Silkworm Seed Commi ttee.  Of the two 
Members, only one is to represent the interests of seed farmers/seed producers.  The 
Committee consider this representation as hard ly sufficient to meet the interests of 
seed farmers/seed producers of the entire country.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that adequate representation should be given to seed farmers/seed 
producers, in the Central Silkworm Seed Committee from prominent silk producing 
areas of the country. 
 
71. The Committee were informed that the co st of setting up of a multivoltine 
grainage, as per the specifications of the Bill, may be around Rs.10 lakh.  The cost of 
bivoltine grainage alongwith cold storage , which is an essential requirement for 
bivoltine silkworm seed production may be around Rs.1 crore.  As such, there is a 
danger of the private sector monopolized  by a few people to take over the 

production of silkworm seeds in the co untry and this may adversely affect the 
interests of 1,300 small scale seed pr oducers.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that suitable provisions should be  made in the Bill to provide financial 
assistance including subsidies to small-scal e seed farmers/producers to enable them 
to transform to the changing requirements or come together to form an 
economically viable company/cooperative fo r setting up bi-voltine grainages.  To 
obviate the lurking danger of monopoly on bi-voltine grainages by private sector, 
certain pre-conditions may also be laid down in this regard for the private sector.  
 
72. The Committee have also noted that  as per Clause 8A(1)(b)(i) of the 
proposed amendments, three Directors of Sericulture from  the silk producing 
States are to be nominated as Members in  the Central Silkworm Seed Committee.  
As Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Prades h and West Bengal are the major silk 
producing States, the Committee are of the view that their regular and continuous 
presence in the Committee is essential for the smooth a nd effective functioning of 
the Committee.  Therefore, the Commi ttee recommend that the Directors of 
Sericulture from all the above States i.e. Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh 
and West Bengal should be nominated as  Permanent members of the Committee.  
Three more Directors of Sericulture of ot her silk producing States may also be 
nominated on rotational basis.   
 
 
 

73. The Committee have also noted that no  provision has been made in the Bill 
for the inclusion of a representative of National Silkworm Seed Organisation 
(NSSO) in the Central Silkworm Seed Commi ttee.  NSSO is engaged in production 
of basic silkworm seed.  The Committee, th erefore, recommend that the Director of 
NSSO should be a member in the Central Silkworm Seed Committee to allay the 
apprehension of the State Governments.    
74. The Committee have further noted that as per Clause 8E(1), a Registration 
Committee is proposed to be set up to regis ter the Silkworm Seed  of the notified 
kind or variety, to register silkworm seed  producer, and to register the silkworm 
dealer.  At present, these functions are performed by the State Governments.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the appropriate number of nominees of 
State Governments  should be included in the proposed Registration Committee.  
75. As per Clause 8H of the Bill, it is pr oposed to appoint Seed Inspectors. Since 
the very term “Inspector” causes apprehensi on in the minds of the industry that it 
might prove another pillar of “Inspector Raj”, the Committee recommend that 
nomenclature of “Seed Inspectors” may be changed as “Seed Certifiers” so as to 
make them people-friendly. Further it is  noted that there is no monitoring 
mechanism proposed in the Bill to monitor and to take corrective steps in case of 
non-function/misuse of powers by var ious Committees/Agencies/Inspectors 
proposed in the Bill.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a suitable 
monitoring mechanism should also be proposed in the Bill. 
 
 

76. Keeping in view that small scale seed  farmers/producers may lose their jobs 
as a result of the proposed amendments, the Committee further recommend that 
provisions should also be incorporated in the Bill to impart training to small scale 
seed farmers/producers in other fields/areas  of the Sericulture to enable them carry 
on their livelihood. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY  
           CHAIRMAN, 
24 February, 2006                             STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR 
5 Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)                                     
 

 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (2005-2006) HELD ON THURSDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2005. 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hours to 1300 hours in Committee Room `E’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Joachim Baxla        
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
5. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Chnadradev Prasad Rajbhar    
8. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
9. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh  
 
              RAJYA SABHA  
 
10. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
11. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
12. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri John Joseph  - Secretary 
2.     Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
 3.     Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
  
 
 
 

 
LIST OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES  
 
Sl.No Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri R. Poornalingam Secretary  
2. Shri J.K. Sharma Joint Secretary, Ministry of Textiles 
 
3. Dr. H. Basker Member Secretary, Central Silk 
Board, Bangalore 
 
4. Shri A.N. Sharan,  Director, Ministry of Textiles 
 
5. Dr. K.V. Benchamin,  Director, National Silkworm Seed 
Organisation, Central Silk Board, 
Bangalore 
 
6. Mrs. K.N. Meenakshi,  Deputy Director, (A&A), Central 
Silk Board, Bangalore 
 
II. REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MI NISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh  Joint Secretary & Legislative 
Counsel 
2. XX   XX   XX 
 
3 .  X X    X X    X X       
 
4. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed Shri R. Poornalingam, Secretary and 
other officials of the Ministry of Textiles and asked them to brief the Members about The 
Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005 which has been refe rred to the Standing 
Committee on Labour by the Hon’ble Speaker.    
 
5. The Secretary and officials of the Mini stry briefed the Committee on the Bill.  
Then they replied to the queries raised by the Members. The Chairman directed the 
Secretary to send written information on  other relevant points within one week.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. A verbatim record of the briefing has been kept.  
 
6. The Committee also decided to hold thei r next sitting on 18 October 2005 to have 
general discussion on the clauses on  “The Labour Laws (Exemption from Furnishing 
Returns and Maintaining Registers by Ce rtain Establishments) Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2005” and “The Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 
2005”.   
    The Committee then adjourned.  
 

MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (2005-2006) HELD ON TUESDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2005. 
 
The Committee met from 1100 to 1400 hours in Committee Room  `B’, 
Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
6. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
7. Shri Virendra Kumar    
8. Shri Ananta Nayak 
9. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
10. Shri Chandra Pratap Singh 
11. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
13. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
14. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
 3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -           Assistant Director 
        
 

 
  
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that (i) “The  Labour Laws (Exemption for Furnishing 
Returns and Maintaining Registers by Ce rtain Establishments) Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2005” and (ii) “The Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 
2005” have been referred to the Standing Committee on Labour by Hon’ble Speaker for 
examination and report within three months from the date of reference i.e. 30 August and 
12 September 2005 respectively of rule 331E of  the Rule of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha.  
     
3. XX   XX   XX  
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Cent ral Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005 for 
discussion. The discussion over the proposed am endment Bill mainly centered around the 
protection to farmers, technical training and subs idized financial assistance to small and marginal 
farmers engaged in sericulture, nature and co mposition of the Silkworm Seed Committee and 
provision of grainages by the States for use of small and marginal farmers. 
 
  The Committee were of the opinion that the report would be finalised on “The 
Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005” after hearing the views of the farmers, reelers and 
weavers during the ensuing visit of the Committee to Bangalore and Hyderabad.  
 
5. XX   XX  XX 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 

 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR (2005-2006) HELD ON MONDAY, 28 NOVEMBER 2005. 
 
The Committee met from 1500 to 1600 hours in Committee Room  `D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
9. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat 
10. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
11. Shri Gandhi Azad 
12. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
11. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
 3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -  Assistant Director 
        
 

  
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that (i) “The  Labour Laws (Exemption for Furnishing 
Returns and Maintaining Registers by Ce rtain Establishments) Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2005” and (ii) “The Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 
2005” had been referred to the Standing Committee on Labour by Hon’ble Speaker for 
examination and report within three months from the date of reference i.e. 30 August and 
12 September 2005 respectively und er rule 331E of the Rule of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. XX   XX   XX  
 
4. XX   XX   XX 
 
5. XX   XX   XX  
  
6. XX   XX   XX 
 
 
7. The Committee then took up the Centra l Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005.  
Hon’ble Chairman informed the Committee that  they held informal discussion with the 
farmers, reelers, weavers and Central Silk Board during their recent study tour to 
Bangalore and Pochampalli in Andhra Pradesh. Seed farmers have opposed this Bill. 
They were of the view that this Bill is detrim ental to the interests of the farmers and were 
of the opinion that the Karnataka Seed Act is  quite in order.  Response of the State 
Government of Karnataka  also seems to be negative to the proposed amendment.  It was 
informed during tour that the Bill had been ci rculated to the State Governments and their 
responses were awaited.  In this regard the Committee decided that they might have 
further discussion with the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles and the Central Silk 
Board after they receive responses from the State Governments.  As such, the Committee 
decided to request the Hon’bl e Speaker to grant extension for a period of 3 months upto 
12 march 2006 for the presentation of the Report on the Bill to bo th the Houses of 
Parliament.  
 
8. XX   XX   XX 
 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 

 

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR (2005-2006) HELD ON MONDAY, 16 JANUARY 2006. 
 
The Committee met from 1130 hours to 1430 hours in Committee Room `B’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Joachim Baxla        
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
6. Shri Virendra Kumar   
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
8. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi  
9. Shri Lal Mani Prasad  
10. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
11. Shri Mohan Rawale  
12. Smt. C.S. Sujatha   
 
              RAJYA SABHA  
 
13. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
14. Shri Jayanta Bhattacharya 
15. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
16. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
17. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
18. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
3.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -           Assistant Director 
  
 
 
 

 
(I) List of representatives of th e Ministry of Labour & Employment 
  
Sl.No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri J.P. Singh Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Pati Joint Secretary 
3. Shri K.C. Jain Director 
 
II List of representatives from the of fice of the Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner 
 
1. Shri A. Viswanathan  CPFC  
2. Shri S.K. Khanna ACC (C ) 
3. Shri M.L. Meena ACC (P) 
4. Shri Ranbir Singh ACC (NZ) 
5. Shri S.R. Joshi RPFC (Delhi North) 
6. Shri P.M. Mathew RPFC (Delhi South) 
7. Shri M. Vijay Raj RPFC (Uttar Pradesh) 
8. Shri U.C. Tiwari RPFC (Haryana) 
9. Shri Satish Chandra RPFC (PQ) 
10. Shri P.K. Udgata RPFC (PQ) 
11. Shri Subhash Sharma APFC (PQ) 
  
2. XX   XX   XX  
   
3. XX   XX   XX 
 
 
4. XX   XX   XX   
 
5. The Committee then took up the Centra l Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005 for 
discussion.  Hon’ble Chairman informed the Committee that the Ministry of Textiles had 
furnished the comments of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal 
Pradesh, Kerala, Goa and Union Territories of Chandigarh and Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands. Karnataka has stated that the amen dments proposed to enhance the role of 
Central Silk Board within the ambit of the objectives contained in its mandate is 
welcome, whereas, such of the amendments which lead to duplication and overlapping of 
the State Law may be dropped in the best interest of the industry.  Tamil Nadu has also 
stated that it is n ecessary to assure that the proposed  amendments will not disturb the 
existing system in the State.  Jammu & Kash mir and Himachal Pradesh have agreed to 
the amendments.  Kerala, Goa, Chandigarh and Andaman & Nicobar Islands have no 
comments to offer on the Bill. 
 

6. The Chairman also informed the Co mmittee that the new Secretary in the 
Ministry of Textiles had called on him 15 December 2005 and that he was advised to 
hold interactions with silkworm seed farmer s and other stakeholders of the sericulture 
industry on the proposed amendments in the Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005.  
As per note sent by the Ministry  of Textiles on the outcome of  such interactions, out of a 
total of 2,248 seed farmers, commercial farmer s, seed producers, reelers and weavers, 
from the States of Karnataka, Tam il Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, 
Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura who have submitted their feed back on the proposed 
amendments, a total of 2,182 have agreed  with the proposed  amendments, i.e. 97% of 
them are in favour of the amendments. 
 
7. The Central Silk Board has also stated  that the amendments are All-India in 
Character and will be applicable all over the country and not the State of Karnataka only.  
The Committee then decided to suggest that the representation of farmers in the Central 
Sikworm Seed Committee may be increased and the Directors of Sericulture of the States 
of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal may become Members of the 
Committee. 
  
8. XX   XX   XX    
 
9. XX   XX   XX  
 
10. XX   XX   XX 
 
 
  A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 

MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR HELD ON 24 FEBRUARY 2006. 
 
 
 
The Committee met from 1000 hrs. to  1100hrs. in Committee Room `D’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Joachim Baxla        
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
6. Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
8. Smt. C.S. Sujatha 
             
RAJYA SABHA  
 
9. Shri Lekhraj Bachani 
10. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
  1.    Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
  3.    Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena              -  Assistant Director 
        
 
 
 

 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and 
apprised them about the two Draft Reports on “The Central Silk Board 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005” and “The  National Institute of Fashion 
Technology Bill, 2005”. 
 
3. The Committee first took up the dr aft Eleventh Report on “The 
Central Silk Board (Amendment) Bill, 2005” and adopted the same with 
the following modification: 
 
Para 72, Line No. 5: Insert the words “ and continuous” after 
the word  “regular” 
 
4. The Committee then considered the draft Twelfth Report on “The 
National Institute of Fashion Technology Bill, 2005” and adopted the 
same with the following modifications: 
 
Para 23, Line 5 of definition: Insert the words “Interior 
Decoration”, before “innovations” 
 
 Para 24 amended as follows: 
  
“To ensure that the functioning of the Institute is carried 
out in consonance with the cust oms and ethos of our society 
and to also ensure protection of/innovation in traditional arts, 
handicrafts, etc., the Committee feel  that it should be overseen 
by people’s representatives.  They, therefore, recommend that 
three representatives from the Parliament, i.e. two Members of 
Lok Sabha and one Member of Rajya Sabha should be 
nominated on the Board of Governors of the Institute”.  
 
    
5. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Reports and 
present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
  
6. XX   XX   XX 
 
7. XX   XX   XX  
 
 8. XX   XX   XX 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
 
 