 
16 
 
 
  SIXTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR  
(2006-07) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
 
THE APPRENTICES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
 
 
  Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on  20   September  2006 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   24 November 2006 
 
            Laid in Rajya Sabha on   24  November 2006 
 
 
       
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
November 2006/Agrahayana 1928 (Saka) 
 

 2
CONTENTS 
 
        
           PAGE   
       
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (iii) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE         ……………………  1  
 
 
ANNEXURE – I The Apprenti ces (Amendment) Bill, 2006 
     
 
ANNEXURE - II Minutes of the sittings of the Standing Committee 
 on Labour  held  on  3 July, 2006 and 7 September 2006  
  
 
  
 

 3
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR   
      (2006-2007) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Subrata Bose    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee 
5. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot    
6. Shri Munawar Hassan    
7. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
8. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
9. Shri Mohammad Tahir Khan   
10. Shri Virendra Kumar     
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi 
12. Shri Bassangouda R. Patil   
13. Shri Devidas Pingle  
14. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
15. Shri Dhan Singh Rawat   
     16. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
17. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
18. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA  
  22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam 
  23. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
26. Shri Gandhi Azad 
27. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
28. Shri Dilip Ray 
29.       Shri Rahul Bajaj 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
    SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
4.         Shri N.K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Committee Officer 
  6. Smt. Lalita Khanna  - Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 

 4
              COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR      
                                                                   (2005-06) 
 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari        
3. Shri Joachim Baxla    
4. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
5. Shri Munawwar Hassan Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa   
7. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot   
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   
9. Shri Virendra Kumar    
10. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
11. Shri Rajesh Kumar Manjhi   
12. Shri Ananta Nayak   
13. Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
14. Shri Lal Mani Prasad   
15. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar  
16. Shri Mohan Rawale  
17. Dr. Dhan Singh Rawat   
18. Smt. C.S. Sujatha    
19.       Shri Parasnath Yadav   
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  20. Shri Gandhi Azad 
  21. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
  22. Ms. Pramila Bohidar 
23. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
24. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany   
25. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
26.       Shri Dilip Ray 
 

 5
Introduction 
 
 
 1. I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Labour having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the re port to Hon’ble Speaker on their behalf 
present this Sixteenth Report on “The Appr entices (Amendment) Bill, 2006” of the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
 
2. “The Apprentices (Amendment) Bill,  2006” as introduced in the Rajya 
Sabha on 19 May 2006 was referred to th e Standing Committee on Labour by the 
Hon’ble Speaker for examination and report w ithin three months from the date of its 
publication in Bulletin Part-II of Rajya Sabha , that is, 31 May 2006 in terms of Rule 
331 E of the Rules of Procedure & Conduc t of Business in Lok Sabha.  Hon’ble 
Speaker has granted an extension of one  month upto 29 September 2006 to present 
the Report. 
 
3. The Committee held its sitting on 3 July 2006 and heard the views of the 
representatives of Ministry of Labour & Employment . 
 
4. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the officers of the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, Mini stry of Human Resource Development, 
Ministry of Law & Justice for placing their important views regarding the Bill. 
 
5. The Committee took up the Bill for consid eration at their sitting held on  
7 September 2006.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at the 
same sitting. 
 
6. For facility of convenience, the recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                      Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy 
7 September, 2006               Chairman, 
16 Bhadrapada, 1928 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Labour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6
 
Report 
 
 
 1.      “The Apprentices (Amendment) B ill, 2006 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 
19 May 2006 was referred to the Standi ng Committee on Labour by the Hon’ble 
Speaker for examination and report within  three months from the date of its 
publication in Bulletin Part-II of Rajya Sabha, that is,  31 May 2006 in terms of Rule 
331 E of the Rules of Procedure & Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
2.      The Apprentices Act, 1961  was enacted with the objective of regulating the 
programme of training of apprentices in the industry and utilizing the facilities 
available in the industry for imparting on-the-job training.  The Act makes it 
obligatory for employers in the specified industries to engage apprentices in 
designated trades.  The training programme consists of basic training followed by on-
the-job training or shop floor training with related instru ctions through the training 
period.  At the end of the training, the a pprentices are to appear in a trade test 
conducted by the National C ouncil for Vocational Training (NCVT) and those 
successful in the trade test are awarded the National Apprenticeship Certificate.  The 
Central Apprenticeship Council (CAC), a tr ipartite and apex statutory body advises 
the Central Government in all policy ma tters for implementing the Apprenticeship 
Training Scheme. 
 
 
3.       The present Bill seeks to amend the Apprentices Act, 1961 to: - 
 
(i) Provide reservation of training places of Other Backward Classes 
(OBCs) in designated trades; 
(ii) Provide flexibility in respect of ratios prescribed for apprenticeship 
seats; and 
(iii)   Provide for imparting related inst ructions at the cost of employer instead 
of  appropriate Government. 
 
4.       In the sitting of the Committee he ld on 3 July 2006, the representatives of the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, Minist ry of Law & Justice and Ministry of 
Human Resource Development briefed the Co mmittee on the provisions of the Bill.  
With regard to the necessity of the pro posed amendments, the representatives of 
Ministry of Labour & Employment stated as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 

 7
 
 
The first amendment is with regard to  the introduction of reservation for 
the OBCs.  This was initiated to safe guard the interest of the OBCs. As 
such we issued the execu tive instructions to th e State Governments to 
reserve the seats for the OBCs as per the State Government Employment 
Policies.  Now the employment policies of most of the State 
Governments  as well as the Gove rnment of India have made the 
reservation clear.  Now, when the seats are being advertised, it was 
found that skilled manpower was not available that necessitated the 
introduction of this reservation for the OBCs under the Apprentices Act, 
1961”. 
 
 5.      When asked whether any Commi ttee of Ministers has been formed under the 
direction of Hon’ble Prime Minister to  study and come out with a report on 
implementation of reservation for OBCs for technical and non-technical institutes,  a 
representative of the Ministry of Human Resource Development stated as below:- 
 
“In regard to implementation of reserv ation for OBCs in the institutes of 
higher learning, an Oversight Comm ittee has been constituted by the 
Central Government under the Chairman ship of  Mr. Veerappa Moily.  
This is to submit its report by 31 August.  Five Groups have been 
constituted which will be submitting th eir reports to this Committee by 
31 July.  Out of these five groups, thr ee groups pertain to the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development and they will be giving reports in regard 
to the colleges of engineering, mana gement and universities.  They will 
be looking into the aspect of impl ementation of rese rvation of 27 per 
cent for OBCs.  It is likely to be implemented by June 2007.  They are 
just working out on the modalities”. 
 
 
6.     During the briefing meeting,  the atte ntion of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment was drawn to th e fact that the Cen tral Apprenticeship 
Council in its 29 th meeting held on 9 October 2002 had  recommended to provide 
reservation for OBCs under “The Apprenti ces Act, 1961”.  When asked the reasons 
for delay in implementation of the reco mmendations of Central Apprenticeship 
Council and the necessity to bring in the present legislation before the Parliament at 
this point of time, a representative of the Ministry  replied as under:- 
 
 
 
 

 8
  “After this was approved by CA C in October 2002, we prepared the 
draft Cabinet Note and after getting the approval of our Labour Minister, 
it was circulated to all the State Governments and the concerned Central 
Ministries in February 2003.  Then, we got reply from 17 States and 
some of the Central Ministries by 30  May and on 18 July 2003 we sent 
the proposal of the Cabin et to the Ministry of Law & Justice for their 
approval and comments.  They returned  the Bill and told us that as in 
between the Government has changed,  we should get the approval of 
new Government.  Then, it was submitte d to them and the Ministry of 
Law & Justice returned the file on 1  October 2003 and stated that 
instead of a draft Cabinet Note, let us first examine issu e by issue and it 
should not be in the form of a Cab inet Note.  Again, the file was 
resubmitted to the Law & Justice on 5 October 2003.  They suggested us 
that we should also wait and again asked for the comments of the 
remaining States and Central Ministries which at that time did not give 
us their comments.  Again, we circ ulated to the remaining States and 
Central Ministries and we received some of the replies and based on that 
we again sent the file to the Mi nistry of Law & Justice on 16 March 
2004.  Then the file was returned by the Ministry of Law & Justice on 27 
of April 2004 with the advice that as  the new Government has come into 
being, we should take the views of the Finance Ministry and Labour 
Ministry again.  We again took the views of Ministry of Finance.  We 
sent the file on 25 May 2004 and we received back on 22 June 2004.  
Again we  took the approval  of   the Labour Minister. We were ready on 
24  August to file and again submitted to the Ministry of Law & Justice 
on 15 September 2004.  We received the file back and they concurred to 
our proposal of 8 February 2005.  It was again got approved from the 
Minister on 16 February.  Then after getting the approval of the 
Minister, it was sent to the Hindi wing  of the Ministry of Law & Justice.  
We got back the approval of the dr aft from them in the Bill shape on 9 
November 2005.  After that, it was la id in the Assembly.  We got the 
Cabinet approval on 15 December 2005.  Then we moved to Rajya 
Sabha”. 
 
7. As it would be pre-mature to weigh th e pros and cons of the Bill before the 
Government comes out with a policy deci sion regarding reservation for OBCs in 
higher educational institutions, the Committee had decided to return the Bill to the 
Government. 
 
 
 
 

 9
 
8.  The Committee are dismayed to note that there has been an 
inordinate delay on the part of the Gov ernment in bringing the new legislation 
to provide reservation for Other Ba ckward Classes (OBCs) under “The 
Apprentices Act, 1961” even though the d ecision in this regard was taken by the 
Central Apprentices Council as early as October 2002.  After a prolonged 
wranglings among various Ministries, the Bill has been brought before the 
Parliament at a juncture when the whole issue of reservation to OBCs is being 
considered by an Oversight Committee.     In this regard, the Committee are of 
the view that the proposed Amendments to  the Apprentices Act, particularly the 
reservation of training places for other Backward Classes in designated trades, 
should be considered after a decision is  arrived at by the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development in the light of the recomm endations made by the 
Oversight Committee on reservation of seats for OBCs in the institutes of higher 
learning.  The Committee, therefore, h ave decided to retur n the Bill to the 
Government and urge upon them to have consultations with the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development on the issue and bring  in a new legislation after 
a policy decision is taken on the whole issue of reservations to OBCs. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                        Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy 
7 September, 2006                  Chairman, 
16 Bhadrapada, 1928 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Labour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 10
          ANNEXURE-I 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
THE APPRENTICES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Apprentices Act, 1961. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Apprentices (Amendment) Act, 2006. 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as th e Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
2. In the Apprentices Act, 1961 (herei nafter referred to as the princi pal Act), after section 3A, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
“3B. (1) In every designated trade, training places shall be reserved by the employer for the 
Other Backward Classes and where there is more than one designated trade in an establishment, 
such training places shall be reserved also on the basis of the total number of apprentices in all the 
designated trades in such establishment. 
 
(2) The number of training places to be reserved for the Other Backward Classes under sub-section 
(1) shall be such as may be prescribed, having regard to the population of the Other Backward 
Classes in the State concerned.”. 
 
Insertion of new section 3B. 52 of 1961. 
 
Reservation of training places for Other Backward Classes in designated trades. 
 
SERVER1 \ BILL-2004 \ RAJYA SABHA\ 929RS 
 
Bill No. XLII of 2006 
REPRINT 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 19TH MAY, 2006 
  2 Amendment of section 8. 
  
Amendment of section 10. 
  
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the second proviso, the following proviso 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
"Provided further that the Apprenticeship Advi ser may, on a representation made to him by an 
employer and keeping in view the more realistic employment potential, training facilities and other 
relevant factors, permit him to engage such number of apprentices for a designated trade as is lesser 
than the number arrived at by the ratio for that tr ade, not being lesser than  fifty per cent. of the 

 11
number so arrived at, subject to  the condition that the employer sh all engage apprentices in other 
trades in excess in number equivalent to such shortfall.". 
 
4. In section 10 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
"(2) Related instruction shall be impa rted at the cost of employer a nd the employer shall, when so 
required, afford all facilities for imparting such instruction.". 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The Apprentices Act, 1961 provides for regulation and control of training of apprentices. 
Section 3A of the Act makes provi sions for reservation of training places for the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes, but there is  no provision for reservation of  training places for the Other 
Backward Classes (OBCs). The Apprentices (Amendment) Bill, 2006 seeks to provide reservation 
for the OBCs in apprenticeship training. 
 
2. Secondly, as per second proviso of sub-section ( 3) of section 8, the flexib ility up to twenty per 
cent. in the matter of engagement of apprentices in a trade, is presently available, provided that over 
all quota fixed for an establishment remains the same. There is need to amend section 8 in order to 
provide flexibility up to fifty pe r cent. in the matter of engageme nt of apprentices in a trade, 
provided that over all quota fixed for the establishment remains the same. 
 
3. Thirdly, sub-section (1) of section 10 provides that a trade apprentice who is undergoing practical 
training in an establishment shall, during the pe riod of practical training, be given a course of 
related instruction which shall be appropriate to the trade approved by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Central Apprenticeship Council, with a view to giving the trade apprentice 
such theoretical knowledge as he needs in order to become fully qualified as a skilled craftsman. 
Sub-section (2) of the said section provides that related instruction shall be imparted at the cost of 
appropriate Government but the employer shall, when  so required, afford all facilities for imparting 
such instruction. The reimbursement of related inst ruction to the es tablishments by the appropriate 
Government involves a lot of pa per work, which could be avoide d if the expenditure on related 
instruction is also borne by the establishment as in case of stipend.  
 
It is, therefore, proposed to ame nd section 10 to impart related inst ruction at the cost of employer 
instead of appropriate Government. 
 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI; K. CHANDRA SEKHAR RAO. 
Dated the 15th May, 2006. 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 3B wherein sub-section (2) empowers 
the Central Government to make rules in regard to the reservation of tr aining places for Other 
Backward Classes in designated trades. 
 
The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure and detail. 
The delegation of power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 

 12
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE APPRENTICES ACT, 1961 (52 OF 1961) 
                                          * * * * * 
 
8. (1) The Central Government shall, after consul ting the Central Apprenticeship Council, by order 
notified in the Official Gazette, determine for each de signated trade the ratio of trade apprentices to 
workers other than unskilled workers in that trade: 
 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall be deemed  to prevent any employer from 
engaging a number of trade apprentices in excess of the ratio determined under this sub-section. 
 
(2) In determining the ra tio under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall have regard to the 
facilities available for apprenticeship training unde r this Act in the designated trade concerned as 
well as to the facilities that may have to be made available by an employer for the training of 
graduate or technician apprentices, technician (vo cational) apprentices if any, in pursuance of any 
notice issued to him under sub-section ( 3A) by the Central Apprenticeship Adviser or such other 
person as is referred to in that sub-section. 
 
(3) The Apprenticeship Adviser may, by notice in wr iting, require an employer to engage such 
number of trade apprentices within the ratio determined by the Central Government for any 
designated trade in his establishment, to under go apprenticeship training in that trade and the 
employer shall comply with such requisition: 
 
Provided that in making any requisition under this sub-section, the Apprenticeship Adviser shall 
have regard to the facilities actually available in the establishment concerned. 
 
Provided further that the Apprenticeship Adviser may, on a representation made to him by an 
employer and keeping in view the more realistic employment potential, training facilities and other 
relevant factors, permit him to engage such number of apprentices for a designated trade as is lesser 
than the number arrived at by the ratio for that tr ade, not being lesser than twenty per cent of the 
number so arrived at, subject to  the condition that the employer sh all engage apprentices in other 
trades in excess in number equivalent to such shortfall. 
 
(3A) The Central Apprentices hip Adviser or any other person not  below the rank of an Assistant 
Apprenticeship Adviser authorised by the Central Apprenticeship Adviser in writing in this behalf 
shall, having regard to— 
 
(i) the number of managerial persons (including technical and supervisory persons) employed in a 
designated trade; 
 
(ii) the number of management trainees engaged in the establishment; 
 
(iii) the totality of the training facilities available in a designated trade; and 
 
(iv) such other factors as he may consider fit in the circumstances of the case, 
by notice in writing, require an employer to impart training to such number of graduate or 

 13
technician apprentices technician (vocational) appr entices in such trade in his establishment as may 
be specified in such notice and the employer shall comply with such requisition. 
 
 
 
Explanation.—In this sub-section the expression "management trainee" means a person who is 
engaged by an employer for undergoing a course of training in the estab lishment of the employer 
(not being apprenticeship training under this Act) subject to th e condition that on successful 
completion of such training, such person shall be employed by the employer on a regular basis. 
Number of apprentices for a designated trade. 
 
 
(4) Several employers may joing t ogether for the purpose of provi ding practical training to the 
apprentices under them by moving them between their respective establishments. 
 
(5) Where, having regard to the public interest, a number of a pprentices in excess ofthe ratio 
determined by the Central Government or in excess of the number specified in a notice issued under 
sub-section (3A) should in the opinion of the appropriate Government be trained, the appropriate 
Government may require employers to train the additional number of apprentices. 
 
(6) Every employer to whom such requisition as aforesaid is made, shall comply with the 
requisition if the Government concerned make av ailable such additional facilities and such 
additional financial assistance as are considered  necessary by the Apprenticeship Adviser for the 
training of the additional number of apprentices. 
 
(7) Any employer not satisfied with the decision of the Apprenticeship Adviser under sub-section 
(6), may make a reference to th e Central Apprenticeshi p Council and such reference shall be 
decided by a Committee thereof appoi nted by that Council for the purpose and the decision of that 
committee shall be final. 
 
10. (1) * * * * * 
 
(2) Related instruction shall be imparted at the cost of the appropriate Government but the employer 
shall, when so required, afford all facilities for imparting such instruction. 
 
Related instruction of apprentices. 
RAJYA SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Apprentices Act, 1961. 
———— 
(Shri K. Chandra Sekhar Rao, Minister of Labour and Employment) 
MGIPMRND—929RS(S1)—3-06-2006. 
 
 
 
 
 

 14
 
 
 
          ANNUXURE-II 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH   SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON MONDAY, 3 JULY  2006 
 
The Committee met again from 1400 hours to 1530 hours in Committee 
Room `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4.         Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot 
5.         Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
6.         Shri Virendra Kumar 
7. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
8.         Shri Bassangouda Patil (Yatnal)  
9. Shri Lal Mani Prasad 
10. Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
11. Smt. C.S. Sujatha   
 12. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
              
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
13.       Shri Gandhi Azad 
14.       Shri Debabrata Biswas 
15. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
16. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri R.S. Misra  - Deputy Secretary 
3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
4.    Shri S.K. Saxena               -           Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 

 15
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF  MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri K.M. Sahni Secretary, Labour 
2. Dr. Ashok Sahu LEA 
3. Shri K.K. Mittal   DGE&T/JS 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Deputy Director General (AT) 
5. Ms. Seema Raj Director, Department of Secondary and 
Higher Education, Ministry of HRD 
6. Shri Ayyakkannu Director, BOAT, Chennai 
7. Shri Dinesh Kumar Nijhawan Joint Director of Training 
8. Shri S.N. Singh Rahi Assistant Director of Training 
   
 
II REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MI NISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
 
  
1. Shri P.B. Singh  Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel  
2. Shri R. K. Pattanayak Assistant Legislative Counsel 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Sh ri K.M. Sahni, Secretary and officials of the 
Ministry of Labour and Employme nt, Ministry of Law and Justi ce and the Minist ry of Human 
Resource Development and asked them to brief the Members about “The Apprentices (Amendment) 
Bill, 2006”, introduced in Rajya Sabha on 19 May 2006 and referred to the Standing Committee on 
Labour under Rule 331 E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for 
examination and report. 
 
 
3. Explaining in brief the importance of the Bill, the Secretary, Ministry of Labour and 
Employment informed that the Bill seeks to amend the Apprentices Act, 1961 to:- 
 
 
(i) provide reservation of training places of Other Backward Classes 
(OBCs) in designated trades; 
 
(ii) provide flexibility in respect of ratios prescribed for 
apprenticeship seats; and 
 
(iii) provide for imparting related instructions at the cost of employer 
instead of appropriate Government. 
 
 
 
 

 16
4. During the deliberations on the provisi ons of the Bill, some of the Members 
drew the attention of the Committee towa rds the formation of Oversight Committee 
headed by Shri Veerappa Moily to implemen t 27 per cent reservations for  OBCs in 
higher  educational institutions.  Thereupon, the representatives of  the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development informed th e Committee that the said Committee has 
to submit its report  by 31 August 2006.  The Government would then go through the 
recommendations of the Committee and bri ng before the Houses of Parliament, a 
suitable legislation in this regard.  The Co mmittee, thereafter, opined that it would be 
pre-mature to weigh the pros and cons of  the Bill before the Government comes out 
with a policy decision regarding reserv ation for OBCs in higher educational 
institutions.  
  
{The witnesses then withdrew}.  
 
   A verbatim record of the briefing was kept.  
 
  The Committee then adjourned.  
 
  

 17
  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR HELD ON THURSDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER  2006 
 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hours to 1400 hour s in Committee Room “B’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy – CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
3. Shri Furkan Ansari 
3. Shri Santasri Chatterjee   
4.         Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
5.         Shri Virendra Kumar 
6. Smt. Sushila Kerketta    
7.         Shri Chandradev Prasad Rajbhar 
8. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat   
 9. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
              
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
10.       Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
11.       Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
12. Shri  K. Chandran Pillai 
13. Shri Gandhi Azad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
         
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri R.S. Misra   - Deputy Secretary 
3.  Shri N. K. Pandey  - Under Secretary 
  
   

 18
      
 
2. XX    XX   XX 
 
3. XX    XX   XX 
 
 
4. The Committee then considered the Draft Sixt eenth Report on “The Apprentices (Amendment) Bill, 
2006.  The Bill aims at bringing a new legislation to provide reservation for other Backward Classes (OBCs) 
under the Apprentices Act, 1961.  In this regard, the Committee were of the view that the proposed 
Amendments to the Apprentices Act, particularly th e reservation of training places for other Backward 
Classes in designated trades, should be considered after a decision is arrived at by the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development in the light of the recommendations made by the Oversight Committee on reservation 
of seats for OBCs in the institutes of higher learning.  The Committee, therefore,  decided to return the Bill to 
the Government and urge upon them  to have consultations with the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development on the issue and bring  in a new legislati on after a policy decision is taken on the whole issue 
of reservations to OBCs. The  Committee adopted the draft Sixteenth Report on  the Bill without any 
amendment.  The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the above Report and present the same to 
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
5. XX   XX   XX 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 